1 Introduction, 1
2 Myocardial Physiology and the Interpretation of
Cardiac Catheterization Data, 20
3 Monitoring, 42
4 Anesthesia for Myocardial Revascularization, 90
5 Anesthesia for Valvular Heart Disease, 129
6 Congenital Heart Disease, 167
7 Anesthesia for Heart, Heart-Lung, and Lung Transplantation, 252
8 Pericardial Disease, 289
9 Anesthesia for Surgery of the Thoracic Aorta, 304
10 Management of Cardiopulmonary Bypass, 323
11 Mechanical Circulatory Support, 375
12 Myocardial Preservation during Cardiopulmonary Bypass, 409
13 Special Considerations during Cardiac Surgery, 425
Index, 439

CHAPTER 1
Introduction
A complete evaluation of the patient’s medical
history, physical examination, and review of per-
tinent laboratory and supportive tests is necessary
priortoanyelectivecardiacsurgicalprocedure.The
intention of the preoperative evaluation is sever-
alfold: deﬁne the status of the patient’s medical
condition,identifyareasofuncertaintythatrequire
further evaluation, consultation or testing, devise
a strategy to improve or stabilize ongoing medi-
cal conditions prior to surgery, determine a prog-
nostic risk classiﬁcation, and provide information
to formulate an intraoperative and postoperative
plan. The anesthesiologist must clearly understand
the intended surgical procedure. This chapter will
present a systems review of the common and sig-
niﬁcantfeaturesfoundpreoperativelyinthecardiac
surgicalpatient.Therewillbeaspecialemphasison
the methodology, limitations, and accuracy of the
tests used most commonly in evaluation of cardiac
surgicalpatients.
Cardiovascular evaluation
A directed history and physical examination are
essential before any cardiac surgical procedure.
The information obtained, in the context of
the anticipated surgical procedure, will deter-
mine the requirement for subsequent evaluation,
consultationortesting.
History and physical examination
There are no controlled trials evaluating the effec-
tiveness of the history and physical; however,
conditions discovered in the process help deﬁne
the anesthetic plan and are often associated with
strong prognostic value. For example, a history of
myocardial infarction, unstable angina, congestive
heartfailure,dyspnea,obstructivesleepapnea,and
anynumberofotherconditionsmaydirectlyaffect
thecourseofthepreoperativeevaluation,operative
outcome, and patient satisfaction. There are many
algorithms for quantifying patient risk, including
the American Society of Anesthesiologists Physi-
cal Status Classiﬁcation. The Revised Cardiac Risk
Index is a clinically useful example of a preopera-
tive scoring system to deﬁne perioperative cardiac
risk(Table1.1).
Inmostcardiacsurgicalprocedures,thepreanes-
thetic evaluation should take place prior to the
day of surgery. This will allow time for additional
testing, collection, and review of pertinent past
medical records, and appropriate patient counsel-
ing. The examination can be obtained on the day
of surgery for procedures with relatively low sur-
gicalinvasiveness.Thehistoryprovidesinsightinto
theseverityofthepathologiccondition.Forexam-
ple, a history consistent with heart failure is most
alarming and requires careful deliberation before
proceeding(Table1.2).Inevaluatingapatientwith
angina, it is essential to determine if the symp-
toms represent unstable angina (Table 1.3). The
Canadian Cardiovascular Society Classiﬁcation of
Anginadeﬁnesanginalsymptoms(Table1.4).
At a minimum, the physical examination must
include the vital signs and an evaluation of
2 Chapter1
Table 1.1 TheRevisedCardiacRiskIndex.
Ischemic heart disease:Includes a history of myocardial
infarction, Q waves on the ECG, a positive stress test,
angina, or nitroglycerine use
Congestive heart failure (CHF):Includes a history of CHF,
pulmonary edema, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, rales,
S3 gallop, elevated β-naturetic peptide, or imaging study
consistent with CHF
Cerebrovascular disease:Includes a history of transient
ischemic attack or stroke
Diabetes mellitus treated with insulin:
Renal dysfunction (serum creatinine>2)
High-risksurgery: Includes any intraperitoneal,
intrathoracic or suprainguinal vascular procedures
CABG, coronary artery bypass surgery; ECG, electrocardio-
gram.
0–2 risk factors = low risk.
3 or more risk factors= high risk.
the airway, lungs and heart. Auscultation of the
chest may reveal wheezing, rales, or diminished
breathsounds.Auscultationoftheheartiscriticalin
uncovering new murmurs, S4 gallops, and rhythm
abnormalities. In patients older than 40years, new
heart murmurs are found in upwards of 4% of
patients. Further screening with echocardiography
reveals signiﬁcant valvular pathology in 75% of
these patients. Arterial hypertension is common
in the cardiac surgical patient; however, there is
little evidence for an association between admis-
sion arterial pressures less than 180mmHg systolic
or 110mmHg diastolic and perioperative compli-
cations. In patients with blood pressures above
thislevel,thereisincreasedperioperativeischemia,
arrhythmias,andcardiovascularlability.
Once the history and physical examination are
complete, attention turns to what additional eval-
uation, consultation or studies are indicated prior
to the operative procedure. The decision regard-
ing which test to order should be based upon
an analysis of value of the information obtained,
resource utilization and timeliness in regards to
thescheduledprocedure.Severalcommontestsare
reviewedbelow.
Electrocardiogram
A preoperative electrocardiogram (ECG) should be
obtainedinallcardiacsurgicalpatients.Thereisno
consensus on the minimum patient age for obtain-
ing an ECG, although ECG abnormalities are more
frequent in older patients and those with multiple
cardiac risk factors. The ECG should be examined
forrateandrhythm,axis,evidenceofleftandright
ventricular (RV) hypertrophy, atrial enlargement,
conduction defects (both AV nodal and bundle
branch block (BBB)), ischemia or infarction, and
metabolicanddrugeffects.
Rateandrhythmabnormalities
Therearealargenumberofrateandrhythmabnor-
malitieswhichmaybepresentinthecardiacsurgical
patient.Tachycardiamaybeasignofanxiety,drug
effect (i.e. sympathomimetics, β-adrenergic ago-
nists, and cocaine intoxication), metabolic disorder
(hypothyroidism), fever, sepsis or other condi-
tions. Bradycardia is typically due to medications
(β-adrenergic blocking agents), although a slow
heart rate may by indicative of other pathol-
ogy (hypothyroidism, drug effect, hypothermia,
conduction defects). Arrhythmias are potentially
more serious and require immediate evaluation.
Electrolyte abnormalities are common in cardiac
surgical patients and may lead to premature ven-
tricular contractions (PVCs). The actively ischemic
patientmaypresentwithventricularirritability,fre-
quentormultifocalPVCs,orventriculartachycardia
(VT). Atrial ﬁbrillation is frequently observed in
the elderly cardiac surgical patient. The diagnosis
ofnewatrialﬁbrillationrequiresevaluationpriorto
surgeryiftimeandtheclinicalconditionpermit.
Axis
Axis refers to the direction of depolarization in
the heart. The mean QRS vector (direction of
depolarization) is normally downward and to the
patient’s left (0–90◦). This axis will be displaced
with physical relocation of the heart (i.e. extrinsic
cardiac compression from a mass effect), hypertro-
phy(axismovestowardhypertrophy),orinfarction
(axis moves away from infarction). In the normal
condition,theQRSispositiveinleadIandaV kkdDinardo: “ch01” — 2007/7/16 — 12:38 — pag e3—# 3
Introduction 3
Table 1.2 AmericanCollegeofCardiology/AmericanHeartAssociationClassiﬁcationofchronicheartfailure.
Stage Description
A. High risk for developing heart failure Hypertension, diabetes mellitus, coronary artery disease, family history of
cardiomyopathy
B. Asymptomatic heart failure Previous myocardial infarction left ventricular dysfunction, valvular heart
disease
C. Symptomatic heart failure Structural heart disease, dyspnea and fatigue, impaired exercise tolerance
D. Refractory end-stage heart failure Marked symptoms at rest despite maximal medical therapy
Stage Aincludes patients at risk of developing heart failure but have no structural heart disease at present. A high
degree of awareness is important in this group
Stage Bincludes patients with known structural heart disease but no symptoms. Therapeutic intervention with
angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors or adrenergic beta-blocking agents may be indicated for long-term chronic
treatment in this group
Stage Cincludes patients with structural heart disease and symptomatic heart failure. Operative risk is increased in this
group. Medical therapy may include diuretics, digoxin, and aldosterone antagonists in addition to ACE inhibitors and
beta-blockers depending upon the severity of symptoms. Cardiac resynchronization therapy also may be considered in
selected patients
Stage Dincludes patients with severe refractory heart failure. These patients frequently present for heart transplantation
or bridging therapy with ventricular assist devices. Acute decompensation is managed with inotropes and vasodilator
therapy
ACE, angiotensin-converting enzyme.
Table 1.3 Theprincipalpresentationsof
unstableangina. Rest angina Angina occurring at rest and usually prolonged greater
than 20 minutes
New onset angina Angina of at least CCSC III severity with onset within
2 months of initial presentation
Increasing angina Previously diagnosed angina that is distinctly more
frequent, longer in duration or lower in threshold
(i.e. increased by at least one CCSC class within
2 months of initial presentation to at least CCSC III
severity)
CCSC, Canadian Cardiovascular Society Classiﬁcation.
Leftatrialenlargement
In adults, left atrial enlargement (LAE) may be
found in association with mitral stenosis, aortic
stenosis, systemic hypertension, and mitral regur-
gitation.Inmitralstenosis,LAEoccurssecondaryto
the increased impedance to atrial emptying across
the stenotic mitral valve. In aortic stenosis and
systemic hypertension, an elevated left ventricu-
lar (LV) end-diastolic pressure results in left atrial
hypertrophy. In mitral regurgitation, LAE occurs
because of the large volumes of blood regurgitated
intheleftatriumduringsystole.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch01” — 2007/7/16 — 12:38 — pag e4—# 4
4 Chapter1
Table 1.4 TheCanadianCardiovascularSocietyClassiﬁcationSystemofanginapectoris.
Class I:Ordinary physical activity, such as walking and climbing stairs does not cause angina. Angina occurs
with strenuous, rapid, or prolonged exertion
Class II:Slight limitation of ordinary activity. Angina occurs on walking or climbing stairs rapidly, walking
uphill, walking or stair climbing after meals, in the cold or wind, under emotional stress or only during the
few hours after awakening. Angina occurs on walking more than two blocks on the level and climbing more
than one ﬂight of ordinary stairs at a normal pace and under normal conditions
Class III:Marked limitations of ordinary physical activity. Angina occurs on walking one or two blocks on the
level ground and climbing one ﬂight of stairs in normal conditions and at a normal pace
ClassIV: Inability to carry on any physical activity without anginal discomfort. Symptoms may be present at rest
Rightatrialenlargement
Right atrial enlargement (AAE) may be seen with
RV hypertrophy secondary to pulmonary outﬂow
obstruction or pulmonary hypertension. RAE also
maybeobservedinpatientswithtricuspidstenosis,
tricuspidatresia,orEpstein’sabnormality.
Leftventricularhypertrophy
In adults, left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) com-
monly occurs in LV pressure overload lesions such
asaorticstenosisandseveresystemichypertension.
Inchildren,LVHmaybepresentwithcoarctationof
theaortaandcongenitalaorticstenosis.
Rightventricularhypertrophy
Right ventricular hypertrophy (RVH) is a common
ﬁnding in patients with congenital heart disease
and may be seen in pulmonic stenosis, tetralogy
of Fallot and transposition of the great arteries.
In adults, RVH frequently results from pulmonary
hypertension.
Conductiondefects
Similartorateandrhythmabnormalities,thereare
a wide variety of conduction defects which may
be observed in the cardiac surgical patient. Atrio-
ventricular (AV) block may be innocuous (1st and
2nd degree type 1) or clinically signiﬁcant requir-
ing immediate evaluation of pacemaker placement
(2nd degree type 2 and 3rd degree). BBB delay
depolarizationintheeffectedventricleandmaylead
toineffectiveventricularcontraction.
Ischemiaandinfarction
New ﬁndings of active ischemia require immedi-
ate attention. In the patient with known coro-
nary artery disease (CAD) and unstable angina,
ST segment abnormalities may be observed.
In patients with diabetes, there may be episodes of
silent ischemia during which the heart is ischemic,
but due to autonomic dysfunction and a dimin-
ished ability to perceive nociceptive signals, the
patient does not experience pain. The presence of
Q waves indicates an old transmural myocardial
infarction. Determining the timing of the Q wave
ﬁnding may be clinically relevant. For example,
a Q wave not seen on an ECG 6months prior
to the evaluation suggests a myocardial infarction
sometime during this recent interval. Periopera-
tive cardiac morbidities are related to timing of
surgery after a myocardial infarction, and there-
forethisinformationrequiresattentionandclinical
resolution.
Metabolicanddrugeffects
Elevated serum potassium will ﬂatten the P wave,
widen the QRS complex, and elevate the T wave.
Low serum potassium will ﬂatten of invert the
Twave.AUwavemayappear.Withelevatedserum
calcium the QT interval shortens; whereas with
hypocalcemia, the QT interval is prolonged. Digi-
talis toxicity will cause a gradual down sloping of
theSTsegment.Theremayalsobeatrialandjunc-
tionalprematurebeats,atrialtachycardia,sinus,and
AVnodalblocks.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch01” — 2007/7/16 — 12:38 — pag e5—# 5
Introduction 5
It must be emphasized that a normal ECG does
notprecludethepresenceofsigniﬁcantcardiacdis-
easeintheadult,child,orinfant.TheECGisnormal
in 25–50% of adults with chronic stable angina.
Likewise,theECGmaybenormalinchildrenwith
LV pressure overload (aortic stenosis) and volume
overload (patent ductus arteriosus or ventricular
septaldefect)lesions.
Chest radiograph
Obtaining a Chest radiograph (CXR) should be
based upon the necessity for the planned clini-
cal procedure (i.e. a lateral chest ﬁlm is essen-
tial in a repeat sternotomy), or in assessing the
patient’s clinical condition. Clinical characteristics
suggesting a beneﬁt to obtaining a CXR include
a history of smoking, recent respiratory infection,
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), or
cardiac disease. The posterior–anterior and lateral
CXR provide a wealth of information including an
assessmentofpulmonaryconditionandmaybecar-
diovascular status. For example, radiographic evi-
dence of pulmonary vascular congestion suggests
poor systolic function. For patients with valvu-
lar heart disease, a normal CXR is more useful
thananabnormalradiographinassessingventricu-
lar function. The presence of a cardio-to-thoracic
ratio less than 50% is a sensitive indicator of an
ejection fraction greater than 50% and of a car-
diacindexgreaterthan2.5L/min/m 2.Ontheother
hand,acardio-to-thoracicratiogreaterthan50%is
not a speciﬁc indicator of ventricular function. For
patientswithCAD,anabnormalCXRismoreuseful
than a normal radiograph in assessing ventricu-
lar function. Cardiomegaly is a sensitive indicator
of a reduced ejection fraction, whereas a normal-
sizedheartmaybeassociatedwithbothnormaland
reducedejectionfractions.
AswiththeECG,effortsshouldbemadetocorre-
late radiographic ﬁndings with the clinical history.
LAEisexpectedinmitralstenosisandregurgitation.
Enlargementofthepulmonaryarteryandrightven-
tricle occurs with disease progression. Eccentric LV
hypertrophy results from mitral and aortic regur-
gitation. Aortic stenosis results in concentric LV
hypertrophy.Ininfantsandchildrenwithincreased
pulmonary blood ﬂow (as with a large ventricular
septaloratrialseptaldefect),thepulmonaryartery
and pulmonary vasculature is prominent. In con-
trast, patients with reduced pulmonary blood ﬂow
(as with tetralogy of Fallot or pulmonary atre-
sia) may manifest a small pulmonary artery and
diminishedvascularity.Somecongenitallesionsare
associated with classic radiographic cardiac silhou-
ettes: the boot-shaped heart of tetralogy of Fallot,
the “ﬁgure 8” heart of total anomalous pulmonary
venous return, and the “egg-on-its-side”-shaped
heartseeninD-transpositionofthegreatarteries.
Stress testing
Patients presenting for cardiac surgery frequently
undergo stress testing to establish the diagnosis of
CAD, assess the severity of known CAD, establish
the viability of regions of myocardium, or eval-
uate anti-anginal therapy. Stress testing may use
exercise or pharmacological agents. Pharmacolog-
ical agents are useful for patients with physical
disabilities that preclude effective exercise. It also
is useful for patients who cannot reach an optimal
exercise heart rate secondary to their medication
regimen(i.e.patientsonbeta-blockers).
Pharmacologicalstresstesting
Pharmacologic stress testing uses dipyridamole,
adenosine, or dobutamine. Pharmacologic stress
testing can be performed in conjunction
with myocardial perfusion scintigraphy or
echocardiography.
Adenosine and dipyridamole are potent coro-
nary vasodilators that increase myocardial blood
ﬂow three to ﬁvefold independent of myocardial
work.Adenosineisadirectvascularsmoothmuscle
relaxant via A2-receptors; whereas, dipyridamole
increases adenosine levels by inhibiting adenosine
deaminase.Dobutamineincreasesmyocardialwork
throughincreasesinheartrateandcontractilityvia
β1-receptors.Theincreasedworkproducespropor-
tional increases in myocardial blood ﬂow. In this
sense,dobutaminestresstestingissimilartoexercise
stresstesting.
Thehyperemicresponsetoadenosineanddipyri-
damole produce increased myocardial blood ﬂow
in regions supplied by normal coronary arteries.
In regions of myocardium supplied by steal proneAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch01” — 2007/7/16 — 12:38 — pag e6—# 6
6 Chapter1
anatomy or diseased coronary arteries, myocardial
bloodﬂowincreaseswillbeattenuatedordecreased
belowrestinglevels.
Dipyridamole is infused at 0.56–0.84mg/kg for
4minutes, followed by injection of the radiophar-
maceutical for myocardial perfusion scintigraphy
3minutes later. If infusion produces headache,
ﬂushing, gastrointestinal (GI) distress, ectopy,
angina, or ECG evidence of ischemia, the effect
can be terminated with aminophylline 75–150mg
intravenously (IV). Adenosine is infused at
140 µg/kg/min for 6minutes with injection of
the radiopharmaceutical for myocardial perfu-
sion scintigraphy 3minutes later. Side effects
are similar to dipyridamole and are termi-
nated by stopping the infusion (the half-life of
adenosine is 40seconds). Dobutamine is infused at
5 µg/kg/min for 3minutes and then is increased to
10 µg/kg/min for 3minutes. The dose is increased
by 5µg/kg/min every 3minutes until a maximum
of 40 µg/kg/min is reached or until signiﬁcant
increases in heart rate and blood pressure occur.
Injection of the radiopharmaceutical for myocar-
dial perfusion scintigraphy takes place 1minute
after the desired dose is reached, and the infusion
is continued for 1–2minutes after injection. Side
effects of dobutamine (headache, ﬂushing, GI dis-
tress,ectopy,angina,orECGevidenceofischemia)
can be terminated by discontinuing the infusion
(thehalf-lifeofdobutamineis2minutes).
Exercisestresstesting
Exercise stress testing increases in myocardial
oxygen consumption to detect limitations in coro-
nary blood ﬂow. Exercise increases cardiac out-
put through increases in heart rate and inotropy.
Despite vasodilatation in skeletal muscle, exercise
typically increases arterial blood pressure as well.
Asaresult,exerciseisaccompaniedbyincreasesin
thethreemajordeterminantsofmyocardialoxygen
consumption:heartrate,walltension,andcontrac-
tility.Tomeetthedemandsofexercise,thecoronary
vascular bed dilates. The ability of the coronary
circulationtoincreasebloodﬂowtomatchexercise-
inducedincreasesindemandiscompromisedinthe
distribution of stenosed coronary arteries because
vasodilatoryreserveisexhaustedinthesebeds.
All exercise tests increase metabolic rate and
oxygen consumption ( VO2). Isometric exercise
may be used to increase the workload, but more
commonly, dynamic exercise using either a tread-
mill or a bicycle is used.VO2max is the maximal
amount of oxygen a person can use while per-
forming dynamic exercise. VO2max is inﬂuenced
by age, gender, exercise habits, and cardiovascu-
larstatus.Exerciseprotocolsarecomparedbyusing
metabolicequivalents(METs).OneMETisequalto
aVO2 of3.5mLoxygen(O 2)/kg/minandrepresents
resting oxygen uptake. Different exercise protocols
are compared by comparing the number of METs
consumedatvariousstages.
The Bruce treadmill protocol is the most com-
monly used protocol for exercise stress testing.
This protocol uses seven 3-minute stages. Each
progressive stage involves an increase in both
the grade and the speed of the treadmill. Dur-
ing stage 1 the treadmill speed is 1.7miles/h on
a 10% grade (5 METs); during stage 5 the tread-
millspeedis5miles/honan18%grade(16METs).
The patient progressively moves through the
stages until either exhausted, a target heart rate
achieved without ischemia, or the detection of
ischemic changes on the ECG. Exercise stress test-
ing can be performed in conjunction with tradi-
tional ECG analysis, myocardial perfusion scintig-
raphy, or echocardiography. The details of stress
myocardial perfusion scintigraphy, stress radionu-
cleotide angiography, and stress echocardiography
arediscussedbelow.
The following factors must be considered in
interpretationofanECGexercisestresstest:
• Angina. Ischemia may present as the patient’s
typical angina pattern; however, angina is not a
universal manifestation of ischemia in all patients.
Ischemic pain induced by exercise is strongly
predictiveofCAD.
• VO2max. If patients with CAD reach 13 METs,
their prognosis is good regardless of other fac-
tors; patients with an exercise capacity of less than
5METshaveapoorprognosis.
• Dysrhythmias. For patients with CAD, ventricu-
lardysrhythmiasmaybeprecipitatedoraggravated
byexercisetesting.Theappearanceofreproducible
sustained( >30seconds)orsymptomaticventricularAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch01” — 2007/7/16 — 12:38 — pag e7—# 7
Introduction 7
tachycardia(VT)ispredictiveofmultivesseldisease
andpoorprognosis.
• ST segment changes. ST segment depression is the
most common manifestation of exercise-induced
myocardial ischemia. The standard criterion for an
abnormal response is horizontal or down sloping
(>1mm) depression 80ms after the J point. Down
slopingsegmentscarryaworseprognosisthanhor-
izontalsegments.ThedegreeofSTsegmentdepres-
sion( >2mm),thetimeofappearance(startingwith
<6 METs), the duration of depression (persisting
>5minutes into recovery), and the number of
ECG leads involved (>5 leads) are all predictive of
multivesselCADandadverseprognosis.
• Blood pressure changes. Failure to increase systolic
arterial blood pressure to greater than 120mmHg,
or a sustained decrease in systolic blood pressure
with progressive exercise, is indicative of cardiac
failureinthefaceofincreasingdemand.Thisﬁnding
suggestsseveremultivesselorleftmainCAD.
Comparisonofstresstestmethods
The sensitivity of detection of CAD with exer-
cise myocardial perfusion scintigraphy or exercise
echocardiography is superior to that of exercise
ECG testing. The superiority of these two modal-
ities over ECG testing in detecting CAD is great-
est for patients with single vessel CAD. When
comparing myocardial perfusion scintigraphy to
stress echocardiography, the data suggest a trend
toward greater sensitivity with myocardial per-
fusion scintigraphy, particularly for patients with
single-vessel disease. Moderate to large perfusion
defects by either stress echocardiography or thal-
lium imaging predicts postoperative myocardial
infarction or death in patients scheduled for elec-
tive noncardiac surgery. Negative tests assure the
clinicianofasmalllikelihoodofsubsequentadverse
outcome(negativepredictivevalue =99%).Unfor-
tunately, however, the positive predictive value
(i.e. the chance that a patient with a positive test
will have an adverse cardiovascular event) is poor
ranging from 4% to 20%. In a meta-analysis com-
paringthetwotechniques,stressechocardiography
isslightlysuperiortothalliumimaginginpredicting
postoperative cardiac events. The choice of which
techniqueshouldbemadebaseduponinstitutional
expertise and patient-speciﬁc attribute. In either
case, angiography should be considered in patients
withmoderatelylargedefects.
LimitationsofexerciseECGtestingaretheinabil-
ity to accurately localize and assess the extent
of ischemia. Furthermore, no direct information
regarding left ventricle function is available. Stress
myocardial perfusion scintigraphy, radionuclide
angiography, and echocardiography provide this
information.Ontheotherhand,thesemethodsare
more expensive and technically more demanding
thanexerciseECGtesting.
Myocardial perfusion scintigraphy
Myocardialperfusionscintigraphyassessesmyocar-
dial blood ﬂow, myocardial viability, the number
and extent of myocardial perfusion defects, tran-
sient stress-induced LV dilatation, and allows for
risk stratiﬁcation. Myocardial perfusion scintigra-
phy is performed most commonly in conjunc-
tion with stress testing. Stress testing can be
accomplished with exercise or pharmacologically
withdipyridamole,adenosine,ordobutamine.With
this technology, it is possible to determine which
regions of myocardium are perfused normally,
whichareischemic,whicharestunnedorhibernat-
ing,andwhichareinfarcted.Thetechniqueisbased
ontheuseofradiopharmaceuticalsthataccumulate
in the myocardium proportional to regional blood
ﬂow. Single-positron emission computed tomogra-
phy (SPECT) or planar imaging is used to image
regional myocardial perfusion in multiple views
andatvariousmeasurementintervals.Patientswith
small ﬁxed perfusion defects have reduced periop-
erativeriskproﬁles,whereaspatientswithmultiple
largerdefectsareathigherrisk.
The radiopharmaceuticals currently in use are
thallium-201 and technetium-99m methoxyiso-
butyl isonitrile (Sestamibi). Thallium has biologic
properties similar to potassium and thus is trans-
ported across the myocardial cell membrane by
the sodium–potassium adenosine triphosphatase
(ATPase) pump proportional to regional myocar-
dial blood ﬂow. Sestamibi is not dependent on
ATP to enter myocardial cells because it is highly
lipophilicbutitsdistributioninmyocardialtissueis
proportionaltobloodﬂow.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch01” — 2007/7/16 — 12:38 — pag e8—# 8
8 Chapter1
Thallium
Thallium-201isinjectedatthepeaklevelofamul-
tistageexerciseorpharmacologicalstresstest.Scin-
tillation imaging begins 6–8minutes after injection
(early views) and is repeated again 2–4hours after
injection (delayed or redistribution views). Identi-
cal views must be used so the early and delayed
imagescanbecompared.Duringstress,myocardial
bloodﬂowandthallium-201uptakewillincreasein
areas of the myocardium supplied by normal coro-
nary arteries. Subsequently, thallium redistributes
toothertissues,thusclearingfromthemyocardium
slowly. Areas of myocardium supplied by diseased
arteries are prone to ischemia during stress and
haveareducedabilitytoincreasemyocardialblood
ﬂow and thallium-201 uptake. These areas will
demonstrate a perfusion defect when compared
with normal regions in the early views. In the
delayed views, late accumulation or ﬂat washout
of thallium-201 from the ischemic areas compared
with the nonischemic areas results in equalization
of thallium-201 activity in the two areas. These
reversible perfusion defects are typical of areas of
myocardium that suffer transient, stress-induced
ischemia. Nonreversible perfusion defects are present
in both the early stress and delayed redistribution
images.Thesedefectsarebelievedtorepresentareas
ofnonviablemyocardiumresultingfromoldinfarc-
tions. Reverse redistribution is the phenomenon in
whichearlyimagesarenormalorshowadefectand
the delayed images show a defect or a more severe
defect.Thisisseenfrequentlyinpatientswhohave
recentlyundergonethrombolytictherapyorangio-
plasty and may result from higher-than-normal
bloodﬂowtotheresidualviablemyocardiuminthe
partiallyinfarctedzone.
Modiﬁedthalliumscintigraphyprotocolsareuse-
ful in detecting areas hibernating myocardium.
Hibernating myocardium exhibits persistent
ischemicdysfunctionsecondarytoachronicreduc-
tionincoronarybloodﬂow,butthetissueremains
viable. Hibernating myocardium has been shown
to exhibit functional improvement after surgical
revascularization or angioplasty and restoration of
coronarybloodﬂow.Stunnedmyocardium,incon-
trast, has undergone a period of transient hypop-
erfusion with subsequent reperfusion. As a result,
these regions exhibit transient postischemic dys-
function in the setting of normal coronary blood
ﬂow.Stunnedmyocardiumisdetectedbyidentify-
ing regions of dysfunctional myocardium in which
noperfusiondefectexists.
Some regions of myocardium that do not
exhibitredistributionat2.5–4.0hoursexhibitredis-
tribution in late images at 18–24hours. This
late redistribution represents areas of hibernating
myocardium.Anotherapproachtodetectinghiber-
natingmyocardiumisreinjectionofthalliumatrest
after acquisition of the 2.5–4.0-hour stress images.
Persistent defects that show enhanced uptake after
reinjection represent areas of viable myocardium.
Finally,serialrestthalliumimaginghasproveduse-
ful in detecting hibernating myocardium. Images
are obtained at rest after injection of thallium
and then are repeated 3hours later. Regions
of myocardium that exhibit rest redistribution
representareasofviablemyocardium.
Increased lung uptake of thallium is related to
exercise-inducedLVdysfunctionandsuggestsmul-
tivessel CAD. Because increased lung uptake of
thallium is due to an elevated left atrial pressure
(LAP), other factors besides extensive CAD and
exercise-induced LV dysfunction (such as mitral
stenosis,mitralregurgitation,andnonischemiccar-
diomyopathy) must be considered when few or no
myocardialperfusiondefectsaredetected.Transient
LV dilation after exercise or pharmacologic stress
alsosuggestsseveremyocardialischemia.
Sestamibi
Sestamibi, unlike thallium, does not redistribute.
As a result, the distribution of myocardial blood
ﬂow at the time of injection remains ﬁxed over
the course of several hours. This necessitates two
separate injections: one at rest and one at peak
stress. The two studies must be performed so that
the myocardial activity from the ﬁrst study decays
enough not to interfere with the activity from the
second study. A small dose is administered at rest
with imaging approximately 45–60minutes later.
Several hours later, a larger dose is administered
at peak stress, with imaging 15–30minutes later.
Reversible and ﬁxed defects are detected by com-
paringtherestandstressimages.Aswiththallium,AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch01” — 2007/7/16 — 12:38 — pag e9—# 9
Introduction 9
late imaging after Sestamibi stress imaging may be
helpfulindetectinghibernatingmyocardium.
Sestamibiallowshigh-count-densityimagestobe
recorded,providingbetterresolutionthanthallium.
Inaddition,useofSestamibiallowsperformanceof
ﬁrst pass radionuclide angiography (see below) to
beperformedinconjunctionwithmyocardialperfu-
sionscintigraphy.Useofsimultaneousradionuclide
angiographyandperfusionscintigraphyhasproved
usefulinenhanceddetectionofviablemyocardium.
Viable myocardium will exhibit preserved regional
perfusion in conjunction with preserved regional
wallmotion.
Radionuclide angiography
Radionuclide angiography allows assessment of
RV and LV performance. Two types of cardiac
radionuclide imaging exist: ﬁrst-pass radionuclide
angiography (FPRNA) and equilibrium radionu-
clideangiography(ERNA),alsoknownasradionu-
clideventriculographyorgatedbloodpoolimaging.
ERNA is also known as multiple-gated acquisition
(MUGA)ormultiple-gatedequilibriumscintigraphy
(MGES).
FPRNAinvolvesinjectionofaradionuclidebolus
(normally technetium-99m) into the central circu-
lation via the external jugular or antecubital vein.
Subsequentimagingwithascintillationcameraina
ﬁxedpositionprovidesatemporalpictorialpresen-
tation of the cardiac chambers as the radiolabeled
bolus makes its way through the heart. First-pass
studies may be gated or ungated. Gated studies
involve synchronization of the presented images
with the patient’s ECG such that systole and dias-
toleareidentiﬁed.Ungatedstudiessimplypresenta
seriesofimagesovertime.
ERNA involves use of technetium-99m-labeled
redcells,whichareallowedtodistributeuniformly
in the blood volume. Radiolabeling of red cells is
accomplished by initially injecting the patient with
stannouspyrophosphate,whichcreatesastannous-
hemoglobincomplexoverthecourseof30minutes.
Subsequent injection of a technetium-99m bolus
results in binding of technetium-99m to the
stannous-hemoglobin complex, thus labeling the
redcells.
After equilibrium of the labeled red cells in the
cardiac blood pool, gated imaging with a scintil-
lation camera is performed. A computer divides
the cardiac cycle into a predetermined number of
frames (16–64). Each frame represents a speciﬁc
time interval relative to the ECG R wave. Data
collected from each time interval over the course
of several hundred cardiac cycles are then added
togetherwiththeotherimagesfromthesametime
interval. The result is a sequence of 16–64 images,
each representing a speciﬁc phase of the cardiac
cycle. The images can be displayed in an endless
loop format or individually. The procedure can
then be repeated with the camera in a different
position.
Below is a summary of the relative advantages
and disadvantages of ﬁrst-pass and equilibration
studies.Bothtypesofstudiescurrentlyareusedfor
adults,infants,andchildren.
• With both FPRNA and ERNA studies, the num-
ber of radioactive counts during end systole and
end diastole can be used to determine stroke
volume,ejectionfraction,andcardiacoutput.
• Bothtypesofstudiesallowreliablequantiﬁcation
of LV volume using count-proportional methods
that do not require assumptions to be made about
LVgeometry.
• AlthoughbothstudiesallowdeterminationofRV
andLVejectionfractions,determinationofRVejec-
tionfractionismoreaccuratewithaﬁrst-passstudy
becausetherightatriumoverlapstherightventricle
inequilibriumstudies.
• First-passstudiesallowdetectionandquantiﬁca-
tion of both right-to-left and left-to-right intracar-
diacshunts,whereasshuntdetectionisnotpossible
withequilibrationstudies.
• First-pass studies allow sequential analysis of
right atrial (RA), RV, left atrial (LA), and LV size,
whereasequilibrationstudiesdonot.Abnormalities
intheprogressionoftheradioactivetracerthrough
theheartandgreatvesselsassistinthediagnosisof
congenitalabnormalities.
• Equilibration studies provide better analysis of
regional wall motion abnormalities than ﬁrst-pass
studiesduetohigherresolution.
• Both types of studies can be used with exer-
cise. First-pass studies can be performed rapidlyAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch01” — 2007/7/16 — 12:38 — page 10 — #10
10 Chapter1
but do not allow assessment of ventricular wall
motionatdifferentexerciselevels,nordotheyallow
assessmentofwallmotionfromdifferentangles.
• Mitral or aortic regurgitation is detectable with
bothﬁrst-passandequilibrationstudiesbyanalysis
of the stroke volume ratio. This method tends to
overestimateregurgitantfractionandisnotreliable
fordetectionofminordegreesofregurgitation.
Echocardiography
Transthoracic and transesophageal echocardiogra-
phy has revolutionized the noninvasive structural
and functional assessment of acquired and con-
genital heart disease. Transthoracic echocardiogra-
phy (TTE) and transesophageal echocardiography
(TEE) often play a major role in the evaluation
of cardiac surgical patients. Routine use of two-
dimensional imaging, color ﬂow Doppler, contin-
uous wave Doppler, pulsed wave Doppler, and
M-modeimagingallowsthefollowing:
• Assessment of cardiac anatomy.Delineation of the
most complex congenital heart lesions is feasi-
ble. In many instances, information acquired from
a comprehensive echocardiographic examination
is all that is necessary to undertake a surgical
repair.
• Assessment of ventricular function. A comprehen-
sive assessment of RV and LV diastolic and systolic
functionisfeasible.
• Assessment of valvular abnormalities. Assessment
of the functional status of all four cardiac valves
is possible. In addition, quantiﬁcation of valvular
stenosis and insufﬁciency is accurate and reliable.
Assessmentofprostheticvalvesalsoisfeasible.
• Characterization of cardiomyopathies.Hypertrophic,
dilated, and restrictive cardiomyopathies can be
identiﬁed.
• Assessment of the pericardium.Pericardialeffusions,
cardiactamponade,andconstrictivepericarditisare
reliablyidentiﬁed.
• Assessment of cardiac and extracardiac masses.Vege-
tations,foreignbodies,thrombi,andmetastaticand
primarycardiactumorscanbeidentiﬁed.
• Contrast echocardiography.Contrast solutions con-
taining microbubbles enhance the image allowing
assessment of myocardial perfusion, intracardiac
shunts, enhancement of Doppler signals, and
improved assessment of regional and global LV
function.
• Stress echocardiography.Stressechocardiographyis
basedontheconceptthatexerciseorpharmacolog-
ically induced wall motion abnormalities develop
early in the course of ischemia. Stress-induced
wall motion abnormalities occur soon after perfu-
sion defects are detected by radionuclide imaging
because, in the ischemic cascade, hypoperfusion
precedes wall motion abnormalities. Comparison
of resting and stress images allows resting abnor-
malities to be distinguished from stress-induced
abnormalities. Resting abnormalities indicate prior
infarction, hibernating or stunned myocardium;
whereas, stress-induced abnormalities are spe-
ciﬁc for ischemia. Furthermore, dobutamine stress
echocardiography may be useful in determin-
ing myocardial viability. Regions that are hypo-
kinetic, akinetic, or dyskinetic at rest and improve
with dobutamine administration probably contain
areasofstunnedorhibernatingmyocardium.Such
areas demonstrate functional improvement after
myocardialrevascularization.
Computerized tomography and magnetic
resonance imaging
Advances in imaging techniques have played a
major role in deﬁning anatomy in cardiac surgi-
cal patients. Computerized tomography (CT) and
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) now allow the
clinician detailed anatomy, three-dimensional ren-
dering, and functional assessment of myocardial
performance and blood ﬂow (Fig. 1.1). It is likely
thatnewadvancesinimagingtechniqueswillcon-
tinuetoimprovethequalityandtheanatomicdetail
afforded by these techniques. Molecular imaging,
i.e.imagingofcellularfunction,isadevelopingarea
in cardiac imaging. The applications of these new
technologiesremaintobeseen.
Cardiac catheterization
Cardiac catheterization remains the gold standard
for evaluation of acquired and congenital heart
disease. Cardiac catheterization is covered in detail
inChapter2.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch01” — 2007/7/16 — 12:38 — page 11 — #11
Introduction 11
Fig. 1.1 Threedimensionreconstructionoftheheart
andaorta
Respiratory evaluation
A preoperative assessment of pulmonary function
(other than CXR) is required in all cardiac surgi-
cal patients. The evaluation must include a history
of known pulmonary disease, current respiratory
symptoms, and a physical examination. Evalua-
tion may include consultation with specialists and
speciﬁc pulmonary testing (pulmonary function
testing, spirometry, pulse oximetry, arterial blood
gas analysis). The history should determine the
extent and length of tobacco use, the presence of
COPD,asthma,recurrentoracutepulmonaryinfec-
tions,andthepresenceofdyspnea.Physicalexam-
ination should focus on the detection of wheezes,
ﬂattened diaphragms, air trapping, consolidations,
and clubbing of the nails. A CXR is indicated in
nearlyallcardiacsurgicalpatients.Pulmonaryfunc-
tion tests (PFTs) play a limited role in preoperative
assessment. If there is confusion about whether
intrinsic pulmonary disease exists, its cause, and
its appropriate treatment, then pulmonary func-
tion testing may help guide the clinician. Spirom-
etry measures lung volumes, capacities, and ﬂow.
Spirometryofexpiratoryﬂowratesallowsmeasure-
ment of the forced expiratory volume in 1second
(FEV1), the forced vital capacity (FVC), and the
forcedmid-expiratoryﬂow( FEF25–75%).Arterial
bloodgasesshouldbeobtainedforpatientsinwhom
carbondioxide(CO 2)retentionissuspectedandfor
thosewithseverepulmonarydysfunctionasdeter-
mined by history, physical examination, PFTs, or
cardiaccatheterization.
Pulmonary assessment and congenital
heart disease
Lesions that produce excessive pulmonary blood
ﬂow (large ventricular septal defect, truncus arte-
riosus, dextrotransposition of the great arteries,
and patent ductus arteriosus) are associated with
pulmonary dysfunction. Occasionally, large airway
compression occurs in response to enlargement
of the pulmonary arteries. More commonly, how-
ever, these lesions produce pulmonary vascular
changes that affect pulmonary function. The pul-
monary vascular smooth muscle hypertrophy that
accompanies increased pulmonary blood ﬂow pro-
duces peripheral airway obstruction and reduced
expiratory ﬂow rates characteristic of obstructive
lungdisease.Inaddition,smoothmusclehypertro-
phy in respiratory bronchioles and alveolar ducts
in patients with increased pulmonary blood ﬂow
contributes to this obstructive pathology. These
changes predispose the patient to atelectasis and
pneumonia. Children with Down syndrome have
a more extensive degree of pulmonary vascular
and parenchymal lung disease than other children
withsimilarheartlesions.Thispredisposespatients
with Down syndrome to greater postoperative
respiratorymorbidityandmortality.
Patients with lesions that reduce pulmonary
bloodﬂow(pulmonaryatresiaorstenosis,tetralogy
of Fallot) also have characteristic pulmonary func-
tionchanges.Thesepatientshavenormallungcom-
plianceascomparedwiththedecreasedcompliance
seen in patients with increased pulmonary blood
ﬂow.However,thelargedeadspacetotidalvolume
ratio in these patients greatly reduces ventilation
efﬁciency, and large tidal volumes are required to
maintainnormalalveolarventilation.Finally,3–6%
of patients with tetralogy of Fallot will have an
absent pulmonary valve and aneurysmal dilata-
tion of the pulmonary arteries. This aneurysmalAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch01” — 2007/7/16 — 12:38 — page 12 — #12
12 Chapter1
dilatation produces bronchial compression and
respiratorydistressatbirth.
Pulmonary assessment and acquired
heart disease
Pulmonary dysfunction ranks among the highest
predictors of postoperative pulmonary complica-
tions. Pulmonary dysfunction is deﬁned as a pro-
ductive cough, wheeze, or dyspnea. Pulmonary
function testing consistent with pulmonary dys-
function shows a FEV1 < 70% of predicted
or FEV1/FVC < 65% of predicted, plus either
vital capacity (VC)< 3.0L or maximum volun-
tary ventilation (MVV )< 80L/min. For patients
undergoing valvular surgery, the presence of pul-
monary dysfunction is associated with up to a
2.5-fold increase in perioperative mortality and a
2.5-fold increase in postoperative respiratory com-
plications. For patients undergoing only coronary
revascularization, pulmonary dysfunction is less
predictiveofpostoperativemorbidityandmortality.
Pulmonary assessment and tobacco use
Chronic tobacco use has several physiologic effects
that may complicate anesthetic management.
Smokingacceleratesthedevelopmentofatheroscle-
rosis.Further,smokingreducescoronarybloodﬂow
by increasing blood viscosity, platelet aggregation,
andcoronaryvascularresistance.Nicotine,through
activation of the sympathetic nervous system and
elevatedcatecholaminelevels,increasesmyocardial
oxygenconsumptionbyincreasingheartrate,blood
pressureandmyocardialcontractility.Furthermore,
theincreasedcarboxyhemoglobinlevel,whichmay
exceed 10% in smokers, reduces systemic and
myocardial oxygen delivery. This is particularly
detrimentaltothepatientwithCADduetothehigh
extraction of oxygen that normally occurs in the
myocardium. The threshold for exercise-induced
angina is reduced by carboxyhemoglobin levels as
low as 4.5%. Short-term abstinence (12–48hours)
issufﬁcienttoreducecarboxyhemoglobinandnico-
tine levels and improve the work capacity of the
myocardium.
There is an increased incidence of postoperative
respiratorymorbidityinpatientswhosmoke.These
complications include respiratory failure, unantic-
ipated intensive unit admission, pneumonia, air-
way events during induction of anesthesia (cough,
laryngospasm), and increased need for postopera-
tive respiratory therapy. Smoking increases mucus
secretion, impairs tracheobronchial clearance, and
causessmallairwaynarrowing.Forpatientsunder-
going coronary revascularization, abstinence from
smoking for 2months may reduce the incidence
of postoperative respiratory complications. Absti-
nence for less than 2months is ineffective in
reducingtheincidenceofpostoperativerespiratory
complications. Similar studies of patients under-
going other surgical procedures have conﬁrmed
the necessity of a 4–6-week abstinence period.
Typically,tobacco-usingpatientspresentingforcar-
diac surgery will not have had the recommended
abstinenceperiodrequiredtoreducecomplications.
Acutecessationofsmokingduringtheperioperative
period is not associated with elevated risk. There
is no added cardiovascular risk for patients using
nicotinereplacementtherapy(NRT).
Pulmonary assessment and asthma
Asthma is characterized by paroxysmal or persis-
tent symptoms of wheezing, chest tightness, dys-
pnea, sputum production, and cough with airﬂow
limitation. There is hyper-responsiveness to endo-
genous or exogenous stimuli. Preoperative evalua-
tionofasthmaconﬁrmsthediagnosisandevaluates
the adequacy of treatment. Adequate control is
demonstrated when the patient reports normal
physical activity, mild and infrequent exacerba-
tions, no missed school or work days, and less
than four doses ofβ2-agonist therapy per week.
Long-termtreatmentislargelypreventiveinnature.
First-line pharmacologic treatment often incorpo-
rates inhaled corticosteroids (ICSs). Beclometha-
sone signiﬁcantly improvesFEV1, peak expiratory
ﬂow, and reduces β-agonist use and exacerba-
tions.Leukotrienereceptorantagonists(LTRAs)are
sometimesusedasﬁrst-linetherapy;however,their
role is less clearly established when compared to
theICSagents.Long-acting β2-agonistsaresafeand
effectivemedicationsforimprovingasthmacontrol
inolderchildrenandadultswhenICSstherapydoes
not adequately control the disease. Theophylline isAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch01” — 2007/7/16 — 12:38 — page 13 — #13
Introduction 13
less effective than ICSs and LTRAs in improving
asthmacontrol.
Forpatientsinwhombronchospasmiswellcon-
trolled preoperatively, it is essential to continue
therapy during the perioperative period. Beta-2-
agonist metered-dose inhaler or nebulizer therapy
canbecontinueduntilarrivalintheoperatingroom
and can be restarted soon after emergence from
anesthesia.Metered-doseinhalationtherapycanbe
deliveredviatheendotrachealtube.Forpatientsnot
onbronchodilatortherapywhopresentforsurgery
with bronchospasm, a trial of bronchodilators with
measurement of PFTs before and after therapy is
often helpful. An increase in theFEV1 of 15% or
moreafterinhalationofanebulizedbronchodilator
suggests a reversible component of bronchospasm.
Surgeryshouldbedelayeduntiltheasthmaiscon-
trolled. If this is not possible, acute therapy with
steroids and β2-agonists is indicated. Therapy for
thecardiacsurgicalpatientshouldbeinitiatedwith
a β2-selective metered-dose inhaler or nebulized
solution.
Renal function
Patients presenting for cardiac surgery may pos-
sess varying degrees of renal dysfunction ranging
frommildelevationsincreatininetodialysisdepen-
dence. Assessing renal function preoperatively is
vitally important in the cardiac surgical patient.
Renal dysfunction after cardiac surgery is associ-
ated with increased mortality, morbidity, resource
utilization and intensive care unit stay. Depending
onthedeﬁnitionofacuterenalfailure(ARF),any-
where from 5% to 30% of patients demonstrate
renal dysfunction after cardiac procedures. Renal
dysfunction requiring dialysis is associated with a
50–80% increased risk of death. ARF is among the
strongest predictors for death with an odds ratio
of 7.9 (95% conﬁdence interval 6–10) in cardiac
surgical patients. Identiﬁcation of high-risk can-
didates remains important for appropriate patient
consent,risk-beneﬁtanalysis,andhospitalresource
utilizationplanning(Table1.5).
The dialysis-dependent patient will require dial-
ysis preoperatively. If dialysis is unobtainable
preoperatively,itcanbemanagedintraoperatively.
Table 1.5 Riskfactorsforacuterenalfailureafter
cardiacsurgery.
Female gender
Congestive heart failure
LV ejection fraction<35%
Preoperative use of an intraaortic balloon pump
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Previous cardiac surgery
Emergency surgery
Valve or valve+ CABG surgery
Elevated preoperative creatinine
CABG, coronary artery bypass graft.
Dialysiswillcorrectorimprovetheabnormalitiesin
potassium, phosphate, sodium, chloride, and mag-
nesium. In addition, the platelet dysfunction that
accompaniesuremiawillbeimproved.L-deamino-
8-D-arginine vasopressin (DDAVP) administration
may improve uremia-induced platelet dysfunction
and should be considered if clinically signiﬁcant
post-dialysis platelet dysfunction exists. Dialysis
will not favorably affect the anemia, renovascu-
lar hypertension, or immune-system compromise
associatedwithchronicrenalfailure.
Fornondialysis-dependentpatients,preoperative
hydrationisnecessarytopreventprerenalazotemia
from complicating the underlying renal dysfunc-
tion.Thisisparticularlyimportantafterprocedures
such as cardiac catheterization with arteriography.
Creatinine clearance falls after contrast arterio-
graphy; in patients with preexisting azotemia, this
reduction is much more likely to result in ARF.
Hydration ameliorates contrast-induced renal dys-
function.Treatmentwithacetylcysteineandsodium
bicarbonatereducepost-contrastARF.
Patients with renal transplants occasionally
present for cardiac surgical procedures. The extra-
renal component of renal blood ﬂow autoregula-
tion is absent in the denervated kidney. Therefore,
preoperative hydration and maintenance of sys-
temicperfusionpressureareparticularlyimportant
to maintain renal perfusion. Sterile technique is
mandatoryintheseimmunocompromisedpatients.
Renal dysfunction often results in electrolyte
imbalance. Potassium regulation is often difﬁcult
in the cardiac surgical patient. HyperkalemiaAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch01” — 2007/7/16 — 12:38 — page 14 — #14
14 Chapter1
(>5.5mEq/L)isuncommoninpatientswithnormal
renal function; however, it may occur with injudi-
ciouspotassiumadministration.Themajorcausesof
hyperkalemia result from diminished renal excre-
tionofpotassiumsecondarytoreducedglomerular
ﬁltration rate (acute oliguric renal failure, chronic
renal failure). Reduced tubular secretion may lead
to hyperkalemia as seen in Addison’s disease,
potassium-sparing diuretics and angiotensin con-
verting enzyme inhibitors. Other causes include
transcellular shifts of potassium as seen in acido-
sis, trauma, burns, beta-blockade, rhabdomyolysis,
hemolysis, diabetic hyperglycemia, and depolar-
izing muscle paralysis with succinylcholine. The
clinical manifestations relate to alterations in car-
diacexcitability.PeakedTwaveswillappearwitha
potassiumlevelof6.5mEq/L.Atlevelsof7–8mEq/L
the PR interval will prolong and the QRS complex
will widen. At 8–10mEq/L sine waves appear and
cardiac standstill is imminent. Treatment is multi-
modal and includes glucose, insulin, bicarbonate
and β-agonists (shifting potassium to the intracel-
lularcompartment),diuretics,exchangeresinsand
dialysis(enhancingpotassiumelimination),andcal-
cium (no change in serum potassium concentra-
tion,butcalciumcounteractsthecardiacconduction
effectsofhyperkalemia).
Hypokalemia (<3.5mEq/L) is not uncommon in
the cardiac surgical patient. The most common eti-
ology is chronic diuretic therapy, but other causes
suchasGIloss(nasogastricsuction,diarrhea,vom-
iting), mineralocorticoid excess, acute leukemia,
alkalosis, barium ingestion, insulin therapy, vita-
min B12 therapy, thyrotoxicosis and inadequate
intake must be considered. The clinical manifesta-
tionsofhypokalemiaareobservedinskeletalmus-
cle,heart,kidneys,andtheGItract.Neuromuscular
weaknessisobservedwithlevelsof2.0–2.5mEq/L.
Hypokalemia leads to a sagging of the ST segment,
depression of the T wave, and the appearance of a
U wave on the ECG. In patients treated with digi-
talis,hypokalemiamayprecipitateseriousarrhyth-
mias. Treatment of hypokalemia involves either
oral or parenteral replacement. A deﬁcit in serum
potassium reﬂects a substantial total body deﬁcit.
A decrease in plasma potassium concentration of
1mEq/Lwithanormalacid-basebalancerepresents
approximately 300mEq of total body potassium
deﬁciency.Inpreparingthecardiacsurgicalpatient
for surgery, it is reasonable to maintain serum
potassium higher than 3.5mEq/L for patients on
digitalis, those at high risk for myocardial ischemia
and those who have suffered acute reductions in
serum potassium. Potassium replacement is not
without risk (iatrogenic hyperkalemia). In gen-
eral, potassium replacement should not exceed
10–20mEq/h or 200mEq/day. Serum potassium
must be closely monitored during the replacement
therapy.
Endocrine evaluation
A careful evaluation for endocrine abnormalities
shouldbesoughtinthehistoryandphysicalexami-
nation.Diabetesmellitus(DM)andhypothyroidism
deservespecialconsideration.
Diabetes mellitus
Diabetes mellitus is a risk factor for development
of CAD; therefore, perioperative management of
DM is a common problem facing those who anes-
thetize patients for cardiac surgery. Patients with
insulin-dependentdiabeteshavereducedorabsent
insulin production due to destruction of pancre-
atic beta cells. Patients with noninsulin-dependent
diabetes have normal or excessive production of
insulin but suffer from insulin resistance. This
resistance may be due to a reduction in insulin
receptors, a defect in the second messenger once
insulin binds to receptors, or both. Patients with
noninsulin-dependent diabetes may be managed
with diet, oral hypoglycemic agents (agents that
increase pancreatic insulin production), or exoge-
nous insulin. Patients with insulin-dependent dia-
betesmustreceiveexogenousinsulin.
Cardiopulmonarybypass(CPB)isassociatedwith
changesinglucoseandinsulinhomeostasisinboth
diabeticandnondiabeticpatients.Duringnormoth-
ermicCPB,elevationsinglucagon,cortisol,growth
hormone,andcatecholaminelevelsproducehyper-
glycemiathroughincreasedhepaticglucoseproduc-
tion,reducedperipheraluseofglucose,andreducedAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch01” — 2007/7/16 — 12:38 — page 15 — #15
Introduction 15
insulinproduction.DuringhypothermicCPB,hep-
atic glucose production is reduced and insulin pro-
duction remains low such that blood glucose lev-
els remain relatively constant. Rewarming on CPB
is associated with increases in glucagon, cortisol,
growth hormone, and catecholamine levels and is
accompanied by enhanced hepatic production of
glucose, enhanced insulin production, and insulin
resistance.Thetransfusionofbloodpreservedwith
acid-citrate-dextrose,theuseofglucosesolutionsin
the CPB prime, and the use ofβ-adrenergic agents
for inotropic support, further increase exogenous
insulin requirements. For nondiabetic patients,
these hormonally mediated changes usually result
in mild hyperglycemia. For diabetic patients, these
changes may produce signiﬁcant hyperglycemia
andketoacidosis.
Management of perioperative glucose is directly
related to perioperative outcome. Uncontrolled, or
poorly controlled, perioperative glucose is associ-
atedwithincreasedmortality,woundinfection,and
intensive care unit length of stay. This relationship
is true in cardiac and noncardiac surgical patients
admittedtoanintensivecareunitsetting.Theideal
level of glucose is unknown; however, if a target
of 130mg/dL can be achieved, this is associated
with improved clinical outcome. Administration of
exogenous insulin should be administered early in
the perioperative period to achieve this goal. The
clinician must remember that achieving this goal
may be impossible in some patients. Insulin resis-
tance and the physiologic conditions encouraging
hyperglycemia may be too great in some patients.
Similarly,theclinicianmustexercisecautionwhen
administering insulin. Serum glucose levels should
be checked as frequently as every 15–30minutes
perioperatively while insulin therapy is utilized.
Unrecognized hypoglycemia can adversely affect
patientoutcome.
Becauseofthevaryinginsulinrequirementsdur-
ing cardiac surgery and the unreliable absorption
of subcutaneously administered insulin in patients
undergoing large changes in body temperature
and peripheral perfusion, insulin is best delivered
IV for patients undergoing cardiac surgery. The
goal of therapy should be maintenance of normo-
glycemia during the pre-CPB, CPB, and post-CPB
Table 1.6 Recommendationsforinsulinadministration.
Blood
glucose
(mg/dL)
Insulin
infusion
rate
(U/kg/h)
Rate in
100kg
patient
(U/h)∗
150–200 0.02 2
200–250 0.03 3
250–300 0.04 4
300–350 0.05 5
350–400 0.06 6
∗ The actual rate of administration will vary from patient
to patient and should be titrated against measured serum
glucose levels and patient response.
periods. On the morning of surgery, the usual
insulindoseiswithheld.Onarrivalintheoperating
room, the patient’s blood glucose is measured. For
tight control, a continuous regular insulin infu-
sion can be started and adjusted to maintain blood
glucose between 100 and 150mg/dL during the
operative procedure. Determinations of blood glu-
cose are made every 15–30minutes. Table 1.6
provides guidelines for insulin administration. It
must be emphasized that the alterations in glucose
homeostasis and the insulin resistance that accom-
pany hypothermic CPB may necessitate alteration
in infusion rates, and therefore insulin must be
titrated against demonstrated patient response by
measuringserialserumglucoselevels.
Patients taking oral hypoglycemic agents should
discontinue them at least 12hours before surgery.
For patients managed with these agents and
patients managed with diet, blood glucose deter-
minations should be made every 30–60minutes
during the operative procedure. These patients
frequently require insulin infusions to maintain
glucosehomeostasisduringsurgery.
Hypothyroidism
Hypothyroidism is characterized by a reduction in
the basal metabolic rate. In patients with hypothy-
roidism cardiac output may be reduced by up to
40%duetoreductionsinbothheartrateandstroke
volume.Inaddition,bothhypoxicandhypercapnic
ventilatory drives are blunted by hypothyroidism.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch01” — 2007/7/16 — 12:38 — page 16 — #16
16 Chapter1
Furthermore, hypothyroidism may be associated
withbluntingofbaroreceptorreﬂexes,reduceddrug
metabolism, renal excretion, reduced bowel motil-
ity, hypothermia, hyponatremia from syndrome of
inappropriate antidiuretic hormone (SIADH), and
adrenalinsufﬁciency.Thehypothyroidpatientmay
nottolerateusualdosesofantianginaldrugssuchas
nitratesand β-adrenergicblockingagents.Hypothy-
roidpatientsonbeta-blockerstypicallyrequirevery
lowanestheticdrugrequirements.
Despite these problems, thyroid replacement
for cardiac surgical patients, particularly those
with ischemic heart disease, is not always desir-
able. For hypothyroid patients requiring coronary
revascularization, thyroid hormone replacement
may precipitate myocardial ischemia, myocar-
dial infarction, or adrenal insufﬁciency. Coronary
revascularization may be managed successfully in
hypothyroid patients with thyroid replacement
withheld until the postoperative period. Mild to
moderate hypothyroid patients undergoing cardiac
surgeryhaveperioperativemorbidityandmortality
similar to euthyriod patients. Hypothyroid patients
may experience delayed emergence from anesthe-
sia, persistent hypotension, tissue friability, bleed-
ing and adrenal insufﬁciency requiring exogenous
steroids. Hypothyroidism is preferentially treated
withlevothyroxine(T4).Inhealthyadultswithout
CAD, a starting dose of 75–100µg/day is appro-
priate. In elderly patients, and those with CAD,
theinitialdoseis12.5–25.0 µg/dayandisincreased
by 25–50µg every 4–6weeks allowing for a slow
increase in metabolic rate thereby avoiding a mis-
match in coronary blood supply and metabolic
demand.
Hematologic evaluation
By the nature of the surgery, and the associated
cardiovascular medications (heparin, clopidogrel),
cardiac surgical patients are at higher periopera-
tive risk of bleeding. A hemoglobin and hema-
tocrit is indicated based on the invasiveness of
the procedure (i.e. relative risk of blood loss and
transfusion), the history of liver disease, anemia,
bleeding,otherhematologicdisordersoranextreme
in age. Serum chemistry (i.e. potassium, sodium,
glucose, renal and liver function studies) are indi-
catedinpatientsanticipatinginvasivesurgerywith
possiblemetabolicalterations,diabeticpatientsand
other patients at speciﬁc risk of renal or liver dys-
function. Plasma N-terminal pro-brain naturetic
peptide (NTproBNP) is secreted by the left ven-
tricle in response to wall stress. It is elevated in
patientswithLVdysfunctionandheartfailure.Pre-
operative NTproBNP levels greater than 450ng/L
are predictive of cardiac complications with a sen-
sitivity of 100% and a speciﬁcity of 89%. Hence,
an NTproBNP level may assist in preoperative risk
assessment and resource management in selected
patients.Aurinalysisisusuallynotindicatedunless
there are speciﬁc urinary ﬁndings. A pregnancy
test should be considered in all female patients
of childbearing age. Coagulation studies are indi-
cated depending on the invasiveness of the proce-
dure,ahistoryofrenalorliverdysfunction,andin
patientsonanticoagulantmedications.
Medical management of acute coronary syn-
dromes, myocardial infarction, peripheral vascular
disease,atrialﬁbrillation,andstrokeoftenincludes
antithromboticmedicationssuchasaspirin,clopido-
grelbisulfate,heparin,coumadin,andothers.These
medicationsarecommoninpatientspresentingfor
cardiac surgery and may have a major impact on
themanagementandpreoperativeevaluationofthe
patient.Patientsmaypresentwithalonghistoryof
aspirinorclopidogreluse.Intheacutesetting,hep-
arinorshorteractingIIb/IIIainhibitingagentssuch
as integrelin may be in use. These agents are ben-
eﬁcial in reducing the incidence of stent occlusion,
myocardialinfarction,orotherthromboticsequaela
ofperipheralvasculardiseaseorhyper-coagulation.
A thoughtful plan regarding the continued admin-
istration of these medications is required prior to
the operative procedure. In the case of clopido-
grel, stable patients presenting for elective surgery
may be advised to stop the medication for 5days
to reduce the risk of excessive bleeding during
the operation. All of the agents, including aspirin,
are associated with increased blood loss during
surgery. The relative risk of stopping the agent
versustheincreasedriskofexcessivebleedingmustAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch01” — 2007/7/16 — 12:38 — page 17 — #17
Introduction 17
be weighed in each patient. Consultation with
surgeon and cardiologist are recommended before
discontinuingantithrombotictherapy.
Inadditiontothemedicationhistory,allpatients
scheduled for cardiac surgical procedures require a
careful bleeding history with emphasis on abnor-
mal bleeding occurring after surgical procedures,
dental extractions and trauma. Signs of easy bruis-
ing should be sought on physical examination.
All patients should undergo laboratory screening
for the presence of abnormalities in hemostasis.
Aplateletcount,partialthromboplastintime(PTT),
and prothrombin time (PT) should be obtained.
Time permitting, all abnormalities should be eval-
uated prior to surgery so that post-CPB hemostasis
is not complicated by unknown or unsuspected
medicalconditions.
PT and PTT elevations
Elevations in PT and PTT should be investigated
for factor deﬁciencies, factor inhibitors, and the
presence of anticoagulants such as warfarin and
heparin. It is important that documentation of a
normal PTT and PT existing before warfarin or
heparin administration is initiated so that other
causes of an elevated PTT and PT are not over-
looked. Deﬁciencies of factors VIII, IX, and XI
are most commonly encountered. These deﬁcien-
cies and their management are summarized in the
followingsections.
FactorVIIIdeﬁciency(hemophiliaA)
The half-life of factor VIII in plasma is 8–12hours;
normal persons have approximately 1unit of
factorVIIIactivityper1mLofplasma(100%activity).
Patients with severe hemophilia A will have as
little as 1% factor VIII activity, whereas mildly
affected patients will have up to 50% activity.
Patients present with an elevated PTT and varying
degrees of clinical bleeding. The diagnosis is made
by a factor assay. Safe conduct of cardiac surgery
requires 80–100% factor VIII activity during the
operative procedure, with maintenance of activity
levels in the 30–50% range for 7days postopera-
tively. An infusion of 1.0 unit of factor VIII per
kilogram of body weight will increase the patient’s
factorVIIIactivitylevelby2%.The12-hourhalf-life
of factor VIII requires that factor VIII be re-infused
every 12hours during the perioperative period.
Factor VIII may be provided with cryoprecipitate,
which contains 100units of factor VIII per bag
(10–20mL). Factor VIII concentrates that contain
1000units of factor VIII in 30–100mL also may
providefactorVIII.
FactorIXdeﬁciency(hemophiliaB)
Thehalf-lifeoffactorIXinplasmais24hours;nor-
mal persons have approximately 1unit of factor
IX activity per 1mL of plasma (100% activity).
Factor IX deﬁciency is clinically indistinguishable
from factor VIII deﬁciency. Diagnosis is made by
factorassay.Safeconductofcardiacsurgeryrequires
60% factor IX activity during the operative pro-
cedure, with maintenance of activity levels in the
30–50% range for 7days postoperatively. An infu-
sion of 1.0unit of factor IX per kilogram of body
weight will increase the patient’s factor IX activ-
ity level by 1%. The 24-hour half-life of factor IX
requires that factor IX be re-infused only every
24hours during the perioperative period. Fresh
frozen plasma (FFP) contains 0.8units of all of
the procoagulants per milliliter and generally is
used to replace factor IX. A 250-mL bag of FFP
will provide 200 units of factor IX. For patients in
who factor IX replacement with FFP will require
infusion of prohibitively large volumes, factor IX
concentratesareused.
FactorXIdeﬁciency(Rosenthal
syndrome)
The half-life of factor XI in plasma is 60–80hours;
normal persons have approximately 1unit of
factorXIactivityper1mLofplasma(100%activity).
Factor XI deﬁciency is most common among
patients of Jewish descent and is associated with
a prolonged PTT. Many of these patients have
no symptoms or have a history of bleeding only
with surgery or major trauma. The diagnosis is
made by factor assay. FFP administration replen-
ishes factor XI. It is recommended that 10–20mL
ofFFP/kg/daybeusedduringthepreoperativeand
postoperativeperiodstomanagethisdeﬁciency.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch01” — 2007/7/16 — 12:38 — page 18 — #18
18 Chapter1
Platelet dysfunction
Thrombocytopeniashouldbeevaluatedandtreated
as necessary to avoid excessive operative bleeding.
A platelet count and platelet function monitoring
are important laboratory evaluations. The bleed-
ing time is not a reliable predictor of perioperative
or postoperative bleeding. Other measurements of
platelet dysfunction include thromboelastography
and assays of activated platelet aggregation (aggre-
gometry). These evaluations provide information
onthefunctionalintegrityofplateletaction.Inthe
case of thromboelastography, clot formation and
ﬁbrinolysis are observed. The information gained
providesinsightintobothfactorcontentandplatelet
function. The activated platelet aggregation assays
provide both a total platelet count and a percent-
ageofactiveplatelets.Plateletdysfunctioncanresult
fromavarietyofcauses.
Thrombocytopenia
Thrombocytopenia may due to dilution (i.e. with
massive ﬂuid replacement), increased peripheral
destruction(sepsis,disseminatedintravascularcoag-
ulation, thrombotic thrombocytopenic prupura,
prosthetic valve hemolysis or platelet antibodies)
or sequestration (splenomegaly, lymphoma). In
the cardiac surgical patient, dilutional thrombo-
cytopenia is common. Thrombocytopenia is also
frequentlytheresultofplateletdestructionfromthe
CPBcircuitandfromactivationofheparininduced
plateletantibodies.
Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia and throm-
bosis (HITT) occurs due to the presence of an anti-
heparin-platelet factor 4 antibodies. The condition
can be terminated by withdrawal of heparin ther-
apy.Ideally,heparintherapyshouldnotberestarted
until in-vitro platelet aggregation in response to
heparin no longer occurs. Heparin induced throm-
bocytopeniamayre-occurupto12monthsafterthe
initial episode. Patients with HITT requiring CPB
before the antibody can be cleared present a man-
agement problem. These patients may be treated
by a variety of alternate anticoagulation agents.
Directthrombininhibitorssuchasdanaparoid,lep-
irudin, bivalirudin, and argatroban have all been
used with success. Other agents such as tiroﬁban
and epoprostenol have been used in combination
with unfractionated heparin with good result. In
the preoperative setting, identiﬁcation of patients
who have experienced HITT is paramount. If HITT
is diagnosed, then the surgery should either be
delayedlongenoughtocleartheheparinantibodies
(usually 90–100days), or an alternate anticoagu-
lation strategy devised. If heparin re-exposure is
considered, testing for the presence of HITT anti-
bodies,generallybyenzyme-linkedimmunosobent
assay(ELISA),isrequired.
Qualitativeplateletdefects
Abnormalitiesinplateletfunctionareobservedwith
some medications, renal failure, hepatic failure,
paraproteinemias (i.e. multiple myeloma), myelo-
proliferative disorders, and hereditary disorders of
platelet function. In the cardiac surgical patient,
medicationrelateddysfunction,uremicdysfunction
aremostcommon.
There is an ever growing list of medications
that inhibit platelet function. Some medications
altering function and commonly observed in the
cardiacsurgicalpatientincludeaspirin,nonsteroidal
anti-inﬂammatory drugs (NSAIDs), thienopyridine
adenosine diphosphate (ADP) receptor antago-
nists (clopidogrel, ticlopidine) and GP IIb/IIIa
antagonists (abciximab, integrelin, and tiroﬁban),
dextran, dipyridamole, heparin, plasminogen acti-
vators, and beta-lactam antibiotics. NSAIDs inhibit
platelet function by blocking platelet synthesis of
prostaglandins and platelet function is normalized
when these drugs are cleared from the blood.
Aspirin irreversibly acetylates prostaglandin syn-
thase (cyclooxygenase) impairing platelet function
for the life of the platelet (7–10days). Like aspirin,
the effects of clopidogrel are present for the life
of the platelet. It is recommended that for elec-
tive surgery, clopidogrel should be held for 5days
allowing adequate time to reestablish a normal
platelet response to bleeding. Integrelin inhibits
ﬁbrinogen from binding to the platelet surface
GP IIb/IIIa receptor. Integrelin should be discon-
tinued 12hours before surgery to ensure adequate
returnofplateletfunction.
Renal dysfunction with uremia inhibits platelet
function. The cause of this effect is unknown. In
addition to the qualitative defect there is oftenAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch01” — 2007/7/16 — 12:38 — page 19 — #19
Introduction 19
thrombocytopenia in these patients. The bleed-
ing time is usually prolonged and there is asso-
ciated anemia. Bleeding may be treated with
platelet transfusion or administration of DDAVP,
orcryoprecipitate.DDAVPandcryoprecipitateraise
the levels of factor VIII (antihemophilic factor/
vonWillebrand factor). When DDAVP is used,
0.3 µg/kg is infused IV over 15minutes and the
half-lifeofitsactivityis8hours.
Coagulopathy and congenital heart
disease
Coagulopathies in children with congenital heart
disease are common. The etiology of these coag-
ulopathies is multifactorial. Cyanosis has been
implicated in the genesis of coagulation and ﬁb-
rinolytic defects particularly in patients where
secondary erythrocytosis produces a hematocrit
greater than 60%. Thrombocytopenia and qualita-
tiveplateletdefectsarecommon.Defectsinbleeding
time, clot retraction, and platelet aggregation to
a variety of mediators have all been described.
Platelet count and platelet aggregation response to
ADP are inversely correlated with hematocrit and
positively correlated with arterial oxygen satura-
tion. In cyanotic patients, generation of platelet
microparticles,hypoﬁbrinogenemia,low-gradedis-
seminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), deﬁ-
ciencies in factors V and VIII, and deﬁciencies in
thevitamin-K-dependentfactors(II,VII,IX,X)have
all been implicated in the genesis of coagulapathy.
In patients who are cyanotic and erythrocytotic,
theplasmavolumeandquantityofcoagulationfac-
tors are reduced, and this may contribute to the
developmentofacoagulopathy.Insomeinstances,
erythrophoresis with whole blood removed and
replacedwithfreshfrozenplasmaorisotonicsaline
maybejustiﬁed.
In addition to the defects induced by cyanosis,
defects inherent to normal infants and to children
withcongenitalheartdiseasearepresent.Neonatal
platelets are hypo-reactive to thrombin (the most
potent platelet agonist), epinephrine/ADP, colla-
gen, and thromboxane A2. In addition, neonatal
ﬁbrinogenisdysfunctionascomparedtoolderchil-
dren and adults. An acquired deﬁciency of the
large von Willebrand multimers has been demon-
strated in patients with congenital heart disease.
Finally, factors synthesized in the liver may be
reduced in both cyanotic and acyanotic patients
in whom severe right heart failure results in pas-
sivehepaticcongestionandsecondaryparenchymal
disease.
Suggested reading
Ashley EA, Vagelos RH. Preoperative cardiac evaluation:
mechanisms, assessment, and reduction of risk.Thorac
Surg Clin2005;15:263–75.
Katz RI, Cimino L, Vitkun SA. Preoperative medical con-
sultations: impact on perioperative management and
surgicaloutcome. Can J Anaesth2005;52:697–702.
Maurer WG, Borkowski RG, Parker BM. Quality
and resource utilization in managing preoperative
evaluation. Anesthesiol Clin North America 2004;22:
155–75.
Practice Advisory for Preanesthesia Evaluation. A report
by the Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force
on Preanesthesia Evaluation. Anesthesiology 2002;96:
485–96.
Schmiesing CA, Brodsky JB. The preoperative anesthesia
evaluation. Thorac Surg Clin2005;15:305–15.
Thakar CV, Arrigain S, Worley S, Yared JP, Paganini EP.
Aclinicalscoretopredictacuterenalfailureaftercardiac
surgery. J Am Soc Nephrol2005;16:162–8.
Wesorick DH, Eagle KA. The preoperative cardiovascular
evaluation of the intermediate-risk patient: new data,
changingstrategies. Am J Med2005;118:1413.e1–9.Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch02” — 2007/7/17 — 20:27 — page 20 — #1
CHAPTER 2
Myocardial Physiology and
the Interpretation of
Cardiac Catheterization Data
The ability to interpret cardiac catheterization data
is essential to the cardiac anesthesiologist. Catheter-
ization data provide information about the extent
and distribution ofcoronary stenosis, the type and
extent ofvalvular lesions, the location and quantiﬁ-
cation ofintracardiac shunts, congenital lesions, and
an assessment ofsystolic and diastolic f unction. This
information contributes to a complete preoperative
evaluation and serves as a predictor ofpostoperative
functional status.
Right heart catheterization
A ﬂuid-ﬁlled catheter capable ofmaking high-
ﬁdelity pressure measurements in the right atrium,
right ventricle, pulmonary artery, and pulmonary
artery occlusion position is passed antegrade via
a basilic, cephalic, or femoral vein under ﬂuoro-
scopic guidance. In addition, the catheter may have
the capability ofmaking thermodilution cardiac
output and mixed venous oxygen saturation mea-
surements. Angiography is performed by recording
several cardiac cycles on cine ﬁlm while radio-
graphic contrast material is injected into the right
heart chambers.
For infants and children, the femoral vein is the
usual access site; however, right heart catheteri-
zation via the umbilical vein may be possible in
the ﬁrst few days after birth. Catheterization of the
right ventricle and pulmonary arteries may be difﬁ-
cult via the umbilical route because umbilical vein
catheters tend to pass directly into the left atrium via
the foramen ovale. Right atrial, right ventricular,
and pulmonary angiography may be performed
on infants and children to delineate congenital
lesions.
Left heart catheterization
A ﬂuid-ﬁlled catheter capable ofmaking high-
ﬁdelity systolic, diastolic, and mean pressure mea-
surements and capable ofallowing angiographic dye
injection is used. The catheter may be passed retro-
grade via the brachial or femoral artery to the aortic
root under ﬂuoroscopic guidance where pressures
are recorded. In infants and children the femoral
artery is the preferred route. The umbilical artery
is small and its course is tortuous; therefore, is not
useful except for pressure monitoring and angiogra-
phy ofthe descending aorta. Lef t heart catheteriza-
tion can be performed antegrade via the right atrium
in patients in whom the atrial septum can be crossed
via a patent foramen ovale or an atrial septal defect.
This is a common approach in infants and children.
In patients in whom the retrograde approach to
the left ventricle is undesirable, and where an atrial
or ventricular level communication does not exist,
the atrial septum can be intentionally punctured to
gain access to the left atrium using a Brockenbrough
needle.
Pressures in the aorta, left ventricle, and left
atrium are recorded. Aortography may be per-
formed by recording on cine ﬁlm the injection of
radiographic contrast material into the aortic root.
20Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch02” — 2007/7/17 — 20:27 — page 21 — #2
Myocardial Physiology 21
(a) (b)
1
2
3
4
5
Diastole Systole
LA
LA
mv mv
Ao
Ao
Fig. 2.1 Left ventriculogram in right anterior oblique (RAO) projection. End-diastolic image is shown in (a) while
end-systolic image is shown in (b). For purposes ofcomparison, end diastole is represented by dotted outline on
end-systolic image. Numbers 1–5 refer to ﬁve segments analyzed for wall motion in RAO projection (see Fig. 2.12).
Ao, aorta; LA, left atrium; mv, mitral valve.
This will allow detection ofaortic regurgitation,
congenital aortic arch abnormalities such as coarcta-
tion or aortic arch interruption, and acquired aortic
lesions such as aortic dissection. Left atrial and ven-
tricular angiography allows detection ofcongenital
anomalies. Left ventriculography is performed by
recording several cardiac cycles on cine ﬁlm as
radiographic contrast material is injected into the
mid left ventricle. The left ventriculogram allows
detection ofmitral regurgitation as well as com-
parison ofboth regional and global wall motion in
systole and diastole (Fig. 2.1a,b). The left ventricu-
logram also allows calculation oflef t ventricular
end-diastolic volume (LVEDV) and left ventricu-
lar end-systolic volume (LVESV). The innermost
margin ofthe lef t ventricular (LV) silhouette in sys-
tole and diastole is determined. Computer assisted
planimetry calculates LV volumes from these two-
dimensional pictures based on the assumption that
ventricular shape is approximated by an ellip-
soid. Angiographic stroke volume (SV) is then
deﬁned as LVEDV – LVESV. Ejection fraction (EF)
is deﬁned as (LVEDV – LVESV)/LVEDV, which is
SV/LVEDV.
Coronary angiography
Cine recordings ofradiographic contrast material
selectively injected into the coronary ostia are made.
Special catheters are used for the selective
Fig. 2.2 Left anterior oblique (LAO) projection of aorta
illustrating use ofJudkin’s technique to catheterize the
right coronary ostia retrograde via femoral artery.
cannulization ofthe ostia and are advanced under
ﬂuoroscopic guidance via the same artery used for
left heart catheterization (Figs 2.2 & 2.3).
Cardiac output determination
Two complimentary methods are used to deter-
mine cardiac output: the thermodilution technique
and the Fick determination. Both methods measure
forward cardiac outputs. Forward cardiac outputAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch02” — 2007/7/17 — 20:27 — page 22 — #3
22 Chapter 2
Fig. 2.3 Left anterior oblique (LAO) projection of
aorta illustrating use ofJudkin’s technique to
catheterize the left coronary ostia retrograde via
femoral artery.
and total cardiac output are equal only ifthere are
no regurgitant lesions or shunt fractions.
Thermodilution cardiac output is a modiﬁcation
ofthe indicator dilution method, in which ﬂow is
determined from the following relationship:
Known amount ofindicator injected
Measured concentration ofindicator × time
In the thermodilution method, cold water is the
indicator. A predetermined volume ofindicator
ofknown temperature is injected into the right
atrium, where the temperature ofthe blood also
is known. The subsequent change in temperature
over time is measured by a thermistor in the pul-
monary artery. This method measures pulmonary
blood ﬂow, which is equal to forward right heart
output. It is not accurate at low cardiac outputs,
in the presence oftricuspid regurgitation, or where
an intracardiac left-to-right shunt exists. Thermo-
dilution cardiac outputs are discussed in detail in
Chapter 3.
The Fick determination is based on the rela-
tionship:
O2 consumption/arterial − venous O2 content
difference
Oxygen uptake or consumption ( Vo2) can be
determined from calculations made on a 3-minute
expired air sample collected in a Douglas bag. The
bag contents are analyzed for carbon dioxide and,
using the respiratory quotient, VO2 is calculated.
More commonly, an estimate of VO2 is obtained
from tables that relateVO2 to body surface area or to
heart rate and age. Arterial–venous oxygen content
difference (A–VO2 difference) is calculated from the
difference between the arterial and mixed venous
oxygen contents where:
Content = (O2 saturation ofarterial or mixed
venous blood×Hb concentration×(1.38))
+(0.003×PO2 ofarterial or mixed venous blood )
This method measures systemic blood ﬂow;
which equals forward left heart output. It also can be
used to measure pulmonary blood ﬂow or forward
right heart output, when oxygen consumption is
divided by pulmonary arterial content subtracted
from pulmonary venous content. The method is
more accurate at low cardiac outputs, where the
arterial to venous oxygen difference is great. It also
is accurate in the presence ofintracardiac shunts
when the mixed venous oxygen content and pul-
monary venous oxygen content are properly deter-
mined. This will be discussed further in the section
on intracardiac shunts.
Resistances
Systemic and pulmonary vascular resistances are
made using hemodynamic and cardiac output data
as follows:
• Systemic vascular resistance (SVR)
• Pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR)
• Transpulmonary gradient (TPG)
• Mean arterial blood pressure (MAP)
• Mean pulmonary artery pressure (mPAP)
• Pulmonary artery occlusion pressure (PAOP)
• Central venous pressure (CVP)
• Cardiac output (CO)
SVR = (MAP − CVP)80
CO
nl = 700–1600 dynes/s/cm5Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch02” — 2007/7/17 — 20:27 — page 23 — #4
Myocardial Physiology 23
SVR = (MAP − CVP)
CO
nl = 9–20 Wood units
PVR = (mPAP − PAOP)80
CO
nl = 20–130 dynes/s/cm5
PVR = (mPAP − PAOP)
CO
nl = 0.25–1.6 Wood units
TPG = mPAP − PAOP nl = 5–10 mmHg
The use ofthese parameters in evaluation of
patients is discussed in detail in Chapters 4–9.
Saturation data
The oxygen saturation (%) ofblood in the low
superior vena cava (SVC), the main pulmonary
artery, and the aorta are obtained to screen for
intracardiac shunts. Ifan intracardiac shunt is sus-
pected, multiple samples from locations in the great
vessels and cardiac chambers are necessary to local-
ize the shunt and determine its magnitude and
direction.
Assessment of valve lesions
Analysis of the pressure data from right and left
heart catheterization, in combination with anal-
ysis ofventriculography and aortography data,
will delineate the extent and nature ofvalvular
lesions.
Assessment of pulmonary vascular
anatomy
For infants and children with congenital heart
disease, special procedures may be necessary to
assess the pulmonary vasculature and the extent of
pulmonary vascular disease.
Pressure–volume loops
To fully understand catheterization data, it is
necessary to be familiar with ventricular pressure–
volume loops. A normal LV pressure–volume loop
Pressure
Volume
A
D
C
B
SW = ∫ PdV  
Fig. 2.4 Schematic representation ofventricular
pressure–volume loop. Crosshatched area represents
stroke work (SW) or total external mechanical work.
Curve AB, diastolic ﬁlling; BC, isovolumic
contraction; CD, systolic ejection; DA, isovolumic
relaxation.
is illustrated in Fig. 2.4. Curve AB represents the
diastolic pressure–volume relationship. Ventricular
ﬁlling begins when left atrial pressure (LAP) exceeds
left ventricular pressure at point A and the mitral
valve opens. Point B represents LVEDP and LVEDV.
LVEDV is also known as Ved. Point B also repre-
sents the onset ofisovolumic contraction at which
LV pressure exceeds LAP and the mitral valve closes.
Changes in diastolic function can be represented by
changes in the position and shape ofthe curve AB
and will be discussed later.
Curve BC represents isovolumic contraction. LV
pressure increases while LV volume remains con-
stant. At point C, LV pressure exceeds aortic diastolic
pressure and the aortic valve opens.
Curve CD represents the ejection phase of
ventricular contraction. At point D, aortic pres-
sure exceeds LV pressure and the aortic valve
closes. Point D represents the left ventricular
end-systolic pressure (LVESP) and the left ventric-
ular end-systolic volume (LVESV). LVESP is also
known as Pes.
Curve DA represents isovolumic relaxation. At
this time there is constant LV volume and rapidly
decreasing LV pressure.Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch02” — 2007/7/17 — 20:27 — page 24 — #5
24 Chapter 2
The area encompassed by ABCD represents the
stroke work (SW) that is external mechanical work.
Preload is deﬁned as the end-diastolic ﬁber length
or volume and is represented by point B on the
curve AB. Augmented preload produces an increase
in end-diastolic muscle ﬁber length represented by
a point B further to the right on the curve AB.
This increased ﬁber length enhances the velocity
ofmuscle shortening f or a given level ofaf terload
(Frank–Starling mechanism).
A family of pressure–volume loops exists for any
ventricle. Experimentally these loops are generated
by altering preload over a physiologic range using
partial inferior vena cava (IVC) occlusion. When
the ventricular end systolic pressure volume points
(point D) from each loop are connected a straight
line is created. The slope ofthis line is ventric-
ular elastance (Ees) and it uniquely deﬁnes the
contractile state ofthe ventricle (Fig. 2.5).
Afterload in this model can be deﬁned simply
as Pes (point D) or as the stress (force per unit
area) encountered by ventricular ﬁbers after the
onset ofshortening as represented by moving f rom
point C to D.
Stress = pressure × radius
2h
where h is wall thickness. Afterload, deﬁned as
wall stress, is constantly changing during ventric-
ular ejection because ventricular pressure, radius,
and thickness are all changing during ejection.
These deﬁnitions ofaf terload are incomplete
because they do not directly describe the charac-
teristics ofthe arterial system. Because the ventricle
produces pulsatile ejection ofa viscous ﬂuid (blood)
into a viscoelastic reservoir (the arterial system), it is
worth considering the characteristics ofthe arterial
system and ofthe blood, both ofwhich consti-
tute impedance to ventricular ejection. Pulsatile and
nonpulsatile ﬂow must be considered because both
exist in the intact arterial system. The nonpulsatile
component ofaf terload is measured as peripheral
vascular resistance. This is a familiar concept and is
deﬁned as
Mean arterial pressure − central venous pressure
cardiac output
Blood viscosity and the caliber ofthe arterioles
are the major determinants ofperipheral vascular
LV pressure (mmHg)
Ea
Ea
Ees
Pes
Ved
Ved
Pes
LV volume (mL)
Fig. 2.5 A family of four ventricular pressure–volume
loops have been generated by varying preload
(ventricular end diastolic volume orVed) in a ventricle
with ﬁxed contractility (Ees) and ﬁxed afterload (Ea).
Joining the ventricular end-systolic pressure (Pes) and
volume points from the four loops deﬁnes the slope Ees.
The ventricular end-systolic pressure and volume points
correspond to point D in Fig. 2.4.Ea is the slope ofthe
line deﬁned by joining Ved to Pes for each loop. Since
afterload is ﬁxed in this example the slopeEa is the same
for each loop. This can be seen in loops 2 and 4. Despite
ﬁxed afterload and ﬁxed contractility, augmentation of
preload results in an elevation ofPes. The intersection
point ofEes andEa uniquely deﬁnePes for each loop.
Pes will remain constant with an augmentation of
preload only ifEa simultaneously decreases (shallower
slope).
resistance. The pulsatile component ofaf terload
is measured as frequency-dependent aortic input
impedance, which is determined by the elastic
properties ofthe proximal aorta and by the reﬂec-
tion ofpulse waves f rom the peripheral arterial tree.
Effective arterial elastance ( Ea) is deﬁned as the
ratio ofLVESP/SV (Pes/SV) and is the line that con-
nects point B to D (see Fig. 2.5). This relationship
incorporates peripheral resistance, characteristic
impedance, and lumped total arterial compliance.
Thus Ea can be used to deﬁne the hydraulic load
(afterload) of the LV.
In the pressure–volume loop scheme, LVESV
and Pes (point D) are uniquely determined by the
intersection point ofthe contractile state ( Ees) andAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch02” — 2007/7/17 — 20:27 — page 25 — #6
Myocardial Physiology 25
the afterload ( Ea). Normally, the ratio of Ea/Ees
is 0.7–1.0. In this range, SW (external mechani-
cal work) and efﬁciency (ratio of SW/myocardial
oxygen consumption) are optimized. In heart fail-
ure patients the ratio may be as high as 4.0 due
to simultaneous decreases in Ees and increases
in Ea.
For a given Ees with Ea constant an increase in
preload (LVEDV orVed) will produce an increase in
SV and an increase in LVESP ( Pes) (see Fig. 2.5).
This increase in the area ABCD is known as preload
recruitable stroke work (PRSW). In reality the only
way in which LVESP ( Pes) could remain con-
stant for a given Ees with an increase in preload
would be for the slope of Ea to decrease. Stated
another way, an increase in preload for a given
Ees will cause a parallel (no change in slope) shift
in Ea to the right resulting in an increase in Pes
and LVESV. With enhanced contractility (steepEes
slope) the rise in Pes will be great and the reduc-
tion in LVESP will be small; PRSW will be high.
With diminished contractility (shallow Ees slope)
the rise in Pes will be small and the reduction in
LVESP will be great; PRSW will be limited. This is
consistent with the clinical observation that in the
presence ofreduced contractility preload augmen-
tation does not substantially improve SV and cardiac
output.
For a given contractile state with ﬁxed preload,
an increase in afterload (steeper Ea slope) results
in an increase in Pes and LVESV; represented
by moving upward and to the right on the line
A decrease in afterload (shallowerEa slope) results
in a decrease in Pes and LVESV; represented by
moving downward and to the left on the line
(Fig. 2.6). Increased contractility is represented by
anEes that is steeper and shifted upward to the left.
An increase in contractility with preload and after-
load ﬁxed obviously augments SV because ofthe
marked decrease in LVESV with LVEDV (preload)
constant (Fig. 2.7). Decreased contractility is rep-
resented by an Ees that is shallower and shifted
downward to the right. With ﬁxed preload ( Ved)
and afterload (Ea), SV is diminished when contrac-
tility decreases (see Fig. 2.7). It is also obvious that
the shallower the Ees slope (more depressed con-
tractility) the more sensitive the ventricle will be to
LV pressure (mmHg)
LV volume (mL)
Ved
Pes
Ea
Ea′
Ees
Ves′
Pes′
Fig. 2.6 Two ventricular pressure–volume loops
illustrating the effect of increased afterload (Ea′) with
preload (Ved) and contractility (Ees) ﬁxed. Increased
afterload is represented by the lineEa′which has a
steeper slope than lineEa. Increased afterload (Ea′)
results in an increase inPes (fromPes toPes′) and
an increase in end-systolic volume (fromVes toVes′),
which causes a reduction in SV (fromVed–Ves to
Ved–Ves′). EF =Ees/(Ees +Ea) and therefore EF falls as
Ea increases toEa′withEes constant.
an increase inEa as evidenced by a greater increase
in LVESV.
Figure 2.8 serves to unify these concepts. Loop 1
represents the control situation. Loop 2 represents
an abrupt increase in afterload with contractility
constant. The result is an increased LVESV and an
unchanged LVEDV. The result is a reduction in SV.
In subsequent beats (loop 3) ofa normal heart,
LVEDV is increased such that the original SV is
now maintained at the new increased afterload.
The ability ofthe ventricle to maintain SV in the
face of increasing afterload by increasing preload
is deﬁned as preload reserve. Preload reserve is
exhausted when the sarcomeres are stretched to
their maximum diastolic length. When this occurs,
there will be no further augmentation of the veloc-
ity ofshortening and the ventricle behaves as if
preload is ﬁxed. For a given level ofcontractil-
ity, after preload reserve is exhausted, additional
increases in afterload will be accompanied by par-
allel decreases in SV (loop 4). This is deﬁned as a
state of afterload mismatch. Afterload mismatch isAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch02” — 2007/7/17 — 20:27 — page 26 — #7
26 Chapter 2
LV pressure (mmHg)
LV volume (mL)
Ved
Ved′
Pes′
Ves′
Pes
Ves
Ees′
Ees
Ea
Ea
Fig. 2.7 Two ventricular pressure–volume loops
illustrating effect of decreased contractility (Ees′) withPes
and afterload (Ea) constant. Decreased contractility is
represented by the line (Ees′) that has a shallower slope
than lineEes and is shifted downward to the left. Since
afterload is ﬁxed in this example, the slopeEa is the same
for both loops. Decreased contractility (Ees′) results in an
increase in end-systolic volume (fromVes toVes′) while
Pes =Pes′. SincePes andEa are constant in this example,
stroke volume (SV) must be constant as well as
SV =Pes/Ea. As a resultVed′increases by an amount
equal to the increase inVes′. WithPes ﬁxed SV will
only decrease with a decrease in contractility if
afterload (Ea) simultaneously increases (steeper slope).
Progressive increases in Ea will result in a greater
increase inVes forEes′as compared toEes. Although
SV is constant in this example EF decreases because
EF =Ees/(Ees +Ea).
the inability ofthe ventricle at a given level ofcon-
tractility to maintain SV in the face of an increased
wall stress.
Diastolic function
Normal diastolic function is dependent on normal
ventricular diastolic compliance, distensibility, and
relaxation. Both extrinsic and intrinsic factors
affect ventricular diastolic function. It is necessary
to differentiate between compliance, distensibil-
ity, and relaxation, and this is best accomplished
by examining diastolic pressure–volume diagrams
240
4
SV
3
2
1
SV
Limit of
reserve
50 100
LV volume (mL)
150
180
120
LV pressure (mmHg)
60
30
Fig. 2.8 Ventricular pressure–volume loops illustrating
the compensation ofan intact ventricle f or progressive
increases in afterload with contractility ﬁxed. Stroke
volume (SV) can be maintained in the face of progressive
afterload increases until preload reserve is exhausted.
(Fig. 2.9a–d). Any or all ofthese abnormalities may
exist in a given patient.
Compliance
Compliance or distensibility is deﬁned as the
ratio ofa volume change to the correspond-
ing pressure change or as the slope ofthe
volume–pressure (/Delta1V//Delta1P) relationship. Elastance
or stiffness is the inverse of compliance ( /Delta1P//Delta1V).
Decreased compliance or increased stiffness is
thus deﬁned as an increase in the steepness
ofthe pressure–volume plot (see Fig. 2.9c).
Strictly speaking, diastolic compliance is determined
by the intrinsic volume–pressure relationship of
completely relaxed myocytes. There are two causes
ofpoor diastolic compliance.
Increasedchamberstiffness
This occurs in aortic stenosis or systemic hyper-
tension. In these cases, there is an increase in
the amount ofmyocardial tissue due to concentricAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch02” — 2007/7/17 — 20:27 — page 27 — #8
Myocardial Physiology 27
Abnormal
relaxation
Increased
chamber stiffness
LV volume
Chamber
dilatation
Pericardial
restraint
LV pressure
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
Fig. 2.9 A series ofdiastolic pressure–volume curves.
The solid curve in each example represents a normal
diastolic pressure–volume relationship, whereas the
dotted curve represents the altered diastolic
pressure–volume relationship. (a) The diastolic
pressure–volume relationship when ventricular
relaxation is impaired. (b) The diastolic pressure–volume
relationship when distensibility is reduced as with
pericardial restraint. (c) The diastolic pressure–volume
relationship when ventricular chamber stiffness is
increased or ventricular chamber compliance is reduced.
(d) The effect of chamber dilatation on a normal diastolic
pressure–volume relationship.
LV hypertrophy. Diastolic compliance ofthe ven-
tricle is diminished despite that fact that the
compliance ofthe individual muscle units is
normal.
Increasedmusclestiffness
This occurs in restrictive cardiomyopathies due to
amyoidosis and hemochromatosis. In these cases,
the compliance ofthe individual muscle units is
diminished due to an inﬁltrative process.
The diastolic pressure–volume relationship is
dynamic. There is high compliance at low volumes
and diminished compliance at higher volumes. As
a result, reduced diastolic compliance is not limited
to ventricles with altered pressure–volume slopes.
A ventricle forced to make use of preload reserve to
maintain SV may function on the steep portion of an
otherwise normal compliance curve (see Fig. 2.9d).
Distensibility
Decreased ventricular distensibility is deﬁned as
an increased diastolic pressure at a given volume.
This would be represented in a diastolic pressure–
volume diagram by a parallel upward shift of the
entire pressure–volume relation (see Fig. 2.9b).
Decreased distensibility can occur from intrinsic and
extrinsic causes.
Intrinsiccauses
It has been demonstrated clearly that pacing-
induced ischemia in humans with coronary artery
disease (CAD) is responsible for diminished dia-
stolic distensibility. Although impaired relaxation
certainly plays a role in diastolic dysfunction with
ischemia, the pressure–volume relation in ischemia
more closely resembles the pattern seen with
pericardial restraint (see Fig. 2.9b). This dimin-
ished diastolic distensibility often precedes systolic
dysfunction. In addition, pacing-induced ischemia
elicits diminished diastolic distensibility in humans
with aortic stenosis without CAD. Differences
in the diastolic behavior ofischemic and non-
ischemic segments ofthe same ventricle subjected
to pacing-induced ischemia have been demon-
strated. An upward shift (diminished distensibility)
in the pressure–length relationship is observed in
ischemic segments. For a given diastolic volume this
results in an increase in diastolic pressure, which
causes the nonischemic segments to move to a
steeper (less compliant) portion oftheir original
pressure–length relationship.
Extrinsiccauses
Decreased distensibility may be caused by extrin-
sic limitations to ventricular expansion in diastole.
Diminished distensibility occurs due to ventricular
interdependence via an intact ventricular septum
and the restraining effect of the pericardium
(see Fig. 2.9b). For example, distension ofthe
right ventricle with a leftward septal shift will
result in diminished distensibility ofthe lef t
ventricle. In addition, reduced distensibility may
occur due to restrictive pericarditis or pericardialAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch02” — 2007/7/17 — 20:27 — page 28 — #9
28 Chapter 2
tamponade a diseased or ﬂuid-ﬁlled pericardium
(see Chapter 7).
Relaxation
Ventricular relaxation is an energy consumptive
process. Adenosine triphosphate (ATP) is required
for calcium sequestration back into the sarcoplas-
mic reticulum and for detachment of actin–myosin
cross-bridges. When isovolumic relaxation is delayed,
early diastolic ﬁlling is impeded. When relax-
ation is incomplete, ﬁlling is impeded through-
out diastole (see Fig. 2.9a). Relaxation is impaired
during myocardial ischemia and in patients with
hypertrophic and congestive cardiomyopathies.
Normally, the right ventricular end-diastolic pres-
sure (RVEDP) is 1–2 mmHg greater than the mean
right atrial pressure (RAP), and the left ventric-
ular end-diastolic pressure (LVEDP) is 2–3 mmHg
greater than the mean PAOP and the LAP. These
small differences in pressure are due to the volume
added to the ventricle by atrial systole. When LV
compliance is poor, the A wave produced by atrial
systole will be large and the additional volume pro-
vided by the atrial kick in end-diastole will result
in a large increase in LVEDP. In these patients, the
peak A-wave pressure in the LAP or PAOP trace
is a better measure ofLVEDP than the mean LAP
or PAOP because the mean LAP or PAOP pressure
will underestimate LVEDP. Even large A waves only
slightly elevate mean LAP because their duration is
short. Thus, well-timed atrial contraction results in
a large elevation ofLVEDV with only a small ele-
vation ofmean LAP and limited pulmonary venous
congestion. For patients who chronically function
on a steep portion ofthe compliance curve, a large
A wave, left atrial enlargement on electrocardio-
gram (ECG) and an S4 on physical examination are
expected ﬁndings.
Analysis of diastolic
pressure–volume curves
Ideally, the diastolic pressure–volume curve should
be examined over its entire range and under
baseline and stress conditions. Unfortunately, this
information is not routinely available from cardiac
catheterization data. Typically, the A wave, V wave,
and mean pressures ofthe RAP and PAOP tracing,
the RVEDP and LVEDP, and the left ventricular end-
systolic and end-diastolic volume indices (LVESVI
and LVEDVI) are provided. The LVESVI and the
LVEDVI are simply the LVESV and LVEDV obtained
by planimetry oflef t ventricular end-systolic and
end-diastolic angiograms divided by the patient’s
body surface area (BSA). Pressure and volume data
from a representative catheterization report are
reproduced in Figs 2.10 and 2.11.
One point on the LV diastolic pressure–volume
curve is obtained ifthe pressure and volume mea-
surements are made under identical conditions of
preload, heart rate, and ischemia. Thus, incomplete
information must be used to draw inferences on
overall diastolic performance. Clinically, a dilated
heart would be expected in patients who are depen-
dent on a large LVEDV to maintain an adequate
forward SV. Patients with chronic volume over-
load valvular lesions such as mitral regurgitation
and aortic insufﬁciency are good examples. In these
patients, a large LVEDV is needed because only a
portion ofthe total SV becomes f orward SV. Early
in the disease, these patients operate on the ﬂat
portion ofa diastolic pressure volume curve and
have enormous preload reserve. As the disease pro-
gresses and systolic function deteriorates, a larger
LVEDV is needed to maintain SV. Eventually, these
patients operate on the steep portion ofthe diastolic
pressure–volume relationship and are unable to
augment preload without large increases in diastolic
pressure and subsequent pulmonary congestion. In
patients with mitral regurgitation, this analysis of
diastolic function is complicated by the presence
ofregurgitant V waves in the LAP or PAOP trace
during ventricular systole. The electronically deter-
mined mean LAP or PAOP will be increased in direct
proportion to the height and duration ofthe regurgi-
tant V wave. This will cause the mean LAP or PAOP
to overestimate LVEDP. An estimate ofthe LVEDP
can be obtained by examining a calibrated PAOP or
LAP trace and determining the A-wave amplitude.
In patients without atrial systole, the best estimate
ofLVEDP will be the PAOP or LAP at end diastole
(see Chapter 3).
A normal LVEDV and diminished ventricular
compliance is seen most commonly in patients withAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch02” — 2007/7/17 — 20:27 — page 29 — #10
Myocardial Physiology 29
Fig. 2.10 Reproduction ofportion of
cardiac catheterization report from
61-year-old woman with severe
three-vessel coronary artery disease
(CAD) and systolic dysfunction. Right
and left ventricular pressure
measurements, Fick cardiac output
(CO) determination, and derived
hemodynamic variables are reported.
Fig. 2.11 Reproduction ofportion of
catheterization report from the patient
described in Fig. 2.10. Section reports
information obtained from left
ventriculography. Left ventricular
end-diastolic volume index (LVEDVI),
left ventricular end-systolic volume
index (LVESVI), stroke volume index
(SVI) and ejection fraction (EF) are
reported. In addition, qualitative
descriptions oflef t ventricular wall
motion in ﬁve wall segments seen in
right anterior oblique (RAO) projection
are reported.
Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch02” — 2007/7/17 — 20:27 — page 30 — #11
30 Chapter 2
LV pressure overload valve lesions such as aortic
stenosis and, to a lesser degree, in patients with sys-
temic hypertension. In these patients, the LVEDV
necessary to maintain an adequate SV is maintained
at the expense ofa high LVEDP because compliance
is poor. The volume contributed by atrial systole
represents a larger proportion ofthe LVEDV than it
does in ventricles with normal compliance because
the early diastolic ﬁlling is compromised by low
compliance and is compensated for by a well-timed
forceful atrial systole. Loss of atrial systole in these
patients is disastrous because LVEDV can only be
maintained by large elevations ofmean LAP with
consequent pulmonary venous congestion.
A ventricle with abnormal LVEDV and dimin-
ished distensibility is characteristic ofpatients with
severe CAD in which the energy requirements nec-
essary to guarantee complete ventricular relaxation
at rest are not met. Such diastolic dysfunction
precedes the development ofsystolic dysf unction.
Systolic function
Systolic function is not synonymous with contrac-
tility. Normal systolic function is the ability of the
ventricle to perform external work (generate a SV)
under varying conditions ofpreload, af terload and
contractility. Any assessment ofsystolic f unction
must take the contribution ofthese three f actors
into account.
Ejection fraction
Deﬁned as {(LVEDV – LVESV)/LVEDV} × 100, the
EF is an ejection-phase index and the most com-
monly used assessment ofglobal systolic f unction.
The LVEDV and the LVESV are obtained from
planimetry ofLV end-diastolic and end-systolic
angiograms (see Fig. 2.1). The normal value is
50–80%. Determination ofEF is dependent on vari-
ations in preload, afterload, and contractility (see
Figs 2.5–2.7). This becomes obvious when EF is
described mathematically using the concepts ofEes,
Ea, stroke volume (SV), and LVEDV (Ved):
EF = SV/Ved
EF = 1 − Pes/Ved
Ees
= 1 − (Ea ∗ SV)/Ved
Ees
EF =Ees/(Ees +Ea)
Normal Ees and Ea are 1–3 mmHg/mL
These equations are consistent with a number of
clinical observations:
• In the range ofnormal contractility ( Ees), EF is
largely insensitive to changes in afterload (Ea) and
preload (Ved).
• EF is increasingly inversely related to afterload
(Ea) as contractility ( Ees) decreases with ﬁxed
preload (Ved). In addition this inverse sensitivity is
enhanced in the setting ofreduced preload (Ved).
• EF is increasingly inversely related to preload
(Ved) as contractility ( Ees) decreases with ﬁxed
afterload (Ea).
• When preload ( Ved) is very low, EF will be
reduced in presence ofnormal contractility ( Ees)
and afterload (Ea).
• Ifthe Ea/Ees ratio is 1.0 (ideally matched) then
EF = 50%.
• EF is most useful as screening tool with low EF
identifying those patients most likely to be sus-
ceptible to alteration in preload, afterload, and
contractility.
As an example, an increase in LVEDVI from
75 to 90 mL/m2 with LVESVI constant at 25 mL/m2,
as would occur with afterload and contractility
constant, would result in an increase in EF from
66% to 72%. Thus, a 20% increase in preload
results in a 9% increase in EF.
EF is not a very sensitive index ofCAD because
areas ofregional myocardial dysf unction secondary
to ischemia may exist without depression ofglobal
systolic function. EF separates patients with normal
LV function from those with LV dysfunction and
is reliable in following changes in systolic function
in individual patients. An EF lower than 40% in
the absence ofacute af terload elevations represents
depressed systolic function and corresponds clin-
ically with New York Heart Association class 3
symptoms. An EF lower than 25% represents severe
depression ofLV systolic f unction and corresponds
to New York Heart Association class 4 symptoms
(see Chapter 1).
EF may overestimate systolic function in mitral
regurgitation because ofthe unique systolic loading
conditions in this lesion. The left ventricle isAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch02” — 2007/7/17 — 20:27 — page 31 — #12
Myocardial Physiology 31
presented with two outﬂow tracts in systole: the
aortic valve and the incompetent mitral valve. The
mitral valve provides a low impedance outﬂow tract
and the aortic valve provides a normal-impedance
outﬂow tract. EF may remain near normal in the
face of depressed systolic function due to this low
mean afterload state. With mitral valve replace-
ment and the elimination ofthe low-impedance
outﬂow tract, the ventricle is presented with more
normal systolic loading conditions. EF may actu-
ally decrease substantially postoperatively in such
patients because depressed systolic function is now
unmasked.
Stroke work
Another ejection-phase index ofsystolic f unction
is stroke work (SW), or external LV work, repre-
sented by the area ABCD in Fig. 2.4. When the
shape ofthe LV pressure–volume loop is normal,
as is true in the absence ofpressure or volume
overload conditions, left ventricular stroke work
(LVSW) is a good measure ofsystolic f unction.
Chronic volume and pressure overload conditions
alter the shape ofthe pressure–volume loop and
the calculated LVSW is increased above the normal
value of60–120 g-m/beat. LVSW is deﬁned as:
(Mean LV systolic pressure
− mean LV diastolic pressure) × SV × 0.0136
When aortic and mitral regurgitation are absent, this
can be simpliﬁed to:
(Mean arterial pressure − mean pulmonary artery
occlusion pressure) × SV × 0.0136
because mean arterial pressure approximates mean
LV systolic pressure and mean pulmonary artery
occlusion pressure closely approximates mean LV
diastolic pressure. In direct contrast to EF, alter-
ations in afterload have little effect on calculated
SW. SV declines or increases in proportion to the
afterload elevation or reduction such that the area of
the loop remains unchanged. SW, unlike EF, is very
sensitive to changes in preload. The area ofthe loop
is increased or decreased by increases or decreases
in preload. LVSW can be converted to LVSWI by
dividing SV by BSA to get SVI.
LWSW is used in conjunction with Ved to describe
PRSW where PRSW= LWSW/Ved. PRSW is a mea-
sure on myocardial contractility that is independent
ofpreload and af terload. This method requires the
ability to simultaneously record LV pressures and
volumes and is not in routine clinical use.
Left ventriculography
Qualitative analysis ofregional wall motion by
left ventriculography is another index of systolic
function. Ventriculography is performed by mak-
ing cine recordings as contrast material is injected
directly into the mid-left ventricle. Left ventricu-
lography is performed in the 30 ◦ right anterior
oblique (RAO) projection or in the right and 60◦ left
anterior oblique (LAO) projections. The ventricle is
divided into segments (Fig. 2.12) and visual analy-
sis ofregional wall motion is made by comparison
ofend-diastolic and end-systolic cineangiograms
(see Fig. 2.1). Five segments are generally analyzed
in the RAO projection: anterobasal, anterolateral,
apical, diaphragmatic (inferior), and posterobasal.
Five segments also may be analyzed in the LAO
projection: basal septal, apical septal, apical infe-
rior, posterolateral, and superior lateral. These areas
are graded qualitatively for wall motion. Normal
areas exhibit concentric inward movement in sys-
tole. Hypokinetic areas exhibit reduced concentric
inward motion in systole. Akinetic areas exhibit no
motion with systole. Dyskinetic areas exhibit a para-
doxical outward bulging with systole. Aneurysmal
areas exhibit characteristic dilation with either
hypokinesis or akinesis.
Areas ofhypokinesis generally are composed of
ischemic myocardium, whereas akinetic areas are
composed ofinf racted or hibernating myocardium.
Improvements in wall motion occur in hypokinetic
and akinetic areas when ischemic tissue has been
salvaged by revascularization or by pharmacologic
interventions to improve perfusion. The presence
ofcollaterals, the absence ofsurf ace ECG Q waves,
and the presence ofan associated proximal coro-
nary stenosis less than 90% improve the likelihood
that medical or surgical intervention will improve
the wall motion abnormalities. Dyskinetic and
aneurysmal areas, respectively, represent regions
with little or no viable myocardium and rarelyAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch02” — 2007/7/17 — 20:27 — page 32 — #13
32 Chapter 2
Anterobasal
LA
1
2
3
45
LV
RAO
LV
LAO
Anterolateral 6
10
9
7
8
Apical inferior
Posterolateral
Superior lateral
LA
Apical
Posterobasal Diaphragmatic Apical septal
Basal septal
Fig. 2.12 Schematic delineation ofthe ﬁve wall
segments seen in right anterior oblique (RAO) and left
anterior oblique (LAO) projections during
left ventriculography. The following is a summary of
coronary arterial supply to these regions:
1.Anterobasal – LMCA; proximal LAD; 1st diagonal.
2.Anterolateral – LMCA; proximal or mid-LAD;
1st diagonal.3.Apical – LMCA; proximal, mid, or distal
LAD; 2nd diagonal.4.Diaphramatic(inferior) – proximal,
mid, or distal RCA; PDA.5.Posterobasal – proximal, mid,
or distal RCA; PDA.6. Basalseptal – LMCA; proximal or
mid-LAD, 1st septal.7. Apicalseptal – LMCA; proximal,
mid, or distal LAD.8. Apicalinferior – proximal, mid, or
distal RCA.9. Posterolateral – LMCA; proximal or distal
CIRC marginals.10. Superiorlateral – LMCA; proximal
CIRC marginals. CIRC, circumﬂex artery; LAD, left
anterior descending artery; LMCA, left main coronary
artery; PDA, posterior descending artery; RCA, right
coronary artery.
show improvement in wall motion with surgical or
pharmacologic intervention.
Regional wall motion abnormalities are a more
sensitive indicator ofCAD than is a reduction in a
global ejection-phase index ofsystolic f unction such
as EF. This is because global systolic function can be
maintained in the presence ofregional dyssynergy
by compensatory increases in wall shortening in
areas ofnormal wall motion as long as large areas
ofmyocardium are not dyssynergic.
Coronary angiography
Coronary angiography delineates the normal and
pathologic features of the coronary circulation.
Normally, angiography is performed in the 60◦ LAO
projection and the 30◦ RAO projection with caudal
or cranial angulated views ifnecessary.
Coronary anatomy
Determination ofthe areas ofmyocardium at risk
with a particular stenotic or vasospastic lesion
requires knowledge ofthe regional blood supply
pattern. The right and left coronary anatomy is illus-
trated in Figs 2.13 and 2.14. Most patients (85%)
have a right dominant system ofcoronary circu-
lation. Here, the right coronary artery extends to
the crux cordis in the atrioventricular groove and
gives rise to the posterior descending branch, left
atrial branch, atrioventricular (AV) nodal branch,
and one or more posterior LV branches. In a left
dominant system (8%), these branches are supplied
by the left circumﬂex artery and the right coronary
artery supplies only the right atria and ventricle. In
7% ofpatients, the system is balanced, with the right
coronary artery supplying the posterior descend-
ing, left atria, and AV nodal branches, whereas
the left circumﬂex artery supplies the posterior LV
branches.
There is variation in the blood supply to various
regions ofmyocardium, but some generalizations
can be made. This information is summarized in
Fig. 2.12. Normally, a proximal branch ofthe lef t
circumﬂex artery supplies the anterobasal region.Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch02” — 2007/7/17 — 20:27 — page 33 — #14
Myocardial Physiology 33
SA nodal
Proximal
RCA
RV branch
Mid-RCA
Acute
marginal
Distal RCA
Posterior
 descending
LV branch
AV nodal
Conus
RCA distal
 to posterior
  descending
Fig. 2.13 Anatomy ofright coronary artery.
AV, arterioventricular; LV, left ventricle; RCA, right
coronary artery; RV, right ventricle; SA, sinoatrial.
Distal LAD
2nd diagonal
1st diagonal
Proximal LAD
Left main
Proximal circumflex
Atrial branch
1st septal perforator
Obtuse marginal
Distal circumflex
Posterior lateral
Mid-LAD
Fig. 2.14 Anatomy oflef t coronary artery (right
oblique). LAD, left anterior descending.
The anterolateral region is supplied by contributions
from both the diagonal branch of the left anterior
descending (LAD) artery and the obtuse marginal
branch ofthe lef t circumﬂex. The terminal por-
tion ofthe LAD artery supplies the apical region.
The inferior region is a combination of the poste-
rior lateral and diaphragmatic regions, which are
best seen in an LAO projection. The posterior lat-
eral branch ofthe lef t circumﬂex artery supplies the
posterior lateral region. The diaphragmatic region is
supplied by the posterior descending artery, which,
as previously discussed, is either a branch ofthe
right coronary or left circumﬂex artery. The poster-
obasal region is supplied by the proximal right coro-
nary artery. The septal branches ofthe LAD artery
supply the anterior two-thirds ofthe ventricular
septum, and branches ofthe right coronary and
posterior descending arteries supply the posterior
one-third. A branch ofthe right coronary artery sup-
plies the sinoatrial (SA) node in 55% ofpatients
and by a branch ofthe lef t circumﬂex artery in the
other 45%.
The bulk ofthe right ventricle is located in the
diaphragmatic and posterobasal regions supplied
by the right coronary artery in a right dominant
system. Small portions ofthe right ventricle also
are included in the apical and septal areas. It is for
this reason that involvement ofthe LAD results in
compromise ofperf usion to the anterior right ven-
tricular wall near the ventricular septum and to the
right ventricular apex. Conversely, involvement of
the right coronary artery in a right dominant system
results in compromise ofperf usion to the portions
ofthe lef t ventricle located in the diaphragmatic and
posterobasal regions. How severely the posterior
portion ofthe lef t ventricle will be compromised in
this setting will depend on how much ofthis region
is supplied by the distal branches ofthe circumﬂex
artery.
Anatomic coronary lesions
Coronary atherosclerotic stenotic lesions are quan-
titated visually from moving cineangiograms in
several projections. Coronary arteriography from
a representative catheterization report is repro-
duced in Fig. 2.15. Stenotic areas ofartery are
compared with adjacent normal areas and the per-
cent reduction in lumen diameter caused by the
stenosis is quantiﬁed. Thus, a 90% lesion refers to
a stenosis that causes a 90% reduction in lumen
diameter. It is generally acknowledged that rest-
ing coronary blood ﬂow does not decrease until
there is an 85% reduction in lumen diameter. This
corresponds to a greater than 90% reduction in
lumen cross-sectional area. By contrast, a 50%
diameter reduction corresponds to a 75% reduction
in cross-sectional area. Maximal coronary ﬂow in
response to a stimulus for vasodilation is blunted
when there is a 30–45% reduction in lumen diam-
eter and is absent when the lumen diameter is
reduced 90%. Inter-observer variability exists in the
grading ofstenotic lesions. In addition, coronary
angiography typically underestimates the severity
ofstenotic lesions and may not accurately predict
the physiologic signiﬁcance ofa particular lesion.Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch02” — 2007/7/17 — 20:27 — page 34 — #15
34 Chapter 2
Fig. 2.15 Reproduction ofa portion ofa catheterization
report from patient described in Fig. 2.10. This section
reports information obtained from coronary
angiography. Morphology ofstenoses, percent reduction
in lumen diameter, and sources ofcollaterization are
reported. A pictorial representation ofcoronary arterial
anatomy also is given.
Coronary spasm
True coronary spasm is diagnosed at the time of
coronary angiography with a provocation test utiliz-
ing methylergonovine, acetylcholine, or hyperven-
tilation. The test is considered positive iff ocal spasm
occurs in the presence ofclinical symptoms or ECG
changes.
Coronary thrombusformation
A thrombus superimposed on an obstructive coro-
nary lesion is often the pathogenesis of unsta-
ble angina and is the direct cause ofan acute
transmural myocardial infarction in most patients.
Currently, protocols designed to intervene in the
early stages ofmyocardial inf arction incorporate
thrombolytic therapy, percutaneous transluminal
coronary angioplasty, or both.
Coronary collaterals
An extensive network ofcoronary collaterals is nor-
mally present at birth. However, these collaterals are
not demonstrable by angiography in normal hearts
due to their small diameter. It is only when the
collateral channels enlarge secondary to regional
myocardial oxygen deprivation that they are visi-
ble angiographically. The development ofcollateral
pathways in patients with comparable degrees of
coronary insufﬁciency is variable in both extent
and time course. The presence ofcollaterals has
been identiﬁed as a determinant ofreversible wall
motion abnormalities. LV function in the region
ofan occluded coronary artery is better main-
tained in the presence ofcollaterals than in their
absence.
Interpretation of coronary
angiography data
To properly interpret the coronary angiograms it
is necessary to integrate data from the angiograms
with data from the right and left heart catheteri-
zations and from the left ventriculograms. Several
questions should be answered:
• What is the status ofsystolic f unction? Global
function in the absence of mitral regurgitation
is best evaluated with EF. Regional function is
assessed by analysis ofthe ventriculogram. Patients
with an EF greater than 55% would be expected to
have limited areas ofdyssynergy and no history of
a prior myocardial infarct. Patients with a history
ofprior myocardial inf arction or three-vessel coro-
nary disease would be expected to have a reduced
EF and more extensive areas ofdyssynergy. EFs
in the range of40% are common in this subset
ofpatients. Patients with three-vessel disease and
a history ofmyocardial inf arction have EFs in the
range of35%. More extensive areas ofdyssynergy
would be expected. Patients with an EF lower than
25% have poor ventricular function and will have
large areas ofakinesis and dyskinesis.
• What is the status ofdiastolic f unction? It is nec-
essary to determine whether myocardial ischemia is
responsible for diminished ventricular distensibilityAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch02” — 2007/7/17 — 20:27 — page 35 — #16
Myocardial Physiology 35
as discussed in the section on diastolic function.
An elevated LVEDP is characteristic ofdiastolic
dysfunction; although this also may exist in con-
cert with systolic dysfunction, an elevated LVEDP is
not synonymous with systolic dysfunction.
• What regions ofmyocardium are jeopardized?
Signiﬁcant stenotic lesions jeopardize the myocar-
dium in speciﬁc regions as discussed previously.
A region is at high risk ofdeveloping ischemic
dysfunction if it is poorly collaterized and distal
to a severe stenosis. It also is necessary to deter-
mine whether the regional myocardium distal to
a stenosis is viable. Ifthe area ofmyocardium is
dyskinetic or aneurysmal with evidence ofsur-
face Q waves, pharmacologic and surgical efforts
to salvage the area will likely be ofno beneﬁt.
Ifthe myocardium is viable, however, (hibernat-
ing myocardium), then revascularization may lead
to a dramatic improvement in regional systolic
function.
• What are the consequences ofdeteriorating f unc-
tion in a given region? Deteriorating function
in a given region may cause major management
problems. Continued compromise ofﬂow to the
AV node may cause progressive heart block with
subsequent hemodynamic compromise. A patient
with depressed global systolic function whose hypo-
kinetic anterior lateral wall becomes akinetic may
develop cardiogenic shock.
Evaluation of valvular lesions
The impressive technological advances in Doppler
echocardiography and nuclear cardiac imaging
now allow noninvasive assessment ofvalvular
pathology. Evaluation via cardiac catheterization,
however, provides important information.
Stenotic lesions
The analysis ofstenotic valve lesions is based on
obtaining a valve oriﬁce area from ﬂow and
pressure–gradient data. The Gorlin equation uses
the basic hydraulic formula: area = ﬂow/velocity.
Combining this with an equation that relates
velocity to mean pressure gradient: velocity =
k × √mean pressure gradient, where k is a spe-
ciﬁc constant for either the aortic or mitral valve
allows a determination ofvalve area. For the
mitral valve, then, the equation is: valve area =
ﬂow/37.7 ×√mean pressure gradient. For the aortic
valve, the equation is: valve area = ﬂow/44.5 ×√mean pressure gradient. Obviously, ﬂow occurs
across the mitral valve only in diastole and across
the aortic valve only in systole. Therefore, car-
diac output cannot be substituted for ﬂow in the
equations. The time per heartbeat during which
blood ﬂows across the mitral valve is deﬁned as the
diastolic ﬁlling period. The diastolic ﬁlling period is
measured from mitral valve opening to end dias-
tole. The time per heartbeat during which blood
ﬂows across the aortic valve is deﬁned as the sys-
tolic ejection period. The systolic ejection period is
measured from aortic valve opening to aortic valve
closure.
Mitral valve ﬂow (cm3/sec)
={ Cardiac output (cm3/min)}
×{ diastolic ﬁlling period (sec/beat)
× heart rate (beat/min)}−1
Mitral valve area (cm2)
={ mitral valve ﬂow (cm3/sec)}
×{ 37.7 × √mean pressure gradient (cm/sec)}−1
Aortic valve ﬂow (cm3/sec)
={ cardiac output (cm3/min)}
×{ systolic ejection period (sec/beat)
× heart rate (beat/min)}−1
Aortic valve area (cm2)
={ aortic valve ﬂow (cm3/sec)}
×{ 44.5 × √mean pressure gradient (cm/sec)}−1
The mean pressure gradient for mitral stenosis is
obtained by using planimetry to determine the area
between simultaneous tracings ofthe lef t atrial or
PAOP and the LV pressure during the diastolic ﬁlling
period and then dividing this area by the length of
the diastolic ﬁlling period. Figure 2.16 illustrates this
area during one diastolic ﬁlling period. Normally,
the pressure gradients for several beats are deter-
mined and the average is taken. For aortic stenosis,
analogous measurements are made using planime-
try to determine the area between simultaneousAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch02” — 2007/7/17 — 20:27 — page 36 — #17
36 Chapter 2
40
30
20
LV
Seconds
LA
ECG
mmHg
10
0
Fig. 2.16 One diastolic ﬁlling period in a patient with
severe mitral stenosis. Simultaneous tracings of
electrocardiogram (EGG), left atrial (LA) pressure, and
left ventricular (LV) pressure are shown. The pressure
gradient across the mitral valve is crosshatched and seen
to vary during diastolic ﬁlling period. The length ofthe
diastolic ﬁlling period can be seen in seconds.
tracings ofthe proximal aortic pressure and the
LV pressure during the systolic ejection period.
Figure 2.17 illustrates this area during one ejec-
tion period. The gradients for several beats are
determined and averaged.
It is essential that proper assessment ofﬂow
be used for lesions in which stenosis and regur-
gitation coexist. A thermodilution or Fick cardiac
output determination is an assessment off orward
ﬂow across a valve oriﬁce. Ifregurgitation exists,
total ﬂow across the valve oriﬁce will be for-
ward ﬂow plus regurgitant ﬂow. Iff orward ﬂow
instead oftotal ﬂow is used, the valve area f or
a given gradient will be underestimated and the
degree ofstenosis will be exaggerated. Total ﬂow
is best obtained from angiographic determination
ofcardiac output. Lef t ventriculography is used to
determine SV (as described previously) and SV is
multiplied by heart rate.
150
100
50
mmHg
0
LV
Ao
Fig. 2.17 One systolic ejection period in a patient with
severe aortic stenosis. Simultaneous recordings of
proximal aortic pressure and LV pressure are recorded.
The pressure gradient across the aortic valve is
crosshatched and seen to vary during systolic ejection
period. Time scale for length of systolic ejection period
not shown. Ao, aorta; LV, left ventricular.
It is important when evaluating stenotic lesions
that the pressure gradient alone is not evaluated.
At low ﬂows (low cardiac output), it is possi-
ble for a valve to be critically stenotic with a
small transvalvular pressure gradient. Several other
relationships should be kept in mind. The mean
pressure gradient is directly related to the square
ofﬂow. Thus, ifcardiac output doubles, the mean
pressure gradient will increase by a factor of four.
The mean pressure gradient is inversely related to
the square ofthe valve area. Thus, ifvalve area is
reduced by one-half, the mean pressure gradient
will increase by a factor of four.
The normal mitral valve area in an adult is
4–6 cm2. The mitral valve area must be reduced
to 2.6 cm2 before symptoms occur. A valve area
of1.5–2.5 cm 2 is considered mild mitral stenosis,
with symptoms occurring during exercise. A valve
area of1.1–1.5 cm 2 is considered moderate mitralAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch02” — 2007/7/17 — 20:27 — page 37 — #18
Myocardial Physiology 37
stenosis. In these patients an elevated LAP neces-
sary to maintain cardiac output. A valve area of
1.0 cm2 is considered severe mitral stenosis. A LAP
of25 mmHg is necessary to maintain even minimal
cardiac output.
The normal aortic valve area is 2.6–3.5 cm2. The
aortic valve area must usually be reduced to 0.8 cm2
before angina, syncope, and congestive heart fail-
ure occur. A valve area of0.5–0.8 cm 2 is consid-
ered moderate aortic stenosis. Severe aortic stenosis
exists when the valve area is less than 0.5 cm2.
For adults, valve areas usually are not normalized
for body surface area (BSA). As a result, extremes
ofbody size must be taken into consideration when
deciding whether a stenotic lesion is signiﬁcant.
A large person with higher cardiac output demands
may have a large gradient and symptoms with a
valve area that would be adequate for a smaller
person with reduced cardiac output requirements.
Valve areas commonly are normalized for BSA in
infants and children.
Regurgitant lesions
Quantiﬁcation ofregurgitant lesions with catheter-
ization techniques is more difﬁcult and less accu-
rate than for stenotic lesions. Two approaches are
available. One method is qualitative; the other is
quantitative. Qualitative analysis is based on assess-
ing the amount ofcontrast material regurgitated
into the left atrium during left ventriculography
for mitral regurgitation (Fig. 2.18) or into the left
ventricle during aortography for aortic regurgita-
tion (Fig. 2.19). The degree ofregurgitation is graded
from mild to severe (1+ to 4+). In mild aortic regur-
gitation, a small amount ofcontrast enters the lef t
ventricle during diastole but clears with each sys-
tole. In mild mitral regurgitation, a small amount
ofcontrast enters the lef t atrium during systole but
clears in diastole. In severe aortic regurgitation, the
left ventricle is ﬁlled with contrast after the ﬁrst dias-
tole and it remains opaciﬁed for several systoles. In
severe mitral regurgitation, the left atrium is ﬁlled
with contrast after the ﬁrst systole and becomes
progressively opaciﬁed with each beat. In addition,
contrast is seen reﬂuxing into the pulmonary veins.
Similar qualitative analysis is used to grade tricuspid
regurgitation.
Fig. 2.18 Long-axis cross-sectional view oflef t atrium,
left ventricle, and aorta in severe mitral regurgitation.
Injection ofcontrast material into lef t ventricle
demonstrates regurgitation ofcontrast into lef t atrium
and pulmonary veins.
The quantitative method ofassessing regurgi-
tation is based on calculation ofthe regurgitant
fraction:
Regurgitant fraction = regurgitant stroke volume
total stroke volume
Regurgitant stroke volume
= total stroke volume − forward stroke volume
Angiographic or total SV is determined from left
ventriculography as described previously and for-
ward SV is determined by the Fick method. A
regurgitant fraction lower than 30% indicates mild
mitral regurgitation, 30–60% indicates moderate
mitral regurgitation, and higher than 60% indicates
severe mitral regurgitation. A regurgitant fraction
of10–40% indicates mild aortic regurgitation, 40–
60% indicates moderate aortic regurgitation, and
more than 60% severe aortic regurgitation.
It is important to note that the height and dura-
tion ofV waves are not a direct assessment ofthe
degree ofmitral regurgitation. Severe mitral regur-
gitation can exist in the absence ofa signiﬁcantAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch02” — 2007/7/17 — 20:27 — page 38 — #19
38 Chapter 2
Fig. 2.19 Long-axis cross-sectional view oflef t
ventricle, right ventricle, and aorta in severe aortic
regurgitation. Injection ofcontrast material into proximal
aorta demonstrates regurgitation ofcontrast into lef t
ventricle.
V wave. It has been stated that, for an individual
patient, the height ofthe V wave correlates with the
degree ofregurgitation under conditions ofchang-
ing afterload. Such conclusions must be drawn
carefully however, as there are several factors that
affect the height and duration of V waves:
• The degree ofmechanical mitral valve impair-
ment. Mechanical impairment occurs with a rup-
tured papillary muscle, a torn prosthetic valve
leaﬂet, or a perivalvular leak.
• The degree off unctional mitral valve impair-
ment. Functional impairment occurs with papil-
lary muscle ischemia or ventricular dilation with
deformation of the valvular annulus.
• The compliance characteristics ofthe lef t atrium
and pulmonary veins. For a given regurgitant vol-
ume, a dilated, compliant left atrium will exhibit
a smaller V wave than a small, noncompliant left
atrium.
• The relative impedance to ejection through the
aortic valve versus that through the incompetent
mitral valve. An increase in the impedance to aortic
ejection will favor increased outﬂow through the
lower impedance ofthe incompetent mitral valve.
With all other variables constant, this will increase
the magnitude ofthe V wave.
• The inotropic state ofthe lef t ventricle. An
increase in LV contractility will tend to decrease LV
dimensions, decrease the size ofthe valvular annu-
lus, and thus decrease the amount ofregurgitant
ﬂow.
• The length ofventricular systole. A decrease in
the length ofventricular systole will reduce
the time available for regurgitant ﬂow to take
place. However, forward SV may be compromised
as well.
Analysis ofthe V wave in tricuspid regurgitation
is hampered by similar considerations. Nonethe-
less, with severe tricuspid regurgitation, the right
atrial pressure trace takes on the shape ofthe right
ventricular pressure trace.
Evaluation of cardiac shunts
A comprehensive discussion ofthe physiology of
shunts is provided in Chapter 6. Oxygen saturation
measurements in multiple cardiac chambers and
the great vessels are used to localize and quantify
cardiac shunts. Additionally, angiography during
cardiac catheterization may be used to locate cardiac
shunts.
Shunt location
Shunt localization is usually accomplished using a
combination ofangiography and measurement of
oxygen saturations in the pulmonary veins, SVC
and IVC, right heart chambers, left heart chambers,
aorta, and pulmonary artery. Oxygen saturation
sampling is used to detect an oxygen saturation
step-up in the right heart in the case ofa lef t-to-
right shunt or an oxygen saturation step-down in
the left heart in the case of a right-to-left shunt.
A step-up is deﬁned as an increase in the oxygen sat-
uration ofblood in a particular location that exceeds
the normal variability in that location; whereas,
a step-down is a greater-than-expected decrease in
saturation for a given location.Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch02” — 2007/7/17 — 20:27 — page 39 — #20
Myocardial Physiology 39
Shunt quantiﬁcation
Shunt quantiﬁcation is based on comparison of
systemic and pulmonary blood ﬂows. Systemic (QS)
and pulmonary (QP) blood ﬂows are calculated by
the Fick method previously described.
QP = VO2/(PVO2 content − PAO2 content)
PAO2 content is the pulmonary arterial oxygen
content. PVO2 content is pulmonary venous oxygen
content. Sampling blood from the left atrium (when
the pulmonary veins return to the left atrium) will
provide a weighted average ofthe f our pulmonary
veins oxygen content. Ifa right-to-lef t atrial level
shunt is present this sampling site will not provide
an accurate assessment ofpulmonary vein oxygen
content. Each ofthe f our pulmonary veins can be
entered and sampled separately. When this is done
segmental areas ofintra-pulmonary shunt and V/Q
mismatch can be detected. The Pa O2 or saturation
ofpulmonary venous blood f rom a lung segment
with V/Q mismatch will improve with an increase
in FiO2 while there will be no improvement ifan
intra-pulmonary shunt is present.
QS = VO2/(SAO2 content − MVO2 content)
SAO2 is systemic arterial oxygen content. MVO2
content is mixed venous oxygen content. True
mixed venous blood is a mixture ofdesaturated
blood from the IVC, SVC, and coronary sinus. In
a normal heart a mixed sample ofvenous blood
from these three locations can be obtained from
the pulmonary artery. In the presence ofan intra
cardiac left-to-right shunt, PA O2 saturation will
overestimate true MV O2 saturation because pul-
monary arterial blood will be a mixture ofmixed
venous blood and oxygenated pulmonary venous
blood from the left heart. In this setting, true mixed
venous saturation must be determined from sam-
ples taken from the SVC and IVC. If the very low
oxygen content low volume blood from the coro-
nary sinus is ignored then a weighted average of
oxygen content ofSVC and IVC blood can be used
to determine MVO2 content:
(3/4 × superior vena cava O2 content)
+ (1/4 × inferior vena cava O2 content)
This formula may be used to determine MV O2
in the catheterization laboratory when left-to-right
shunts exist. More commonly, particularly in chil-
dren, SVC oxygen content is commonly used as a
surrogate for MVO2 content. SVC blood has a lower
oxygen content than IVC blood and a higher con-
tent than coronary sinus blood and thus SVC blood
provides a very close estimate ofthe mixture of
the three samples. In addition, streaming ofblood
ofvarying oxygen contents in the IVC hampers
accurate IVC oxygen content sampling.
After QP and QS have been calculated, shunts
can be quantiﬁed. For an isolated left-to-right shunt,
the magnitude ofthe shunt is QP −QS. For an iso-
lated right-to-left shunt, the magnitude of the shunt
is QS −QP. The ratioQP:QS is also useful. It can be
calculated from content data alone because the Vo2
terms cancel out:
QP:QS = (SAO2 content − MVO2 content)
(PVO2 content − PAO2 content)
Furthermore, ifthe blood is sampled using a
low FiO2, the dissolved oxygen portion ofthe
content equation (P O2 × 0.003) can be ignored.
The hemoglobin × 1.34 term cancels out and
the equation can be simpliﬁed to one using just
saturation data from the four sites:
QP:QS = (SAO2 saturation − MVO2 saturation)
(PVO2 saturation − PAO2 saturation)
A QP:QS >2.0 constitutes a large shunt, whereas
aQP:QS <1.25–1.5 constitutes a small shunt. Obvi-
ously, a QP:QS <1.0 indicates a net right-to-left
shunt.
For bidirectional shunts, it is necessary to cal-
culate effective pulmonary blood ﬂow ( QPeff) and
effective systemic blood ﬂow ( QSeff). QPeff is the
quantity ofdesaturated systemic venous blood that
traverses the pulmonary capillaries to be oxy-
genated. QSeff is the quantity ofoxygenated pul-
monary venous blood that traverses the systemic
capillaries to deliver oxygen to tissue.QSeff andQPeff
are always equal. This concept is discussed in detail
in Chapter 6.
Qseff =QPeff =VO2/(PVO2 content−MVO2 content)
The left-to-right shunt is deﬁned as QP − QPeff
while the right-to-left shunt is deﬁned asQS −QSeff.Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch02” — 2007/7/17 — 20:27 — page 40 — #21
40 Chapter 2
The net shunt is the difference between these two
calculated shunts.
Evaluation of the pulmonary
vasculature
Marked increases or decreases in pulmonary blood
ﬂow routinely occur in patients with congenital
heart disease. Obstructive pulmonary vascular dis-
ease may occur as a consequence ofincreased pul-
monary blood ﬂow in patients with congenital heart
disease. The extent ofpulmonary vascular disease
will greatly inﬂuence the type ofcorrective or pal-
liative operative procedure performed. For patients
with diminished pulmonary blood ﬂow, an evalu-
ation ofthe extent and caliber ofthe pulmonary
vessels is necessary to choose the proper corrective
or palliative operative procedure.
Pulmonary artery wedge angiogram
The pulmonary artery wedge angiogram is recorded
on cine ﬁlm while radiocontrast material is injected
into a catheter that is in the pulmonary artery
wedge position. Generally, the artery to the pos-
terior basal segment ofthe right lower lobe is
studied. As obstructive pulmonary vascular disease
progresses, the wedge angiogram demonstrates pro-
gressive increases in the diameter and tortuosity of
the pulmonary arteries, a diminution in the blush
seen as capillaries ﬁll, and the abrupt termination of
the dilated, tortuous arteries with a marked decrease
in the number ofsupernumerary arterial branches.
Pulmonary vein wedge angiogram
In many congenital cardiac lesions with reduced
pulmonary blood ﬂow, the pulmonary vasculature
may be well visualized with injection ofcontrast
into collaterals that arise off the aorta. For patients
with pulmonary atresia, pulmonary blood ﬂow is
markedly diminished and the pulmonary arteries
may not be well visualized with contrast injec-
tions into collateral vessels. In this instance, the
pulmonary vein wedge angiogram may be used to
delineate the pulmonary vasculature. Retrograde
ﬁlling ofthe parenchymal pulmonary vessels can be
seen on cine recordings when contrast is hand
injected into a catheter wedged in a pulmonary
vein. When antegrade pulmonary blood ﬂow is
severely diminished, retrograde ﬁlling ofeven the
main pulmonary artery can occur.
Assessment of pulmonary arterial
hypertension
Assessment ofpulmonary arterial hypertension
(PAH) is deﬁned as a PA systolic pressure
>35 mmHg or mean pulmonary artery pressure
(PAP) >25 mmHg at rest or mean PAP >30 mmHg
with exercise. While the causes ofPAH are myr-
iad the etiology ofpulmonary hypertension related
to cardiac disease can be divided into four general
categories:
LAhypertension
Elevated LAP can result from a number of causes
(mitral valve disease, LV diastolic dysfunction, LV
systolic dysfunction, loss of AV synchrony). This is
the by far the most common cause of elevated PAP
in adults with acquired heart disease.
Pulmonaryvenousobstruction
This may be the result ofobstruction to pulmonary
vein entry into the venous circulation as with total
anomalous pulmonary venous return or as with
cor triatriatum, or the result ofobstructive disease
inherent to the veins themselves.
Pulmonaryvascularocclusivedisease
(PVOD)
Chronic exposure ofthe pulmonary arterial bed to
high ﬂow and/or pressure leads to extensive struc-
tural changes. There is progressive muscularization
ofperipheral arteries, medial hypertrophy ofmus-
cular arteries and gradually reduced arterial number
due to occlusive neointimal formation with ﬁbrosis.
Chronic LA hypertension can lead to development
ofa similar process thru chronic elevation ofPAP.
High QP:QS
When a large nonrestrictive intracardiac communi-
cation exists, particularly at the ventricular level,
PAP may be systemic or just sub-systemic. The
question that must be answered is whether the
elevated PAP is due to high ﬂow into a low resis-
tance pulmonary bed (high QP:QS, normal PVR,Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch02” — 2007/7/17 — 20:27 — page 41 — #22
Myocardial Physiology 41
Table 2.1 Characteristics ﬁndings in pulmonary hypertension from different etiologies.
Etiology Pressures LAP TPG PVR QP
LAhypertension PAD ≈PAOP ≈LAP
(acute)
↑↑ ↔ ↔ ↔
PAD >PAOP ≈LAP
(chronic)
↑↑ ↑ ↑ ↔
Pulmonaryvein
obstruction
PAD ≈PAOP ≫ LAP ↔↑ ↑ ↑ ↑ ↔
sl ↓
Pulmonaryvascular
occlusivedisease
PAD ≫ PAOP ≈LAP ↔↑ ↑ ↑ ↑ ↔
sl ↓
LargeL–Rshunt PAD ≈PAOP ≈LAP sl ↑↔
sl ↑
↔
sl ↑
↑↑
LAP, left atrial pressure; PAD, pulmonary artery diastolic pressure; PAOP, pulmonary
artery occlusion pressure; PVR, pulmonary vascular resistance (TPG/cardiac output) nL<
2 Wood units;QP, pulmonary blood ﬂow; TPG, transpulmonary gradient (mPAP–LAP)
nL5–10mmHg.
large L–R shunt) or normal/low ﬂow into a high
resistance pulmonary bed (normal/lowQP:QS, high
PVR, PVOD).
Determination ofthe etiology ofpulmonary hy-
pertension requires measurement ofthe PAP, LAP,
PAOP, TPG, and PVR as summarized in Table 2.1.
Suggested reading
Chemla D, Antony I, Lecarpentier Y, Nitenberg A. Contri-
bution ofsystemic vascular resistance and total arterial
compliance to effective arterial elastance in humans.
AmJPhysiolHeartCircPhysiol 2003;285:H614–20.
Izzo JL, Jr. Arterial stiffness and the systolic hypertension
syndrome.CurrOpinCardiol 2004;19:341–52.
Lock JE, Keene JF, Perry SB (eds). Diagnostic and Inteven-
tionalCatheterizationinCongenitalHeartDisease , 2nd edn.
Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2000.
Maughan WL, Sunagawa K, Burkhoff D, Sagawa K.
Effect of arterial impedance changes on the end-
systolic pressure–volume relation. Circ Res 1984;54:
595–602.
Robotham JL, Takata M, Berman M, Harasawa Y. Ejection
fraction revisited.Anesthesiology 1991;74:172–83.
Segers P, Stergiopulos N, WesterhofN. Relation ofef f ec-
tive arterial elastance to arterial system properties.
AmJPhysiolHeartCircPhysiol 2002;282:H1041–6.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch03” — 2007/7/17 — 20:28 — page 42 — #1
CHAPTER 3
Monitoring
Basic monitoring of cardiopulmonary function is
essential to the safe conduct of any anesthetic.
For patients undergoing cardiac surgery, advanced
monitoringofcardiac,pulmonary,renal,andcere-
bral function will allow measurement of the phys-
iologic variables necessary to make sound clinical
decisions. The extent of monitoring required for
a given case should be individualized and based
upon the relative advantages and risks present.
Theconsiderationforadvancedmonitoringshould
includepatientcharacteristics,theanticipatedsurgi-
cal procedure, and the postoperative requirements
foradvancedmonitoring.Thischapterwillprovide
an overview of the monitoring systems used most
commonly in the management of cardiac surgical
patients.
StandardAmericanSocietyof
Anesthesiologists(ASA)monitors
TheASAapprovedthe Standards for Basic Anesthetic
Monitoringin1986andlastamendedthedocument
in 2005. This standard outlines the basic require-
ments for all anesthetics including cardiothoracic
and vascular procedures. There are two essential
standardsoutlinedinthetext:
• StandardI.Qualiﬁedanesthesiapersonnelshallbe
present in the room throughout the conduct of all
generalanestheticsandmonitoredanesthesiacare.
• Standard II . During all anesthetics, the
patient’s oxygenation, ventilation, circulation, and
temperatureshallbecontinuallyevaluated.
Toensureoxygenation,thestandardprescribesthat
inspired oxygen concentration will be monitored
withanoxygenanalyzerwithalowoxygenconcen-
trationlimitalarminuse.Thepatient’soxygenation
willbeassessedusingaquantitativemethodsuchas
pulse oximetry. Further, when a pulse oximeter is
used,thevariablepitchpulsetoneandalowthresh-
oldalarmshallbeaudible.Adequateexposureand
illuminationisrequiredtoassesspatientcolor.
Ventilation shall be continually evaluated for
adequacy. Means to determine adequacy include
chest excursion, observation of the reservoir bag,
auscultation,expiredend-tidalcarbondioxidecon-
centration monitoring and qualitative monitoring
ofthevolumeofexpiredgas.Airwaymanipulation
involvingalaryngealmaskairwayorendotracheal
tubeshallhavethedevicepositionconﬁrmedwith
carbon dioxide monitoring. When ventilation is
controlled by a mechanical ventilator, there shall
be a disconnection device in place with an audi-
blealarm.Duringregionalanesthesiaormonitored
anesthesia care, ventilation shall be evaluated by
continual observation of qualitative clinical signs
and/or monitoring for the presence of end-tidal
carbondioxide.
Circulation will be assessed with the use of on
electrocardiogram (ECG) continuously displayed
during the duration of the anesthetic. An arterial
blood pressure and heart rate will be determined
at least every 5 minutes. Every patient shall fur-
ther have at least one of the following continually
monitored: palpation of a pulse, auscultation of
42AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch03” — 2007/7/17 — 20:28 — page 43 — #2
Monitoring 43
heartsounds,intra-arterialmonitoring,ultrasound
peripheral pulse monitoring, or pulse plethysmog-
raphyoroximetry.
Finally, every patient shall have their tem-
perature monitored when clinically signiﬁcant
changes in temperature are intended, anticipated,
orsuspected.
Thesemonitoringstandardsformthebasisupon
whichalladvancedmonitoringofthecardiothoracic
patientoccurs.Advancedmonitoringinthecardio-
thoracic patient involves both invasive and non-
invasivestrategiestoassesscirculation.Inaddition,
the cardiothoracic patient may require advanced
cerebral function monitoring. Finally, the cardio-
thoracic anesthesiologist is required to monitor
advanced coagulation function monitoring. The
remainder of the chapter will review the various
componentsofthisadvancedmonitoringstratagem.
Advancedelectrocardiographic
(ECG)monitoring
The Advanced electrocardiographic is a standard
monitorduringcardiacsurgicalproceduresformon-
itoring heart rate, rhythm, and ischemia. A ﬁve-
electrodeECGsystemcapableofmonitoringseven
leads (I, II, III, aVR,a VL,a VF, and V5) is typi-
cal. In most operating room (OR) environments,
leadsIIandV 5 aresimultaneouslymonitored.The
combination of these two leads provides the best
surveillanceforischemiaandarrhythmiadetection
(Fig.3.1).
Dysrhythmiadetection
Lead II usually allows P-wave identiﬁcation and
morphology allowing for easy dysrhythmia iden-
tiﬁcation.Insometachydysrhythmias(paroxysmal
atrialtachycardia,nodalrhythm,ventriculartachy-
cardia), the P wave may be difﬁcult or impossible
toseeinanyofthestandardleads.Inothertachy-
dysrhythmias (atrial ﬁbrillation, atrial ﬂutter), the
P wave is absent. In some cases of AV nodal block
or AV dissociation, the relationship between the
P waves and the QRS complex may be difﬁcult to
discernwithstandardECGleads.Insuchinstances,
the bipolar esophageal or intra-atrial ECG may be
useful. Two electrodes are incorporated in either
50
40
30
20Single lead sensitivity (%)
0
I II III
ECG lead
aVR aVL aVF V1 V2 V3 V4 V5 V6
Fig.3.1 Theleadsensitivityindetectingmyocardial
ischemiaisdisplayed.ThecombinationofleadIIandV 5
providesthegreatestabilitytodetectischemiaand
rhythmdisturbances.(FromLondonMJ,HollenbergM,
WongMF, etal. Anesthesiology1988;69:232–41,with
permission.)
a 12-French esophageal stethoscope for pediatric
patientsora15-Frenchesophagealstethoscopefor
adults. Alternatively, two of the three atrial elec-
trodes from a pacing pulmonary artery catheter
(PAC) can be used to obtain a bipolar intra-atrial
ECG.Thetwoleadsfromtheseelectrodesarecon-
nected to the right arm and left arm jacks of a
standard three-lead ECG system. The third lead of
the three-lead ECG is connected to the patient via
askinelectrodeandleadImonitored.Becausethe
esophagealandintra-atrialECGplaceelectrodesso
proximaltotheatria,thereisaugmentationofatrial
activitysuchthatthePwaveisoftenlargerthanthe
QRScomplex.
Ischemiadetection
ThepresenceofECGchangesisusefulinthedetec-
tion of myocardial ischemia. Speciﬁcally, ischemia
alters repolarization causing either downsloping
or horizontal ST-segment depression. Transmu-
ral ischemia and myocardial injury are associated
with ST-segment elevation. In the case of coro-
naryspasm,ST-segmentelevationsarelikelytobe
the initial manifestation seen on ECG. For ECG
monitoring to be effective in detecting ischemia,
the appropriate leads must be monitored. ExerciseAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch03” — 2007/7/17 — 20:28 — page 44 — #3
44 Chapter3
treadmill testing has demonstrated that 89% of
the signiﬁcant ST-segment depressions occurring
during exercise can be detected in lead V5. The
addition of leads II, AVF,V 3,V 4, and V6 to lead
V5 increases the sensitivity of ischemia detection
to 100% during exercise testing. Combining leads
V5 and II increase the sensitivity for detecting
ischemicchangesto90%.Thiscombinationallows
themostsensitivedysrhythmiaandischemiadetec-
tionandisthereforethepreferredleadselectionin
mostORenvironments.
It is important to understand ECG mode selec-
tion and ischemia analysis. The monitoring mode
(0.5–40.0Hz) ﬁlters out high and low frequency
artifactstherebyattenuatingtheeffectsofextrane-
ous interference from 60 cycle interference, elec-
trocautery, respiratory variation, and movement.
Unfortunately, this mode makes analysis of sub-
tle ST segment changes unreliable. The diagnostic
mode (0.05–100.00Hz) reﬂects the true extent of
ST segment changes but is more prone to interfer-
ence. The monitoring mode is best selected when
there is a low risk of ischemia; whereas, the diag-
nosticmodeshouldbeemployedwhenischemiais
suspectedoranticipated.
Automated ST-segment software is currently
available on many intraoperative monitoring sys-
tems. These ST-segment analysis systems identify
the QRS complex and then identify the isoelectric
pointintheP–Rintervalandameasurementpoint
along the ST-segment (80ms from the J-point).
Mostmonitorsanalyzeoftwotothreeleadssimulta-
neouslyallowingamorecompleteexaminationfor
ischemia.Alarmsmaybesetforspeciﬁcamountsof
ST-segmentdeviation.
Arterialpressuremonitoring
Arterial access allows beat-to-beat monitoring
of arterial blood pressure as well as the ability to
obtain arterial blood samples for analysis of partial
pressureofoxygen(P O2),partialpressureofcarbon
dioxide (PCO2), pH, bicarbonate, and other elec-
trolytes.Themostcommonsitesofarterialcannula-
tionaretheradialandfemoralarteriesinadultsand
children.Innewbornstheumbilicalarteryservesas
analternativetotheradialorfemoralarteries.
Radialarterycannulation
Radial artery cannulation can be accomplished in
infants, children, and adults. A 24-gauge Teﬂon
or polyurethane catheter is appropriate for infants
<4–5kg. A 22-gauge catheter is appropriate for
infants and children weighing less than 30kg,
whereas a 20-gauge catheter is used in larger chil-
drenandadults.Thewristisdorsiﬂexedoveraroll
oftowelorgauzeandsecuredonashortarmboard.
The thumb is taped back to reduce the mobility
of the artery. Neither the dorsiﬂexion of the wrist
northetapingofthethumbshouldbesosevereas
to compromise the radial pulse. The puncture site
shouldbeapproximately2cmproximaltothesty-
loid process of the radius. After appropriate sterile
prepping, the area of proposed puncture is anes-
thetizedwith1–2mLof1%lidocaineintheawake
patient.Whenusinga22-gaugecatheteritishelp-
ful to nick the skin with a needle directly over the
artery prior to catheter placement. The skin nick
helpspreventdeformationofthecathetertip.
The catheter is introduced at an angle of 30◦ to
the artery with the bevel of the needle directed
upward. When blood ﬂows freely out the end of
the catheter, the angle between the catheter and
the artery is reduced and the catheter and needle
areadvancedapproximately1–2mm.Atthispoint,
both the catheter and needle should be within the
vessellumen,andthecathetercanbeadvancedfor-
wardovertheneedleintothevessel.Ifthereisno
blood ﬂow out the needle, it is likely that the pos-
terior wall of the artery has been punctured. The
needleandcatheterarethenintentionallyadvanced
throughtheposteriorwall.Theneedleiswithdrawn
partly from the catheter and the catheter is then
withdrawnuntilitstipislocatedwithinthelumen
ofthearteryandfreeﬂowofbloodisnoted.Atthis
point,thecatheterisadvancedintotheartery.Alter-
natively, a small guide wire (0.018) can be passed
up a 24-, 22-, or 20-gauge catheter into the artery
andoftenwillfacilitateadvancementofthecatheter
(Fig.3.2a–c).
Radial arterial cannulation is associated with a
verylowincidenceofmorbidity.AnAllen’stestto
assesscollateralcirculationtothehandviatheulnar
artery and palmar arch is frequently performed
before cannulation of the radial artery. There isAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch03” — 2007/7/17 — 20:28 — page 45 — #4
Monitoring 45
(a)
(c)
10°
(b)
30°
Fig.3.2 Radialarterycannulation.(a)Thewristis
positioned.(b)Thearteryiscannulatedapproximately
2cmproximaltothestyloidprocessofthedistalradius.
(c)Theneedleangleisreducedandthecatheter
advanced.(FromLakeCL. CardiovascularAnesthesia.
NewYork,Springer-Verlag,1985:54,withpermission.)
controversyregardingthespeciﬁcityandsensitivity
ofanAllen’stest,however,andthisexaminationis
notuniversallyapplied.Theradialarterycatheteris
mostoftenplacedintothewristofthenondominant
handforpatientcomfortandconvenience.Insome
instances,however,theradialarterycathetermust
be introduced preferentially into one radial artery
ortheother,asspeciﬁedbelow:
• Blalock–Taussig shunts. For children undergoing
these subclavian to pulmonary artery shunts, the
radial artery contralateral to the subclavian artery
being used must be used for monitoring. Like-
wise,forchildrenwithpre-existingBlalock–Taussig
shunts, accurate arterial blood pressure will be
obtainedonlyinthecontralateralarm.
• Coarctation repair. Arterial blood pressure is best
monitoredintherightradialarteryforavarietyof
reasons:arterialbloodpressureintheleftarmmay
belowerthanthatintherightarminthepresence
ofhypoplasiaoftheaorticisthmus,aleftsubclavian
artery patch may be used to repair the coarcta-
tion, or left subclavian artery circulation may be
compromised by placement of aortic cross-clamps
duringthecoarctationrepair.
• Thoracic aortic surgery . Left subclavian artery
ﬂow may be compromised by surgical procedures
on the distal arch or descending aorta; there-
fore, blood pressure should be monitored in the
right radial artery. For procedures involving the
ascending aorta, the left radial artery is a better
choice.
Femoralarterycannulation
A22-gauge,thin-wallneedletopuncturetheartery
in infants and children weighing less than 30kg
can be used for femoral artery cannulation. After
free ﬂow of blood is obtained, a straight wire is
passed through the needle up into the artery. For
infants,a2-inch20-gaugecatheterispassedintothe
arteryoverthewire.Forchildren,a3-inch20-gauge
catheter can be employed. For children weighing
morethan30kg,an18-gaugethin-wallneedlefor
arterial puncture and a 4-inch 18-gauge catheter
is appropriate. For larger children and adults, an
18-gaugethin-wallneedleforarterialpunctureand
a6-inch16-or18-gaugecatheterisused.
Femoral artery catheters have been used with
a low complication rate for infants, children and
adults. Hesitation to use femoral artery catheters
in children stems from concern that damage to
thepoorlyencapsulatedhipjointmayoccureither
directly,fromsepsisorarterialocclusionandthrom-
bosis. This does not seem to be a problem for
infants and children when proper insertion tech-
niques and catheter sizes are used. However, for
infants younger than 1month of age, the inci-
dence of transient perfusion-related complicationsAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch03” — 2007/7/17 — 20:28 — page 46 — #5
46 Chapter3
(loss of distal pulse, limb coolness) has been
reported to be 25% when a 20-gauge catheter is
used. This is higher than the rate associated with
radialorumbilicalarterycatheterizationinthisage
group.
Umbilicalarterycannulation
The umbilical artery cannulation may be obtained
in the catheterization laboratory or in the inten-
sivecareunit(ICU)inneonatesrequiringinvasive
arterial pressure monitoring. A 3.5- or 5-French
catheterisusedforarterialmonitoring.Thecatheter
tip should lie just above the aortic bifurcation but
belowL3,oralternatively,abovethediaphragmat
theT7–T8level.
Centralvenousaccess
Accesstothecentralvenouscirculationisessential
forcardiacsurgicalpatientsforavarietyofreasons
includingsecureintravenous(IV)accessforvolume
andmedicationadministrationandadvancedmon-
itoring of volume status and cardiac function. The
internal and external jugular veins and the sub-
clavianveinsarecommonlyusedforcentralvenous
access in infants, children, and adults. The right
internaljugularveinoffersfairlyconstantanatomy
with a straight course to the right atrium and a
low complication rate. Attempts at left internal
jugular venous cannulation may lead to injury to
the thoracic duct, and for patients with congenital
heart disease, the left internal jugular may drain
into a persistent left superior vena cava. The left
subclavianveinprovidesanalternativeforpatients
withdifﬁcultorimpossibleinternaljugularcannu-
lation. For patients with communication between
therightandleftheartchambers,allperipheraland
centralvenouslinesmustbekeptclearofairbubbles
toavoidpotentialsystemicairembolization.
A wide variety of central venous catheters are
available for use. For adults and large children,
7-and8-Frenchdouble-andtriple-lumencatheters
are available. For infants and children weighing
<4kg, 4-French double-lumen catheters 5cm in
length are available. For children weighing>4kg,
5-French double-lumen catheters 5 or 8cm in
lengthareused.
Internaljugularcannulation
Three general approaches to the internal jugular
using anatomical landmarks have been described:
central, anterior, and posterior. The central
approachinvolveslocalizationoftheinternaljugu-
lar vein at the apex of the triangle formed by the
two heads of the sternocleidomastoid muscle. The
apexislateraltothecarotidpulseandgenerallyisat
thelevelofthecricoidcartilage(2–3ﬁnger-breadths
abovetheclavicleinadults).Thisapproachapplies
to infants and children. The anterior approach
involveslocalizationoftheveinatthelateralborder
of the medial head of the sternocleidomastoid at a
pointhalfwaybetweentheclavicleandthemastoid.
Theposteriorapproachinvolveslocalizationofthe
veinunderthelateralborderofthemedialheadof
the sternocleidomastoid at the level of the cricoid
cartilage.Regardlessoftheapproach,extremecare
must be exercised to ensure that the jugular vein
is cannulated and not the internal carotid artery
(CA). Ultrasound imaging of the internal jugular
veindemonstrateslargeanatomicvariabilityinthe
relationship between the jugular vein and the CA
(Figs3.3&3.4).Inabouthalfofchildrenandadults,
more than 75% of the right CA is overlaid by the
rightinternaljugularveinwhentheheadisrotated
to the left. This overlap can be reduced somewhat
by rotating the head less than 40% from the neu-
tralposition.Ultrasonicguidancefacilitatescatheter
placement and may reduce the complication rate
of central venous catheter placement. The follow-
ingisrecommendedforcannulationoftheinternal
jugularvein:
1 The patient is positioned with the head turned
away from the intended cannulation site. Sup-
plemental oxygen is supplied to nonanesthetized
patients.
2 For adults and older children, the pillow is
removed from beneath the head to produce a
slightlyextendedneckposition.Forelderlypatients
with limited neck mobility, removal of the pil-
lowmaynotbepossible.Forchildren,infants,and
neonates, it may be necessary to place a small roll
undertheshoulderstopreventcranialhyperﬂexion
duetothelargerheadsize.
3 The anatomic outline of the clavicle and of the
two heads of the sternocleidomastoid muscle areAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch03” — 2007/7/17 — 20:28 — page 47 — #6
Monitoring 47
ICA
RIJ
Fig.3.3 Theinternalcarotidartery(ICA)iswell
visualized.Inthispatientwithspontaneousrespiration,
therightinternaljugularveiniscollapsed(RIJ).
identiﬁed (some prefer to mark these structures
with a pen). In nonanesthetized patients, lifting
the head off the bed will help deﬁne these land-
marks.Anultrasonicprobe(5.0–7.5MHz)isplaced
ontheneckusingultrasonicgel.Therelationshipof
the internal jugular and CA relative to each other
and to the anatomic markings is noted. The depth
of the vein below the skin surface also is deter-
mined. Head position can be altered to provide
the least amount of overlap of the internal jugular
and CA without compromising access to the neck.
Ultrasonography further allows one to determine
whethertheinternaljugularissmall,absent,throm-
bosedorcompressedfromextravascularstructures
(i.e. hematoma from previous attempts). This may
prompt a look at the contralateral internal jugular
ormovetoasubclavianveincannulation.
4 The neck is prepped and draped using sterile
technique.Theoperatorisgownedandgloved.For
awake patients, local anesthesia is accomplished
with1%lidocaineintheareaoftheintendedneedle
puncture. Deeper inﬁltration should be performed
RIJ
ICA
Fig.3.4 InthissamepatientwithaValsalvamaneuver,
therightinternaljugularvein(RIJ)isnowengorgedand
prominent,anteriorandlateraltotheinternalcarotid
artery(ICA).
with caution because the vein is not very deep
below the skin. The patient is placed in a 10–15◦
Trendelenberg position. This positioning increases
thesizeoftheinternaljugularandreducestherisk
ofairembolus.Itisbesttowaituntilthelastminute
to do this for patients with pulmonary venous
congestion or poor ventricular function because
prolonged periods in the Trendelenberg position
mayexacerbatepulmonaryvenouscongestionand
heartfailure.Innonanesthetizedpatients,thismay
resultinpatientdiscomfort,dyspnea,agitationand
lackofcooperation.
5 A25-gauge5/8-inchneedleisusedtolocatethe
center of the vein in all but the largest of adults.
A1 1
2-inch 22-gauge needle rarely is needed to
localize the internal jugular. There is no need to
keep a hand on the CA after the vein position has
beenlocalizedwithultrasound.Thismaneuveronly
servestocompresstheinternaljugular.
6 Aftertheveinislocalized,theﬁnderneedlecan
be left in place or removed. The appropriate-sizedAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch03” — 2007/7/17 — 20:28 — page 48 — #7
48 Chapter3
thin-wallneedleisinsertedthroughtheskininthe
sameorientationastheﬁnderneedle.Thethin-wall
needleisadvanced.Iftheskinisdepressedordim-
pledinward,theveinisatleastpartiallycompressed.
Whendimplingoccurs,theskinshouldbeallowed
to“rebound.”Thisdoesnotmeanpullingthenee-
dlebackoutoftheskin,itmeansrelievingpressure
to allow the skin to return to a neutral position.
Some compression of the vein by the larger thin-
wall needle is inevitable, but when the needle is
advanced without compressing the skin, it is more
likelythattheveinwillbeenteredonthewayinand
lesslikelythattheveinwillbetransﬁxedandtheCA
willbepunctured.Often,whentheskinisallowed
to rebound, free ﬂow of internal jugular blood is
obtained without any further advancement of the
needle.
7 When free ﬂow of internal jugular blood is
obtained,thethin-wallneedleisﬁxedinplacewith
the ﬁngers of the left hand while the hypothenar
eminence rests on the patient. A ﬂexible J-wire is
advancedintothethin-wallneedleandvein.Ifthe
wire goes a short distance out the end of the nee-
dleandresistanceismet,advancementofthewire
while spinning it with the right hand should be
attempted. If resistance is still met, the wire can
be left in place and the thin-wall needle can be
removed. An appropriate-sized IV catheter is then
placed over the wire and advanced into the vein.
Theguidewireisremovedandasyringeisattached
to the catheter. The syringe is aspirated and the
catheter is withdrawn until free ﬂow of blood is
obtained. The catheter is then advanced into the
veinandtheguidewireisreintroduced.
8 If there is any doubt that the thin-wall needle
or catheter is in the internal jugular, the needle
or catheter should be connected to the monitor
and the venous (or arterial) waveform identiﬁed.
Checking the color of the blood or the blood ﬂow
through the catheter are unreliable indicators of
arterialcannulation.
9 When the guide wire is in place in the internal
jugular (it is reassuring and common to see some
ventricular ectopy as the wire is advanced), a skin
nickismadewithaknife.Theskinnickshouldbe
contiguouswiththewire;thatis,thereshouldnot
beaskinbridgebetweenthewireandtheincision
madewiththeknife.Thedilatorispassedoverthe
wire. The dilator should only be passed once and
onlydeepenoughtopassthroughskin,softtissue,
platysma,andintothevein.Thedilatorisremoved
andgentlepressureisheldoverthedilatedpuncture
siteuntilthecentralvenouspressure(CVP)catheter
orPACintroducerisplaced.
10 Forinstancesinwhichvenousaccessisdifﬁcult
or large transfusion requirements are anticipated,
two catheters can be placed in the same inter-
nal jugular. In this “double-stick” technique, one
guidewireisplacedandthenasecondguidewireis
placedthroughasecondpuncturesite1–2cmabove
or below the ﬁrst one. The cannulation process is
thenthesameasdescribedpreviously.
The most common complication of the inter-
nal jugular approach is carotid puncture (4%).
Otherpotentialcomplicationsoftheinternaljugu-
lar approach include pneumothorax, thoracic duct
injury,brachialplexusinjury,andairembolism.
Externaljugularcannulation
The external jugular approach is complicated by
the presence of a system of venous valves, which
can make the placement of a guidewire and, sub-
sequently, a catheter into the central circulation,
difﬁcult. The advantage of this approach is that
there is little or no risk of carotid puncture, pneu-
mothorax, thoracic duct injury, or brachial plexus
injury. For adults, the use of a guidewire with a
ﬂexible J-shaped tip increases the success rate of
this approach to 75–95%, compared with 95% for
the internal jugular route. In children, the success
rate of this approach is approximately 60%. Clini-
callysilentvenousthrombosisinpediatricpatients
ishighwhentheexternaljugularcatheterdoesnot
reachthecentralcirculation.
Centralcirculationpressure
monitoring
Pulmonaryarterycathetermonitoring
PACs are multilumen, multipurpose catheters
available in a variety of sizes (5-, 7-, and
7.5-French). A typical PAC contains the followingAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch03” — 2007/7/17 — 20:28 — page 49 — #8
Monitoring 49
components:
1 A proximal lumen that terminates in a port
located 30cm (7- and 7.5-French) or 15cm
(5-French) from the distal end of the catheter.
Whenthecatheterispositionedproperly,thisprox-
imal port will be located in the right atrium. This
lumenisusedtomeasurerightatrialpressure(RAP)
andtoinjectﬂuidofaknownvolumeandtemper-
ature for determination of a thermodilution (TD)
cardiacoutput.
2 Adistallumenthatterminatesinaportlocatedat
thedistalendofthecatheter.Thislumenmeasures
pressures as the catheter is advanced into position
and, when the catheter is properly positioned, is
usedtomeasurepulmonaryarterysystolicpressure
(PASP),pulmonaryarterydiastolicpressure(PADP)
andpulmonarycapillarywedgepressure(PCWP).
3 A balloon located 1mm from the distal end of
thecatheter.Thisballoonisconnectedtotheproxi-
mal end of the catheter by a lumen that runs the
length of the catheter. The balloon can be ﬁlled
with air from a syringe located at the proximal
end.The7-and7.5-Frenchcathetershavea1.5-mL
balloon,andthe5-Frenchcatheterhasa1-mLbal-
loon. When the balloon is inﬂated, the catheter is
directedforwardintheﬂowofblood.Ballooninﬂa-
tion is used whenever the catheter is advanced.
Whenthecatheterispositionedproperlyinthepul-
monaryartery,inﬂationoftheballoonwillresultin
the balloon occluding a branch of the pulmonary
artery. The pressure tracing obtained from the dis-
tal port at this point will be a measure of the
PCWP. As described in Chapter 2 it is technically
the pulmonary artery occlusion pressure (PAOP)
thatismeasured.
4 A thermistor is located at the distal end of the
catheterjustproximaltothedistalportandthebal-
loon. The thermistor is connected to one or more
plugs at the proximal end of the catheter, which
are used to interface the thermistor with a cardiac
outputcomputer.
5 Thecatheterislabeledin10-cmincrementsfrom
thedistalendofthecatheter.
6 OptionalfeaturesinPACsinclude:
a Anadditionallumenfordruginfusion.
b An additional lumen for placement of a bipolar
rightventricularendocardialpacingwire.
c Atrialandventricularpacingelectrodesforbipo-
larendocardialatrial,ventricular,andatrioventric-
ular(AV)sequentialpacing.Thesecatheterscontain
three atrial electrodes and two ventricular elec-
trodes. Two electrodes must be in contact with
the endocardium for successful pacing. Consider-
ing the variations in patient size and the length of
catheter necessary to properly position a PAC, the
presenceofthreeatrialelectrodesincreasesthelike-
lihoodthattwoelectrodeswillbeincontactwiththe
atrialendocardialsurface.Thesecathetersare80%
effective in establishing atrial, ventricular, and AV
sequentialpacing.
d The addition of ﬁberoptic bundles, which allow
continuousdeterminationofmixedvenousoxygen
saturationbyreﬂectivespectrophotometry.Lightof
selected wavelengths is transmitted down a ﬁber-
optic bundle, the tip of which is located in the
pulmonaryartery.Thislightistransmittedthrough
blood ﬂowing past the ﬁberoptic bundle and is
reﬂected back to be transmitted down another
ﬁberopticbundletobeanalyzedbyaphotodetector.
The differential absorption of known wavelengths
oflightbyoxyhemoglobinanddeoxyhemoglobinis
usedbyacomputertodeterminemixedvenousoxy-
gensaturation.Theuseofcontinuousmixedvenous
oxygen saturation measurements will be discussed
indetaillater.
e Theabilitytoperformcontinuouscardiacoutput
determinationsusingathermalﬁlament.
f The ability to measure right ventricular ejec-
tionfractionusingarapid-responsethermistorPAC
(discussedindetaillater).
PACplacement
Incardiacsurgery,PACsusuallyareintroducedper-
cutaneously into the right heart and pulmonary
artery via an introducer placed in the right inter-
nal jugular vein. For adults and large children, 7-,
7.5-, and 8.0-French catheters are used and are
placed through an 8.5- or 9.0-French introducer.
The 5-French catheter is used in smaller chil-
dren (weighing 15–40kg) and is placed through a
6-Frenchintroducer.
During placement, the patient should be moni-
tored with a continuous ECG display. A deﬁbrilla-
tor should be in the room and in working order.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch03” — 2007/7/17 — 20:28 — page 50 — #9
50 Chapter3
The deﬁbrillator should be capable of being syn-
chronized with the ECG signal to allow cardiover-
sion as well as deﬁbrillation. The catheter must be
placedundersterileconditionsbytheoperator.The
catheterisplacedinasterilesheath,andtheproxi-
malendofthecatheterishandedofftoanassistant,
who uses the syringe to test balloon inﬂation. The
fullyinﬂatedballoonshouldprotrudeoutoverthe
distalendofthecatheterandinﬂatesymmetrically.
Theassistantalsoshouldconnecttheproximaland
distal lumens to their respective transducer/ﬂush
systems.Theproximallumenwillbeusedtomea-
sure the RAP while the distal lumen will be used
tomeasurethePASP,PADP,andPCWP.Thedistal
lumentracemustbevisibleonthemonitorscreen
as the catheter is advanced. Finally, the TD car-
diac output computer should be connected to the
appropriate jack and the correction factor for the
catheter being used should be programmed into
thecomputer.
Thecatheterisheld,looselycoiled,intheopera-
tor’shandwiththetippointedtowardthepatient’s
left(towardtherightventricleandpulmonaryout-
ﬂowtract).Thecatheterisplacedintotheintroducer
and advanced 20cm for older children and adults
and 10cm for smaller children. At this point, the
balloon is inﬂated and the catheter is advanced
with a smooth motion. For adults and older chil-
dren, a RAP trace will be seen on the distal lumen
trace at approximately 20–30cm. For smaller chil-
dren, this will occur at approximately 10–15cm.
Smooth catheter advancement with the balloon
inﬂated continues until the right ventricular trace
is seen, followed by the PASP trace and ﬁnally the
PCWPtrace.
Catheter advancement stops when the PCWP
trace is seen. For adults and older children, the
PCWPtracewillbeseenatapproximately45–55cm.
Insmallerchildren,thePCWPtracewillbeseenat
approximately 25–35cm. Deﬂation of the balloon
at this time should result in reappearance of the
PASP trace. If the PCWP trace remains after bal-
loon deﬂation, the catheter should be pulled back.
ThecathetershouldnotremaininthePCWPposi-
tionforanylongerthanittakestomeasurePCWP.
Excessive balloon inﬂation can lead to pulmonary
arteryruptureorpulmonaryinfarction.
If the catheter is advanced more than 10–15cm
(5–10cmforsmallerchildren)beforethetracefrom
the next expected chamber or vessel is noted, the
cathetermaybecoilingintherightatriumorven-
tricle.Atthispoint,theballoonshouldbedeﬂated,
thecathetershouldbedrawnbackintothesheath.
The catheter can then be advanced again after
inﬂation of the balloon. Catheter coiling may
ultimatelyleadtocatheterknotting.
If coiling occurs, several things can be tried to
advancethecatheteroutoftheRAorRV:
1 Remove the catheter from the introducer and
makecertainthattheballooninﬂatesproperly.
2 Orientthecurveofthecathetersothatitismore
anteriorthanmedialasitenterstheintroducer.This
mayhelpdirectittowardthetricuspidvalveoriﬁce.
3 Aftermultipleattempts,thecathetermaysoften.
This can be remedied by ﬂushing the distal port
with2–3mLoficedsalineorbygentlytwistingthe
catheterasitisadvanced.
4 For awake patients, taking a deep breath may
enhancebloodﬂowouttheRAandtherightven-
tricular outﬂow track. For anesthetized patients,
releaseofaValsalvamaneuvermayaccomplishthe
samething.
5 Putting the patient in the head-up position
and/or rotating the bed left or right may help
aswell.
Most patients with congenital heart disease are
notcandidatesforpercutaneousplacementofPACs.
Some of the reasons and considerations in these
patientsinclude:
1 Some patients (less than approximately 15kg)
aretoosmallforthe5-Frenchcatheters.
2 In some patients, percutaneous placement of a
PAC may be difﬁcult or impossible. For example,
the presence of a large atrial septal defect or a
ventricular septal defect may make placement dif-
ﬁcult without the use of ﬂuroscopy. Similarly, the
presenceoftricuspidatresia,pulmonaryatresia,or
pulmonarystenosismakepercutaneousplacement
impossible.
3 The PAC may interfere with the surgical repair
andmayhavetoberemovedintraoperatively.
4 If necessary, catheters can be placed directly
into pediatric patients by the surgeon imme-
diately before termination of cardiopulmonaryAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch03” — 2007/7/17 — 20:28 — page 51 — #10
Monitoring 51
bypass (CPB). A thermistor probe (2.5-French) or
a thermistor probe combined with a distal lumen
(4-French) may be placed directly into the pul-
monary artery via the right ventricular outﬂow
tract. When combined with a directly placed right
atrialcatheter(3.5-French),thesewillallowdeter-
mination of TD cardiac outputs. Because these
cathetersdonotallowdeterminationofPCWP,aleft
atrialpressure(LAP)linemaybeplacedbythesur-
geonaswell.Theselinesmaybeplaceddirectlyinto
the left atrium or into the left atrium via the right
superior pulmonary vein. Caution must be exer-
cised with left atrial lines to avoid introduction of
airintothesystemiccirculation.
Centralvenousandpulmonaryartery
pressure(PAP)measurements
Rightandleftatrialpressure
Right atrial pressure (RAP) is monitored directly
through the proximal lumen, whereas LAP is not
directly measured by the PAC. The PCWP will be
anaccurateassessmentofLAP,exceptforinstances
in which there is pulmonary venous obstruction
(rare) or in which the pulmonary alveolar pres-
sure exceeds pulmonary venous pressure. In these
instances, PCWP will reﬂect pulmonary alveolar
pressure (Palv). Pulmonary alveolar pressure will
exceed pulmonary venous pressure (Pv) when the
distal port lies in zone one (PAP< Palv > Pv) or
zone two (PAP> Palv > Pv) of the lung. Fortu-
nately, most catheters (93%) reside in zone three
(PAP >Palv <Pv)portionsoftherightmiddleand
lowerlobes.
The RAP trace usually is of higher quality than
the PCWP trace because the LAP changes are
damped as they are transmitted through the pul-
monary vasculature to be detected by the distal
port.TheRAPandLAPtracesnormallycontainA,
C, and V waves as well as X and Y descents
(Fig.3.5).
Awave
TheAwavereﬂectstheatrialpressureincreaseseen
during atrial systole. Atrial systole occurs at ven-
tricular end diastole and is commonly called the
atrial kick. The peak of the right atrial A wave
40
20
0
ECG
A
Left atrial pressure
X
C V Y
5 sII
Fig.3.5 Leftatrialpressure(LAP)obtainedfroma
patientundergoingleftatrialpacing.Arrowshowspacer
spike.Thepaperspeedis50mm/sandclearlyshows
theA,C,andVwavesaswellastheXandYdescent.
(FromDiNardoJA.Monitoring.In:DiNardoJA(ed).
AnesthesiaforCardiacSurgery ,2ndedn.Stamford,CT:
Appleton&Lange,1998:37–80,withpermission.)
follows the peak of the P wave on the ECG by
80mswhensimultaneousRAPandECGtracesare
compared.ThepeakoftheleftatrialAwavefollows
the peak of the P wave by 240ms due to the later
depolarization of the left atrium compared with
the right atrium. The peak A-wave pressure is the
best estimate of ventricular end-diastolic pressure,
particularlywhenventricularcomplianceordisten-
sibilityispoor(Fig.3.6).Obviously,noAwavewill
bepresentwhenatrialsystoleisabsent,asinatrial
ﬁbrillationandatrialﬂutter.Forinstancesinwhich
atrial systole is not synchronous with ventricular
diastole, atrial contraction may occur in the pres-
ence of a closed tricuspid or mitral valve during
ventricular systole. This will result in production
of a large A wave (cannon A wave) because the
atrium cannot empty via the closed tricuspid or
mitralvalve.CannonAwavesmaybeseenduring
nodalrhythmswithretrogradeatrialdepolarization
(Fig. 3.7), re-entrant supraventricular tachycar-
dia in which ventricular activation precedes atrial
activation, and heart block with nonconducted
atrial activity occurring during ventricular systole.
Cannon A waves also may be seen in instances in
which atrial and ventricular contraction are syn-
chronous but in which atrial outﬂow is prevented
bytricuspidormitralatresia.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch03” — 2007/7/17 — 20:28 — page 52 — #11
52 Chapter3
40
20
0 PCWP
A
X
V Y
ECG
1 sII
Fig.3.6 Pulmonarycapillarywedgepressure(PCWP)
tracefromapatientwithaorticstenosisandconcentric
leftventricularhypertrophy.AlargeAwaveisclearly
seen.ThepeakA-wavepressureatend-expirationis
18mmHg;thisisthebestestimateofleftventricular
end-diastolicpressure.(FromDiNardoJA.Monitoring.
In:DiNardoJA(ed). AnesthesiaforCardiacSurgery ,
2ndedn.Stamford,CT:Appleton&Lange,1998:37–80,
withpermission.)
ECG
200
100
0
40
20
0 PCWP
A
XC Y
Radial artery pressure
Fig.3.7 Pulmonarycapillarywedgepressure(PCWP)
obtainedfromapatientinanodalrhythmwith
retrogradeatrialactivation.CannonAwavesarepresent.
(FromDiNardoJA.Monitoring.In:DiNardoJA(ed).
AnesthesiaforCardiacSurgery ,2ndedn.Stamford,CT:
Appleton&Lange,1998:37–80,withpermission.)
Cwave
The C wave reﬂects movement of the tricuspid or
mitralvalveannulusintotheatriumduringtheiso-
volumicphaseofventricularsystoleandisoftennot
wellseen.TheCwavefollowstheAwavebyatime
interval equal to the P–R interval and is seen best
whentheP–Rintervalisprolonged.
Vwave
TheVwaverepresentspassiveatrialﬁllingwhilethe
tricuspid and mitral valves are closed during ven-
tricular systole. The peak V-wave pressure will be
determined by the compliance of the atrium and
the volume of blood that enters the atrium during
passive ﬁlling. In the right atrial trace, the V wave
peaksneartheendoftheECGTwave,whereasthe
leftatrialVwavepeaksaftertheTwave.
A large V wave may be produced by tricuspid
ormitralregurgitation(Figs3.8&3.9).Inthisset-
ting,theVwaverepresentsacombinationofpassive
atrial ﬁlling and regurgitation of blood into the
atrium via the incompetent valve during ventric-
ularsystole.Commonly,theheightanddurationof
theVwaveisusedtoquantitatetricuspidormitral
regurgitation. Such conclusions must be drawn
carefully,however,becausethedurationofsystole,
the extent of mitral or tricuspid valve impairment,
atrial compliance, the systolic performance of the
ventricle,andtheimpedancetoejectionviathepul-
monaryarteryoraortaallcontributetotheheight
anddurationofVwaves.
It is important to note that other factors may be
responsibleforproductionofalargeVwave.Alarge
volume of blood returning to the atrium and poor
atrialcompliancewillbothproducelargeVwaves.
For example, in the presence of a ventricular sep-
taldefectwithatwo-to-oneleft-to-rightshunt,left
atrialvenousreturnwillbetwicethatofrightatrial
return. Likewise, in the presence of poor ventric-
ular systolic performance, preload reserve may be
exhaustedtomeetbaselinecardiacoutputdemands.
In both instances, the large preload requirements
willresultinatrialdistension,withtheatriumfunc-
tioningonthesteepportionofitscompliancecurve.
This reduced atrial compliance will result in the
production of a large V wave during passive atrial
ﬁlling.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch03” — 2007/7/17 — 20:28 — page 53 — #12
Monitoring 53
Fig.3.8 Pulmonaryarterypressure
(PAP)andpulmonarycapillarywedge
pressure(PCWP)fromapatientwith
mitralregurgitation.Thepresenceof
thelargeVwavemaymake
distinguishingPAPfromPCWP
difﬁcult.Closeexaminationshowsthat
thepeakofthePAPtraceoccursmuch
earlierintheelectrocardiogram(ECG)
cyclethantheVwaveinthePCWP
trace.(FromDiNardoJA.Monitoring.
In:DiNardoJA(ed). Anesthesiafor
CardiacSurgery,2ndedn.Stamford,CT:
Appleton&Lange,1998:37–80,with
permission.)
1 s
ECG
Radial artery pressure
Pulmonary artery pressure
150
0
50
25
0 PCWP
A
X VY
II
ECG
50
25
0 Pulmonary artery pressure
Fig.3.9 Pulmonaryarterypressure(PAP)and
pulmonarycapillarywedgepressure(PCWP)inapatient
withmitralregurgitation.ThePCWPVwaveisclearly
seen.Thearrowpointstotheend-diastolicpressurein
thePCWPtrace.Thispressureisapproximately18mmHg
andisthebestestimateofleftventricularend-diastolic
pressure(LVEDP).(FromDiNardoJA.Monitoring.In:
DiNardoJA(ed). AnesthesiaforCardiacSurgery ,2ndedn.
Stamford,CT:Appleton&Lange,1998:37–80,with
permission.)
Differentiating the PAP trace from the PCWP
can be difﬁcult in the presence of large V waves
because of the similarity of the two traces. Fail-
ure to recognize the V wave of the PCWP can
result in over advancement of the PAC into a dis-
tal pulmonary artery, increasing the likelihood of
a catheter-induced pulmonary artery perforation.
Use of simultaneously obtained PAP and systemic
arterypressureorECGtracescanbeusedtodiffer-
entiatethetwotraces.Ithasbeendemonstratedthat
the peak of the pulmonary artery trace normally
occurs approximately 130ms after the upstroke of
a simultaneously recorded systemic arterial trace,
whereas the peak of the V wave occurs approxi-
mately 350ms after the systemic arterial upstroke.
Similarly,thepeakoftheVwavewilloccurlaterin
theECGcyclethanthepeakofthePAPwave.
XandYdescent
The X descent follows the A and C waves and
reﬂects a combination of the downward displace-
ment of the tricuspid and mitral valve with the
onset of ventricular systole and atrial relaxation
following atrial systole. The Y descent follows the
V wave and reﬂects rapid atrial emptying after
opening of the tricuspid and mitral valves. Thus,
the Y descent also reﬂects early diastolic ﬁlling of
the ventricle. In the presence of pericardial tam-
ponade, the X descent usually will remain visible
whiletheYdescentwillbeattenuated.Inpericardial
tamponade,diastolicﬁllingoftheheartchambersis
impeded because the potential space available for
expansionoftheheartinthepericardiumislargely
eliminatedwhenthepericardiumisﬁlledwithﬂuid.
Forthisreason,passiveﬁllingandexpansionofthe
ventricleasreﬂectedintheYdescentisattenuated.
Tothecontrary,theXdescentispreservedbecause
itreﬂectsadecreaseinpericardialvolumeasatrial
relaxationandventricularsystolebegin.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch03” — 2007/7/17 — 20:28 — page 54 — #13
54 Chapter3
For patients with constrictive pericarditis, early
diastolicﬁllingoftheventricleisnotcompromised
as it is in pericardial tamponade. Constrictive peri-
carditis is characterized by impairment of ventric-
ular ﬁlling in late diastole. Because early diastolic
ﬁlling is not impaired and because atrial pressure
is elevated, the Y descent is more prominent than
normalinconstrictivepericarditis.Asinpericardial
tamponade,theXdescentremainsprominent.This
combination of prominent X and Y descents gives
a characteristic shape to the atrial pressure curve,
whichisoftenreferredtoastheMorWsign.
Pulmonaryarterypressure
A determination of systolic, mean, and diastolic
PAP can be made with a PAC. In the presence of
normalpulmonaryvascularresistance,thediastolic
PAPwilloverestimatethePCWPby2–3mmHg.In
thepresenceofincreasedpulmonaryvascularresis-
tance,thediastolicPAPwilloverestimatePCWPand
cannotbeusedasasubstitutemeasurement.
Limitations
There are major limitations to accurate measure-
ment and interpretation of intracardiac and PAPs.
Common errors include a failure to properly zero
the transducers, placement of the transducer at an
inappropriate level relative to the patient (trans-
ducer too low reports a spuriously high pressure),
catheterwhip,andcatheterdampening.
Determinationofmeanpressure
Monitor systems designate systolic, diastolic, and
meanpressuresastheaveragehighest,lowest,and
meanpressuresobtainedduringapresettimeinter-
val or a series of such intervals. The electronically
determined mean RAP and PCWP will be skewed
upwardbythepresenceoflargeVwaves.Thiswill
cause mean RAP or PCWP to overestimate ven-
tricular end-diastolic pressure. A device to provide
calibrated paper printout of pressure traces is use-
fulinanalysisofpressuretraces.Thesepapertraces
can be used for accurate determination of A- and
V-wave pressures as well as systolic and diastolic
PAP. The best estimate of ventricular end-diastolic
pressure will be the peak A-wave pressure. For
patientswithoutanatrialsystole,thebestestimate
ofventricularend-diastolicpressurewillbetheRAP
or PCWP at end diastole. This can be determined
byobtainingsimultaneousECGandRAPorPCWP
papertraces.End-diastolicpressureintheRAPtrace
isdeterminedatapointapproximately40msbefore
the start of upstroke of the QRS complex. End-
diastolic pressure in the PCWP trace is determined
attheQRSST-segmentjunction.
Changesinpleuralpressure
Transmural pressure, i.e. the pressure acting to
distend a heart chamber, is determined by the
pressure–volume relationship of the chamber.
Intracardiacpressures(suchasRAPandPCWP)are
equaltothetransmuralpressureplusthejuxtacar-
diacpressure.Transmuralandintracardiacpressure
willbeequalaslongasjuxtacardiacpressureiszero.
Pleural pressure is a major determinant of juxtac-
ardiac pressure. Pleural pressure will be negative
during spontaneous inspiration and positive dur-
ing controlled inspiration and forced exhalation.
Large ﬂuctuations in pleural pressure will cause
intracardiac pressure to over- and underestimate
transmural pressure and preload. Ideally, all intra-
cardiacpressuredeterminationsshouldbemadeat
passive end-expiration, when pleural pressure is
closetozero(atmosphericpressure).
If positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) is
added to the ventilation circuit, the juxtacardiac
pressure at end expiration may be greater than
atmospheric pressure; this will cause intracardiac
pressure to overestimate transmural pressure and
preload. How much a given quantity of PEEP
will elevate juxtacardiac pressure depends on the
relationshipoflungandthoraciccompliance.Under
normal circumstances, the juxtacardiac pressure is
expectedtorisebyapproximatelyonehalfthevalue
of the added PEEP. Thus, if 10cm H2O of PEEP is
added, the juxtacardiac pressure can be expected
toincreaseby5cmH 2O.Whenlungcomplianceis
high (emphysema) and thoracic compliance is low
(obesity),alargerproportionoftheaddedPEEPwill
be added to the juxtacardiac pressure. A smaller
proportionwillbeaddedincaseswherelungcom-
plianceispoor(acuterespiratorydistresssyndrome)
andthoraciccomplianceishigh(musclerelaxation).AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch03” — 2007/7/17 — 20:28 — page 55 — #14
Monitoring 55
Ventricularpreloadandpressure
measurements
Ventricular preload is deﬁned as the ventricu-
lar end-diastolic volume. Unfortunately, methods
of obtaining measurements of ventricular end-
diastolicvolumearenotpossibleinaclinicalenvi-
ronment. In the absence of tricuspid or mitral
stenosis,theAwaveoftheRAPandLAP(asmea-
sured by PCWP) traces are good estimates of the
rightandleftventricularend-diastolicpressures.If
we assume that the ventricular pressure–volume
relationship does not vary, then measurement of
ventricular end-diastolic pressure is as good an
assessment of preload as ventricular end-diastolic
volume.Unfortunately,theshapeoftheventricular
pressure–volume relationship is not linear. Fur-
thermore, changes in ventricular distensibility and
compliance alter the relationship between ventric-
ularpressureandvolume.Itisnotsurprising,then,
that changes in PCWP and LAP have been shown
to correlate poorly with changes in left ventricular
end-diastolicvolumeinboththepre-andpost-CPB
periods.
Thermodilutioncardiacoutput
determination
Thermodilution (TD) cardiac output is a modiﬁca-
tionoftheindicatordilutionmethodinwhichﬂow
isdeterminedfromthefollowingrelationship:
Knownamountofindicatorinjected
×time/measuredconcentrationofindicator
In the bolus TD method, the indicator is a crys-
talloid injectate (usually 5% dextrose in water or
isotonic saline) at a temperature lower than the
bloodtemperature.Bloodtemperatureismeasured
by a thermistor in the pulmonary artery. Crys-
talloid temperature is measured by separate ther-
mistor. A predetermined volume of crystalloid is
injected into the right atrium. Adequate mixing
of the crystalloid and blood occurs before passage
intothepulmonaryartery,andthechangeinblood
temperature over time after injection of the crys-
talloid is measured by the thermistor in the pul-
monaryartery.Cardiacoutputinlitersperminute
can be calculated with the aid of a computer and
theequation:
Cardiacoutput =V1 ×S1 ×C1 × (TB −T1)
×60/SB ×CB
∫
/Delta1TB(t)dt
where V1 is the volume of the injectate;S1 and
SB are the speciﬁc gravity of the indicator and the
blood,respectively; C1 and CB arethespeciﬁcheat
oftheindicatorandtheblood,respectively;and T1
andTB arethetemperatureoftheindicatorandthe
blood,respectively.( S1×C1)/(SB×CB) =1.08when
isotonicsalineor5%dextroseisinjected. /Delta1TB(t)dt
isthetemperature–timecurvemeasuredbythepul-
monary artery thermistor after indicator injection.∫
/Delta1TB(t)dt istheareaunderthetemperature–time
curve.
A computer extrapolates the exponential down
slope of the temperature–time curve to the base-
line and then determines the area under the
curve. With all variables thus known or mea-
suredthecomputersolvestheequationforcardiac
output.
Two recent modiﬁcations of the bolus TD tech-
niquedeserveattention:continuouscardiacoutput
(CCO) monitoring and RV ejection fraction (EF)
catheters.
The CCO technique makes use of a thermal ﬁl-
ament located between the 15- and 25-cm gra-
dations on the PAC. No injectate is necessary.
This ﬁlament infuses, on the average, 7.5W of
heat, heating the blood as it passes by. Although
warmed, the blood temperature always remains
below 44◦C. The resulting temperature change is
detecteddownstreaminthepulmonaryarteryand
cross-correlatedwiththeinputsequencetoproduce
a TD washout curve. This requires use of a signal
processingsystemwithanenhancedsignal-to-noise
ratiobecausethethermalinputislowrelativetothe
background PA thermal activity. The monitor dis-
playstheaveragecardiacoutputfromtheprevious
3–7minutes updated every 30seconds. In the Stat
mode,anewcardiacoutputcanbeobtainedevery
45–60seconds.Inthismode,fasttrendestimatesof
cardiac output can be obtained when an unstable
thermal signal is present. These catheters also can
be used to obtain standard bolus injectate cardiac
outputs.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch03” — 2007/7/17 — 20:28 — page 56 — #15
56 Chapter3
Clinical studies have demonstrated a close cor-
relationbetweenTDcardiacoutputdeterminations
madewiththebolusandCCOtechniquesinarel-
ativelystableICUenvironment.Amajoradvantage
oftheCCOtechniquewouldbetheabilitytomon-
itor acute changes in cardiac output (CO) as they
occurinrealtime.IntheStatmode,thesechanges
canbetrackedapproximatelyeveryminute;inthe
standard mode, changes are averaged over time
and show data more consistent with a trend over
time. In either mode, the changes in CCO lag
behind those seen with mixed venous saturation
monitoring.
Right ventricular ejection fraction (RVEF)
catheters are another modiﬁcation of the bolus
injectatecatheter.RVEFcathetersincorporate:
• a rapid response thermistor, which has a reac-
tiontimeof50mscomparedwiththe300–1000ms
responsetimeofstandardbolusinjectatePACs.
• a multi-hole injectate port located 21cm from
the catheter tip to ensure complete mixing of the
injectateintheRV.
• twoECGelectrodes,whichenablethecomputer
todetecttheRwave.
• Thisarrangementallowsbeat-to-beatdetermina-
tionofPAtemperaturechanges.Theinjectatemixes
and equilibrates with RV blood within two beats.
There is an exponential decrease in the amount
ofindicatorejectedwitheachsubsequentbeat.PA
concentrations of indicator for each beat are equal
to the RV end-diastolic concentration of indicator
for that beat. This produces a series of diastolic
temperatureplateausthatareidentiﬁedbythecom-
puter.TheRVEFiscalculatedasfollowsfromthree
diastolicplateaususingtheequation:
EF =1 −RFmean
where
RFmean = (RF1 −RF2)/2
RF1 = (T2 −TB)/(T1 −TB)
RF2 = (T3 −TB)/(T2 −TB)
whereT1,temperatureatﬁrstdiastolicplateau; T2,
temperature at second diastolic plateau;T3, tem-
perature at third diastolic plateau; andTB, blood
temperature.
• Stroke volume (SV), right ventricular end-
diastolic volume (RVEDV), and right ventricular
end-systolic volume (RVESV) are calculated as
follows:
SV =CO/HR
RVEDV =SV/EF
RVESV =RVEDV −SV
ThenormalRVEF =0.4.Goodcorrelationsbetween
PACdeterminedRVEFandradionuclidedetermined
RVEFhavebeenreported.
• Several points regarding TD CO techniques
(bolus,RVEF,andCCO)areworthemphasizing:
a TD CO is a measure of pulmonary blood ﬂow,
which in the absence of shunting (both intracar-
diacandsystemictopulmonaryartery),isequalto
forwardrightheartoutput.
b Cardiac output is inversely proportional to the
areaunderthepulmonaryarterytemperaturetime
curve.
c TherearelargecyclicalvariationsintheTDdeter-
mination of cardiac output during the different
phases of mechanical ventilation. This seems to be
duetocyclicvariationsinpulmonarybloodﬂowand
temperature. For this reason, bolus measurements
obtainedatrandomduringtheventilatorycyclewill
exhibit a great deal of variability, whereas those
obtained during the same phase of the ventilatory
cycle will have the greatest reproducibility. It has
beendemonstratedthatmultiplecardiacoutputval-
ues obtained at end expiration or peak inspiration
inventilatedpatientshavehighreproducibility.The
highestmeasuredTDCOoccursatpeakinspiration,
whereasthelowestoccursatendexpiration.Tripli-
cateTDCOdeterminationsarecommonlymadeat
end-expirationbecauseend-expirationistheeasiest
phase of respiration to detect clinically. This prac-
tice provides excellent reproducibility but tends to
underestimatetheaveragecardiacoutputoverone
fullcycleofmechanicalventilation.
d Injectatetemperaturesfrom0 ◦Ctoroomtemper-
atureareused.Thelowertemperaturesareobtained
byplacingtheinjectateinanicebath.Theaccuracy
and variability of TD CO in adults is similar with
either10mLofroomtemperatureoricedinjectate.
Sinus bradycardia and atrial ﬁbrillation have beenAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch03” — 2007/7/17 — 20:28 — page 57 — #16
Monitoring 57
reportedinconjunctionwithicedinjectateforcar-
diacoutputdetermination.Theslowingofthesinus
rateislikelyduetocoolingofthesinusnode.
• TD cardiac output is inaccurate in the
presenceof:
a Low cardiac outputs. Cardiac output is overesti-
matedbecauselowﬂowallowsthecoldinjectateto
warmandreducestheareaundertheTDcurve.
b Left-to-right intracardiac shunts (atrial septal
defect,ventricularseptaldefect).Computeranalysis
of the temperature–time curve often is not possi-
ble due to recirculation of indicator (cold water)
through the pulmonary vasculature, which results
in interruption of the exponential downslope of
the temperature–time curve with a prolonged, ﬂat
deﬂection.Thelargertheshunt,theearliertherecir-
culation curve interrupts the normal downslope.
Manualplanimetryhasbeenusedtodeterminethe
area under the two portions of these curves. The
ratio of the area under the terminal deﬂection of
the curve to the area under the entire curve has
beenshowntobeanaccurateestimateoftheratio
ofpulmonarytosystemicbloodﬂow.
c Tricuspid regurgitation. Regurgitation of a frac-
tionofthecoldinjectateresultsindelayedclearance
of the indicator from the right heart. This causes
the TD curve to be broad and of low amplitude,
which results in inaccurate assessment of forward
cardiac output. In the presence of TR TD cardiac
output tends to underestimate true cardiac output
athighcardiacoutputsandtooverestimateitatlow
cardiac outputs. Similar problems are encountered
withCCOcatheters.
d Rapid infusion of volume via peripheral IV
catheters. Abrupt increases in the infusion rate of
IV solutions within 20seconds of a bolus TD CO
determination have been shown to result in vari-
ations of up to 80% in TD CO. The precise timing
of the infusion rate increase relative to the TD CO
measurement determines whether the output will
be an over- or underestimate. It is recommended
that volume infusions be terminated or held at a
constantrateforatleast30secondsbeforeaTDCO
determination. Likewise, rapid infusions of cold IV
solutionsaffecttheaccuracyofCCOcatheters.
TheaccuracyofbolusTDCOdeterminationsinthe
period immediately following termination of CPB
is questionable. Bolus TD COs have been shown
to underestimate true cardiac output by approx-
imately 0.5L/min in the ﬁrst 10minutes after
termination of CPBdue to a downward drift of
the temperature baseline in the pulmonary artery.
Another source of bolus TD CO error in the ﬁrst
30minutesafterterminationofCPBisthepresence
ofrespiratoryvariationsorthermalnoiseinthepul-
monary artery blood temperature. These thermal
variations in pulmonary artery blood temperature
may cause large variations in the bolus TD CO
determinations made at the various points in the
respiratorycycle.Thisproblemcanbeminimizedby
measuringbolusTDCOatthesamepointintheres-
piratory cycle or eliminated by holding ventilation
duringbolusTDCOdetermination.
Similar considerations may exist for the CCO
technique.Intheory,thedataprocessingoftheCCO
systemshouldminimizetheeffectsofbaselinetem-
perature shift and of thermal noise and improve
performance. There is a poor correlation between
bolus TD CO and CCO during the ﬁrst 45 minutes
afterterminationofCPB.The“stat”modeshouldbe
usedduringthisinterval.
Continuousmixedvenousoxygen
saturation(SvO2)monitoring
SvO2 monitoring is available with some PACs. The
SvO2 ismeasuredinthemainpulmonaryarteryby
oximetry. The main pulmonary artery is the loca-
tion of the most reliable site of true mixed venous
(SVC,IVC,andcoronarysinus)blood.Ininfantsand
childrenwhereSVCsaturationisusedasasurrogate
for mixed venous saturation surgically placed oxi-
metricSVCcatheterscanbeused.Ineithercase,the
SvO2 is used to determine total tissue oxygen bal-
ance. It will not reﬂect regional oxygen imbalance
(Table3.1).Severaldeﬁnitionsareinorder:
• Oxygen (O2) delivery (DO2) = cardiac output
(CO) ×O2 content.
• Arterial oxygen content (CaO2) = (hemoglobin
(Hgb) ×13.8)(SaO2) +(0.003 ×PaO2).
• Mixedvenousoxygencontent(Cv O2) =(Hgb ×
13.8)(SvO2) +(0.003 ×PvO2).
• Oxygenconsumption(V O2) =themetabolicrate
or the amount of oxygen consumed by the body.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch03” — 2007/7/17 — 20:28 — page 58 — #17
58 Chapter3
Table3.1 Limitationsofmixedvenousoxygen
saturationmonitoring.(FromMarxG,ReinhardK. Curr
OpinCritCare 2006;12:263–8,withpermission.)
SvO2 level Consequences
SvO2 > 75% Normal extraction;
O2 supply > O2 demand
75% > SvO2 > 50% Compensatory extraction;
increasing O2 demand or
decreasing O2 supply
50% > SvO2 > 30% Exhaustion ofextraction;
beginning oflactic acidosis;
O2 supply < O2 demand
30% > SvO2 > 25% Severe lactic acidosis
SvO2 < 25% Cellular death
Thisisequaltotheamountofoxygendeliveredsys-
temically(CO)(Ca O2)minustheamountofoxygen
returnedtotheheart(CO)(Cv O2).
• If we ignore the small dissolved component of
oxygeninarterial(0.003 ×PaO2)andvenousblood
(0.003 ×PvO2)then(CO)(Ca O2) −(CO)(CvO2) =
[(Hgb ×13.8)(SaO2)(CO)] −[(Hgb ×13.8)(SvO2)
(CO)] =(Hgb ×13.8)(CO) ×(SaO2 −SvO2).
Thisissimpliﬁedto:
SvO2 =SaO2 −[VO2/(Hgb × 13.8)(CO)]
Thus,mixedvenousoxygensaturationasmeasured
continuously by a mixed venous saturation PAC
varies directly with CO, Hgb, and SaO2 and varies
inversely with VO2.I fS aO2, Hgb, and VO2 remain
constant,thenSv O2 willdirectlyreﬂectchangesin
CO. Under these circumstances, continuous mea-
surementofSv O2 isanalogoustoacontinuousCO
measurement. The response time of SvO2 to acute
changes in CO under conditions of constant SaO2,
Hgb, and VO2 has been demonstrated to be more
rapidthanCCOmeasurements.Thisisareliableand
sensitiveindicatoroffunctioninthecardiacsurgical
patient.
A normal SvO2 is 75%, which corresponds to
a mixed venous PO2 of 40–45mmHg. SvO2 is
a reﬂection of the adequacy of systemic oxygen
delivery. A reduced SvO2 indicates inadequate
systemic oxygen delivery and increased peripheral
oxygen extraction and should prompt an evalu-
ation of SaO2, Hgb, VO2, and CO. Similarly, a
low CO in the setting of a normal SvO2 indicates
that systemic oxygen delivery is adequate to meet
present metabolic needs and that, in reality, the
COisnotlowforthemetabolicdemand.Although
a high CO is reassuring, it does not guarantee
adequate systemic oxygen delivery under condi-
tions of reduced Hgb and SaO2 or increased VO2.
AS vO2 measurement allows this determination to
bemade.
Hemodynamicproﬁles
The information obtained from a PAC can be used
in conjunction with arterial blood pressure moni-
toringtoobtainanumberofderivedhemodynamic
parameters.Themostcommonlyusedparameters,
their formula, and their units of measurement are
giveninTable3.2.
Efﬁcacyandcomplicationsof
pulmonaryarterycatheterization
Remarkably, demonstrating the efﬁcacy of pul-
monaryarterycatheterizationisdifﬁcult.Thereare
severalstudiesindicatingthatPACisnotassociated
withimprovedoutcome.Unfortunately,eachstudy
carries certain limitations making a broad recom-
mendation against use in speciﬁc patient popula-
tions impossible. Published guidelines for PAC use
indicatethatPACriskandbeneﬁtmustbeweighed
ineachpatientinviewofthespeciﬁcpatientchar-
acteristics, intended surgical procedure, and the
practice setting. PACs are indicated in patients at
increasedriskofhemodynamicdisturbance,clinical
evidenceofcardiovasculardisease,pulmonarydys-
function,hypoxia,renalinsufﬁciency,orothercon-
ditions associated with hemodynamic instability.
Surgical procedures associated with increased risk
includethosewithanticipatedhemodynamicinsta-
bility, damage to the heart, vascular tree, kidneys,
liverorbrain.ThedecisiontouseaPACshouldbe
basedupontheindividualhemodynamicriskchar-
acteristicsoftheindividualcaseratherthanthetypeAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch03” — 2007/7/17 — 20:28 — page 59 — #18
Monitoring 59
Table3.2 Hemodynamicparameters,
derivation,andmeasurement.
(FromDiNardoJA.Monitoring.In:
DiNardoJA(ed). AnesthesiaforCardiac
Surgery,2ndedn.Stamford,CT:
Appleton&Lange,1998:37–80,with
permission.)
Formula Units Normalvalue
SV = CO/HR × 1000 mL/beat 60–90
SI = SV/BSA mL/b/m 2 40–60
LVSWI = [1.36 × (MAP − PCWP)/100] × SI [g-m/m 2]/beat 45–60
RVSWI = [1.36 × (PAP − CVP)/100] × SI [g-m/m 2]/beat 5–10
SVR = (MAP − CVP/CO) × 80 dynes s/cm 5 900–1500
PVR = (PAP − PCWP/CO) × 80 dynes s/cm 5 50–150
BSA, body surface area; CO, cardiac output; CVP, central venous pressure;
HR, heart rate; LVSWI, left ventricular stroke work index; MAP, mean arterial
blood pressure; PAP, pulmonary artery; PCWP, pulmonary capillary wedge pres-
sure; PVR, pulmonary venous return; RVSWI, right ventricular stroke work index;
SI, stroke index; SV, stroke volume, SVR, systemic vascular resistance.
of procedure. Finally, PAC use may be indicated
for postoperative management depending upon
the practice setting which should consider factors
suchastechnicalsupportandnursingtrainingand
skills.
PAC insertion carries all the risks of central line
placement.Therecanbearterialinjury,pneumoth-
orax, arrhythmias, pulmonary artery hemorrhage,
thromboembolism, sepsis, and endocardial dam-
age.Inaddition,theremaybemisinterpretationof
informationresultingininappropriatepatientcare.
Finally,unnecessaryPACplacementisexpensive.
Theincidenceofcatheter-inducedtransientpre-
mature ventricular contractions (PVCs) during
advancement of PACs is approximately 65%;
whereas, the incidence of persistent PVCs during
catheteradvancementisonlyapproximately3.0%.
These persistent PVCs are generally self-limited.
Removalofthecatheternearlyalwaysstopstheper-
sistent PVCs. If persistent, pharmacologic therapy
withlidocaine(1.0–1.5mg/kg)maysuppressthese
PVCs. The prophylactic use of lidocaine does
not reduce the incidence of these benign, tran-
sient catheter-induced PVCS. The incidence of
catheter-induced right bundle branch block is less
than 0.05%. Although frequently mentioned, the
risk of complete heart block in a patient with a
pre-existingleftbundlebranchblockisrare.Ifcon-
cerned about arrhythmias, the PAC can be ﬂoated
afterthesternumandpericardiumareopenedand
directaccesstotheheartobtained.
The incidence of pulmonary artery rupture, a
potentially lethal complication, is less than 0.07%.
The risk of pulmonary artery rupture is increased
byanticoagulation,pulmonaryhypertension,distal
catheterplacement,andeccentricballooninﬂation.
Pulmonaryinfarctionisrare( <0.07%)andcanbe
avoidedbypreventingthecatheterfromremaining
in a continuous wedge position. Placement of pul-
monarycathetershasresultedindirecttricuspidand
pulmonaryvalvulardamageaswellastricuspidand
pulmonaryvalvularendocarditis.
Transesophagealechocardiography
Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) is an
intraoperative diagnostic and monitoring modal-
ity with wide use among cardiovascular anesthesi-
ologists. The esophagus lies in direct proximity to
theheartandgreatvesselsallowingextraordinarily
clear imaging windows. Furthermore, TEE allows
intraoperative use without disrupting the surgical
procedure. It is a valuable tool in the ICU and in
theevaluationoftraumaorotherhemodynamically
unstable or poorly responsive patients. Every car-
diovascularanesthesiologistshouldbefamiliarwith
the basic applications, advantages, and limitations
ofTEE.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch03” — 2007/7/17 — 20:28 — page 60 — #19
60 Chapter3
(a) (b) (c)
Fig.3.10 Generationoflongitudinalultrasound
wavefrontproduction.(a)Singlesmallelement.
(b)Multiplesmallelements(phasedarray).(c)Single
largeelement.Theultrasoundwavestravelincircular
fashionawayfromasingleelement.Transesophageal
echocardiography(TEE)imagingtypicallyemploys
phasedarrayultrasoundwavegeneration.(From
FeigenbaumH. Echocardiography,5thedn.Philadelphia:
Lea&Febiger(LippincottWilliams&Wilkins),1994:4,
withpermission.)
Basicsofultrasound
Ultrasound is deﬁned as sound waves above the
audiblerangeinhumans(above20000cycles/s).In
echocardiographicequipment,piezoelectriccrystals
in the distal transducer head generate and receive
the ultrasound waves (Fig. 3.10a–c). A high fre-
quency electrical current is applied to the crystal
causingvibrationandsoundwaveformation.Asthe
generatedsoundwavespassthroughtissue,theyare
either absorbed, reﬂected, refracted, or scattered.
The degree of ultrasound wave reﬂection (return
to the transducer) is enhanced when the struc-
ture of interest is perpendicular to the ultrasound
wave. In order to identify two contiguous struc-
tures, there must be a difference in density and
impedancebetweenthemalteringbeamabsorption,
reﬂection,refractionandscattering.
Thefrequencyoftheultrasoundwavesproduced
by the piezoelectric crystals is important. Recall
thatwavelengthequalsvelocity( V)dividedbyfre-
quency (F): 1 = V /F. Because ultrasound travels
at1540m/sthroughsofttissue,thereisaconstant
relationshipbetweenfrequencyandwavelength.As
the frequency of the vibrations of the piezoelectric
crystalsincreases,thelengthofthewavesproduced
decreases.Asmallerwavelengthsignalallowsbetter
imageresolutionbutispronetogreatersignalatten-
uationwithincreasingdistancefromthetransducer.
Likewise, greater wavelength will reduce resolu-
tion,butwillenhancevisualizationofstructuresat
greaterdepthfromthetransducer.
Whenthepiezoelectriccrystalreceivesareﬂected
sound wave, it vibrates and generates an electrical
signal.Becausethewavelength,thefrequency,and
the speed of the transmitted and reﬂected waves
are known, the time it takes for the signal to be
transmittedandreﬂectedbackcanbeusedtodeter-
minethedepthofthereﬂectingobject(remember,
ultrasound travels at a constant 1540m/s through
soft tissue). With proper ampliﬁcation and pro-
cessing, these signals are converted to display the
real-timereﬂectedwaveactivity(theimage).
Doppler echocardiography is based on the
Dopplerprinciple,whichstatesthatwhenawaveof
agivenfrequencystrikesamovingtargetitwillbe
reﬂectedwithafrequencyshiftproportionaltothe
velocityofthetargetparalleltothepathoftheemit-
tedwave.Ifthetargetismovingtowardtheemitted
wave,thefrequencyofthereturningreﬂectedwave
will be higher. If the target is moving away from
the emitted wave, the frequency of the reﬂected
returningwavewillbelower.Redbloodcellmassis
anexcellentreﬂectorintheheartandvascularsys-
tem. Measuring the red blood cell ﬂow velocity in
the heart is the application of Doppler technology
in echocardiography. The Doppler principle, when
usedtocalculatethevelocityofredbloodcellmass,
canbesummarizedinthefollowingequation:
V =cfd/2focos θ
where V, velocity of red cells;c, speed of sound in
tissue(1540m/s); fd,shiftedorDopplerfrequency;
fo,transmittedfrequency; θ,theangleofincidence
between the transmitted wave and the velocity
vectorbeinginterrogated.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch03” — 2007/7/17 — 20:28 — page 61 — #20
Monitoring 61
Recall that cosine 90◦ and cosine 270◦ = 0,
the cosine 0◦ = 1 and cosine of 180◦ =− 1;
therefore, detection of velocity is most accurate
when the transmitted beam and the velocity vec-
tor are parallel (cosine 0◦ and 180◦). The detec-
tionofvelocityisimpossiblewhenthetransmitted
beam and the velocity vector are perpendicular
(cosine 90◦ and 270◦). In practice, aligning the
Doppler beam and the velocity vector within 20◦
producesacceptableresults(6%underestimationof
velocity).Byconvention,ﬂowawayfromthetrans-
ducer (cosine 180◦) has a negative value and ﬂow
toward the transducer (cosine 0◦) has a positive
value.
M-modeechocardiography
M-mode echocardiography is the simplest echo-
cardiographicimagingtechnique.Ultrasonicwaves
of known frequency and wavelength are trans-
mitted in a single beam path and recorded over
time. This provides a linear (“ice pick”) view of
theimagingsectorthroughwhichthebeampasses
(Fig. 3.11). M-mode is used in conjunction with
two-dimensional(2-D)imagingandthecursorline
isusedtodirectthebeampaththroughthedesired
area.Thereﬂectedwavesaredisplayedinrealtime
as a time-motion study. The vertical axis displays
the distance and intensity of the reﬂected from
Fig.3.11 M-modeimagethroughtheleftventricle
withameasurementoffractionalshortening(FS).
Theleftventricularinternaldimensionismeasured
inbothsystole(LVIDs)anddiastole(LVIDd).The
FS =LVIDd–LVIDs/LVIDd.Normalis0.25–0.45.
the transducer, and time is on the horizontal axis.
Blood-ﬁlled chambers with little or no reﬂected
waveactivityappearblack,whereasvalvetissueand
myocardiumwithhighwavereﬂectivityaregrayor
white.
Ultrasound waves through a single beam path
are transmitted and received in 0.001seconds. As
a result, the display is a real-time repetitive dis-
play of cardiac activity along this single beam line
at 1000frames/see. This M-mode feature allows
very high-resolution images of moving cardiac
structures.
Two-dimensional(2-D)echocardiography
Two-dimensionalimagingisthedisplayofreﬂected
imagesobtainedfortransmissionofwavesnotalong
a single beam line but across a multiple beam line
sector.Thissectorusuallyis60–90 ◦wide(Fig.3.12).
Sector scanning is accomplished most frequently
by use of a phased-array technology. In 2-D imag-
ing, a set of piezoelectric crystals are activated in
phased sequences to create a single beam through
a deﬁned sector. An analogy may help: For M-
mode, imagine a man holding a ﬂashlight in one
position, looking at one object; in 2-D, imagine
the same man moving the ﬂashlight beam back
and forth across the horizon and putting the com-
bined images together to create a picture of the
objects in the night. The resulting sector sweep in
Fig.3.12 Two-dimensional(2-D)mid-esophagealfour
chamberviewoftheheart.Thereisleftventricularseptal
hypertrophy.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch03” — 2007/7/17 — 20:28 — page 62 — #21
62 Chapter3
2-D contains approximately 100 single scan lines.
The computer assembles these scan lines and dis-
playstheprocessedinformationastheechocardio-
graphicimage.Obviously,obtaining100scanlines
is more time consuming than obtaining one scan
line, as in M mode (hence, diminished spatial res-
olution).Two-dimensionalimagesarepresentedin
realtimewiththesectorscanupdated30–60times/s
asopposedtothe1000times/sofMmode.Aswith
M mode, distance of the reﬂected wave from the
transducer is displayed from the top of the scan
downandthedisplayedbrightnessofthereﬂected
waveisproportionaltoitsamplitude.
Pulsed-wave(PW)Doppler
PW Doppler analyzes frequency shifts in a time-
gatedmanner.Thetransducerintermittentlytrans-
mits and then waits a speciﬁed time (t) to receive
reﬂected ultrasonic signals. This pulse and receive
pattern allows depth localization because the dis-
tanceofthereﬂectingobjectfromthetransduceris
deﬁnedby:
d =ct/2
where d, distance of the reﬂecting object from the
transducer; c, 1540m/s; t, time between emission
andreceptionofsignal.
In practice, the PW Doppler cursor and sample
volume are positioned on an updated 2-D image.
After the Doppler cursor and sample volume are
positioned,onlyreﬂectedsignalsfromthatposition
are analyzed (Fig. 3.13). The sample volume also
canbeselected(usuallyfrom2to6mm).Thisallows
theinterrogatedareatobeexpandedorcontracted.
Dataaredisplayedasspectra,whichareareal-time
presentationofvelocityovertime.
There are limitations with PW Doppler. In order
toreliablydetectthefrequencyshift(andhencethe
velocity) of a reﬂecting object, the reﬂected ultra-
sound wave must be sampled at a frequency at
leasttwicethatoftheobject(Nyquistcriterion).The
samplingfrequencyofPWDoppleristhepulserepe-
titionfrequency(PRF).Thus,themaximaldetected
velocityforagivenPRFisPFR/2.ThisistheNyquist
limit. Thus, the maximum velocity that can be
detectedislimited.Anadditionalproblemisthatthe
Fig.3.13 PulsewaveDoppleratthedistaltipsofthe
mitralvalvedemonstratinganEandAwave.
PRF must decrease as the distance from the trans-
ducertothesamplingsiteincreases.Thismustoccur
becauseittakeslongerfortheemittedwavetoreach
the increased depth and for the reﬂected wave to
return.
Exceeding the Nyquist limit causes aliasing or
wraparound. The signal literally wraps around the
velocityscaleintheotherdirection.Itthenbecomes
difﬁcultorimpossibletodetermineredcellvelocity
ordirection.Thetrade-offisunambiguousdistance
information but ambiguous velocity and direc-
tion information. An analogy may help: recall old
Westernmoviesinwhichthewagonwheelsappear
to be rotating backwards as the wagon moves for-
ward. This is due to the frame capture rate of the
ﬁlmasthespokesonthewagonwheelturn.Appro-
priate ﬁlm capture (altering the PRF) will capture
theforwardprogressionofthespokesallowingthe
imagetoportraythereality.Therearetwostrategies
todealwithaliasingduringPWDopplerinterroga-
tion.Theﬁrstistoincreasetheavailablescale.The
second is to shift the baseline. If wraparound still
occurs,thencontinuous-wave(CW)Dopplermust
beusedtodeterminepeakvelocityanddirection.
PWDopplerisusefulformeasuringlowvelocities
atveryspeciﬁclocationssuchasmitralandtricuspid
inﬂoworinthepulmonaryandhepaticveins.
Continuous-waveDoppler
InCWDoppler,onetransducercontinuouslyemits
signals and a separate transducer continuouslyAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch03” — 2007/7/17 — 20:28 — page 63 — #22
Monitoring 63
receivesreﬂectedsignals.Thesetransducersarenot
the same ones used to obtain 2-D images. This
arrangement allows reliable measurement of very
high velocities because there is no lag between
emission and reception of signals. In other words,
the PRF is extremely high. Because reﬂected sig-
nals returning from all points along the Doppler
beam are recorded, the location of returning sig-
nalsisambiguous.Inaddition,lowervelocitysignals
areburiedinthehighervelocitysignals.Therefore,
CW Doppler provides unambiguous peak velocity
and direction information but ambiguous distance
information.
In practice, the CW Doppler cursor is positioned
on an updated 2-D image just like PW except that
there is no sample volume. A spectrum of data is
displayed demonstrating a real time presentation
of object velocity over time. CW Doppler is use-
fulformeasuringhighvelocitiessuchasthoseseen
withaorticstenosis(Fig.3.14)orwithintracardiac
shunts. With the baseline shifted, velocities up to
600–800cm/sareobtainable.
Color-ﬂowDoppler
Color-ﬂow CF Doppler is a modiﬁcation of PW
Doppler called multigated PW Doppler. Sampling
of object velocity occurs at several locations along
many lines in a sector. The sample volumes are
Fig.3.14 ContinuouswaveDoppleracrosstheaortic
valveinthedeeptransgastriclong-axisview.Thepeak
velocityisapproximately3m/syieldingapeakgradient
of36mmHg.
called packets. The average velocity and direction
for the spectra in a sample volume are deter-
minedandassignedapredeterminedcolor.Gener-
ally,8–16samplesperframedeterminetheaverage
object velocity. The set of velocities that are aver-
agedinasamplevolumeforasingleframeiscalled
apacketorpacketsize.Objectvelocitiesareassigned
speciﬁccolors.ApopularpresentationisBART(blue
away,redtoward).Inthisscheme,velocitiestoward
thetransducerareredandthoseawayareblue.As
velocity increases, the intensity of color increases
as well. The CF Doppler image is presented in real
timeasasectordisplayedoverareal-time2-Dimage
(Fig.3.15).
CF Doppler has some of the same limitations as
PW Doppler. There is no position ambiguity, but
the peak velocity is limited and decreases with the
distance from the transducer. Aliasing occurs and
is presented as a color mosaic. Because the color
image is presented over the real-time 2-D image,
the direction of the aliased signal can be deter-
mined easily. This is an obvious advantage when
comparingCFtoPWDoppler.Becausetheaverag-
ingprocesslosesvaluablespectraldata,CFDoppler
is useful for detection of abnormal ﬂows and the
directionandspatialextentoftheseﬂows.Reliable
determinationofpeakvelocitiesrequiresPWorCW
Dopplerspectralanalysis.
Fig.3.15 Thiscolorcompareimageshowsthe
two-dimensional(2-D)imageontheleftandthe
color-ﬂowDopplerimageontheright.Thereisa
centraljetofmitralregurgitationthatissevere.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch03” — 2007/7/17 — 20:28 — page 64 — #23
64 Chapter3
0%
20%
60%
A
B
50% accuracy 94% accuracy
Fig.3.16 Theangleofinterrogationhasagreatimpact
ontheaccuracyofDopplermeasurement.(From
ObeidAI. EchocardiographyinClinicalPractice .
Philadelphia:LippincottWilliams&Wilkins,1992,
withpermission.)
Dopplerspectrameasurements
As discussed previously, Doppler spectra represent
objectvelocitydataovertime.Velocitiestowardthe
transducer are presented above the zero velocity
line or baseline and are assigned positive values.
Velocities away from the transducer are presented
below the zero line or baseline and are assigned
negative values. Accurate Doppler measurements
are dependent on the Doppler beam being paral-
lel (or within 20◦ of parallel) to the interrogated
ﬂow(Fig.3.16).SeveralimportantDopplerspectra
measurementsarediscussedbelow.
Pressuregradients
Avelocitymeasurement(m/s)canbeconvertedto
a pressure gradient (mmHg) using a modiﬁcation
of the Bernoulli equation 4V2 where V = velocity
in meters per second. Peak instantaneous pressure
gradients are determined by identifying the peak
velocity (Max V) of the desired Doppler spectra
and using the equation 4V2. In practice, machine
software will calculate the peak pressure gradient
usingapeakvelocityidentiﬁedbytheoperator(see
Fig.3.14).Peakinstantaneousgradientsarealways
greaterthanthepeak-to-peakgradientsdetermined
atcatheterization.
Velocity–timeintegral
Velocity–time integral (VTI) is determined by trac-
ing(planimetry)theentireDopplerspectraoverthe
desiredportionofthecardiaccycle(systoleordias-
tole). Machine software integrates the area under
thetracedspectratodetermineVTIincentimeters.
VTIcanbeusedtodeterminethemeangradient,the
strokevolume,andoriﬁceareausingthecontinuity
equation.
Mean velocity (cm/s) is determined by the
machine software by dividing the VTI (cm) by the
duration of ﬂow (seconds). Mean velocity cannot
be used to calculate the mean gradient because
the mean gradient is actually the average of mul-
tiple instantaneous gradients within the VTI trace.
Machine software determines, totals, and averages
theseindividualpressuregradientstodeterminethe
meangradient.
Strokevolumeandcardiacoutputaredetermined
using the VTI as follows. The VTI can be used to
determinestrokevolume(cm 3)bymultiplyingthe
VTI (cm) obtained at a given location by the area
ofthelocation(cm 2).Cardiacoutputisthenstroke
volumemultipliedbyheartrate(HR).Thisdetermi-
nationcanbedoneinthemainpulmonaryartery,
intherightventricularoutﬂowtract(RVOT),atthe
mitralvalveannulus,intheleftventricularoutﬂow
tract(LVOT),orattheleveloftheaorticvalve.The
feasibilitydependsontwofactors:
• obtainingaDopplerspectrafromthedesiredarea
with the Doppler beam within 20◦ of parallel to
bloodﬂow,and
• obtaining an accurate measure of the area from
whichtheDopplersamplewasobtained.
Diameter(D)iseasilymeasuredwithultrasoundcan
beconvertedtoareausingtheequation:
Area = π(r)2 = π(D/2)2 =0.785(D)2
Alternatively,adirectmeasurementofareacanbe
obtainedusingplanimetry.
The continuity equation makes use of the VTI
to calculate valve areas. The conservation of mass
demandsthatastrokevolumeremainequalimme-
diately upstream and downstream of a stenotic
valve.Althoughthevelocitiesmaybedifferent,the
massofejectedbloodmustbethesame.Thus,
(A1) × (VTII) = (A2) × (VTI2)
where A1, area of region 1;A2, area of region 2;
VTI1,VTIfromarea1;VTI 2,VTIfromarea2.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch03” — 2007/7/17 — 20:28 — page 65 — #24
Monitoring 65
The concept can be extended to state that the
ﬂows across all valves in the heart must be equal,
but this is true only in the absence of regurgitant
lesions or shunts. Thus, in theory, the continuity
equation could be used to determine aortic valve
area using mitral valve or pulmonary artery ﬂows
orviceversa.
Decelerationtime,accelerationtime,
pressurehalf-time
Deceleration time (D1) is the time it takes (ms)
for the peak velocity of a Doppler spectra to fall
to the zero baseline (Fig. 3.17). In instances in
which the zero baseline is not reached, the natu-
ral slope of the Doppler spectra is extended to the
baseline.
Theaccelerationtime(A1)isthetimeittakes(ms)
fortheDopplerspectratoreachpeakvelocityfrom
thezerobaseline.
The pressure half-time (PHT) is the time it takes
(ms) for the peak velocity gradient of a Doppler
spectra to decrease by one-half. In other words, it
is the time it takes for the peak velocity to decline
tothepeakvelocitydividedby √2.Inaddition,the
PHT (ms) is always 0.29×DT. The PHT is impor-
tantbecauseitcanbeusedtocalculatemitralvalve
area (MVA) over a wide range of values using the
formula:MVA =220/PHT.
TEEprobes
TEE probes consist of an echocardiographic trans-
ducer or combination of transducers ﬁtted to the
distal, ﬂexible end of a gastroscope. The trans-
ducer consists of an array of piezoelectric crys-
tals. Most current adult TEE transducers have a
64-crystal element, whereas pediatric probes have
a 48-crystal element. Adult TEE transducers gen-
erally operate at 5MHz, whereas pediatric probes
operate at 7.5MHz. Some adult TEE probes pos-
sess frequency agility or the ability to function
at 3.7 and 5MHz, whereas some pediatric probes
can function at 7.5 and 5.5MHz. The higher fre-
quencytransducerscanbeusedwithoutsigniﬁcant
signal attenuation because of the proximity of the
transducer to the heart. TEE probes allow 2-D,
M-mode,PWDoppler,CWDoppler,andCFDoppler
imagining.
Hand controls allow ﬂexion of the transducer
both side to side and anterior and posterior. These
controlsallow70 ◦ oflateralmobilityineachdirec-
tion (right and left) and 90◦ of anteﬂexion and
retroﬂexion(Fig.3.18).Presently,therearesingle-
plane, biplane, and multiplane adult TEE probes
available.Pediatricsingleplaneandbiplaneprobes
can be used for neonates and infants as small as
2–3kg. With care, adult probes can be used for
childrenassmallas15–20kg.
Fig.3.17 SchematicofaCWDoppler
spectraacrossastenoticmitralvalve.The
velocity–timeintegral(VTI)istheshaded
areainsidethespectra.Thevalues
calculatedfromtheVTIareshowninthe
upperlefthandcorner.Thedeceleration
timeisobtainedbyextendingtheslopeof
thespectratothezerobaseline.The
pressurehalftime(PHT)canbe
determinedbycalculating V2 and
measuringthetimebetween V1 andV2.
ThevaluescalculatedfromtheDTare
showninthebottomrightcorner.DT,
decelerationtime;MVA,mitralvalvearea.
(FromDiNardoJA.Monitoring.In:
DiNardoJA(ed). AnesthesiaforCardiac
Surgery,2ndedn.Stamford,CT:
Appleton&Lange,1998:37–80,with
permission.)
Max V = 250 cm/s
Mean V = 185 cm/s
VTI = 200 cm
Max PG = 25 mmHg
Mean PG = 13.7 mmHg
DT
DT = 600 ms
PHT = 174 ms
MVA = 1.26 cm2
PHT
0
−100
− 200
−300
V2
V1AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch03” — 2007/7/17 — 20:28 — page 66 — #25
66 Chapter3
Turn to
the left
Advance
Turn to
the right
Withdraw
Anterior Posterior
Anteflex Retroflex
Right Left
Flex to
the left
Flex to
the right
0°
90°
180°
Rotate
forward Rotate
back
Fig.3.18 Movementofthetransesophageal
echocardiography(TEE)probeallowsextensive
sectioningandimagingoftheheartinatwo-dimensional
(2-D)plane.(FromShanewiseJS,CheungAT,
AronsonS, etal. AnesthAnalg 1999;89:870–84,with
permission.)
Single-planeprobeshaveasingletransducerthat
transmits and receives ultrasonic signals in the
0◦ plane (transverse or horizontal plane). Biplane
probes have two transducers mounted one above
the other. One transducer transmits and receives
ultrasonic signals in the 0◦ plane and the other
transmitsandreceivesultrasonicsignalsinthe90 ◦
(longitudinal or sagittal) plane. Changing planes
requiresswitchingfromonetransducertotheother.
Becausethetransducersareatdifferentlevels,sub-
tle(1.0–1.5cm)advancementorwithdrawalofthe
probe is necessary after transducers are switched
to ensure imaging at the same anatomic level.
Multiplane (omniplane) probes have the ability to
transmitandreceiveultrasonicsignalsinanyplane
from 0 to 180◦. These probes use either mechan-
ical rotation or phased-array activation (varying
sequentialactivationofthepiezoelectriccrystalsin
thetransducer)ofasingletransducertoaccomplish
this.Activationofmultiplanecapabilityisobtained
withaswitchonthehandleoftheprobe.
InsertionoftheTEEprobe
InsertionoftheTEEprobeintheanesthetizedadult
orpediatricpatientwithanendotrachealtube(ET)
inplaceisusuallyeasy.Thepatientshouldhavean
orogastric tube placed and the stomach should be
emptied as well as possible. Even a small volume
of air in the stomach can interfere with imaging
from the transgastric position. The orogastric tube
should be removed before probe insertion. The
presence of a tube in the esophagus will interfere
withimaging.Theendotrachealtubeshouldbewell
secured.TheTEEprobeisleftintheunlockedposi-
tion and is lubricated with ultrasonic gel. A bite
blockisessentialforTEEexaminationsinnonanes-
thetized patients, but in anesthetized patients it is
onlyrequiredinpatientswithjaggedteethoratthe
operator’sdiscretion.
The operator stands in the same position as if
to perform direct laryngoscopy. The patient’s head
and neck should be in a neutral position. There
should be no positioning rolls under the patient’s
shoulders. The thumb of the left hand is placed
on the patient’s tongue and the left hand is used
to pull the jaw upward. The right hand is used to
insert the probe into the pharynx to the left side
of the ET with the probe transducer facing ante-
rior. The remainder of the probe can be looped
around the operator’s neck and shoulder, held by
an assistant, or rested on the head of the bed near
the patient. The probe is advanced with steady
gentle pressure using a slight left to right rotating
motion.Theunlockedprobewillfollowthenatural
curveofthepharynx.Atthepharyngeal-esophageal
junction (10cm from the lips in neonates, 20cm
from the lips in adults), some mild resistance will
characteristically be met. This can be overcome
with gentle, steady pressure. If undue resistance is
encountered, it is possible that the probe is in the
piraform sinus or the vallecula. It should be with-
drawnandadvancementtriedagain.Ifthereisany
doubtregardingprobeposition,theprobeshouldbe
placedunderdirectvisionusingalaryngoscope.In
somerareinstances,itisimpossibletoplacetheTEE
probe.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch03” — 2007/7/17 — 20:28 — page 67 — #26
Monitoring 67
TEEviews
The American Society of Echocardiography and
the Society of Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists
recommended views for a comprehensive TEE
examinationareshowninFig.3.19.
Views available with a single-plane probe are
those obtained in the 0◦ plane. The basic views
available with a biplane probe are those obtained
in both the transverse (0◦) and longitudinal (90◦)
planes. Multiplane views are all of the views
from 0 to 180 ◦. In fact, most of the views
obtainable with a multiplane probe are obtain-
able with a biplane probe. The difference is
that use of a biplane probe requires signiﬁcantly
moreprobemanipulationthanamultiplaneprobe.
The following is useful when using a biplane
ME four chamber
(a) (b) (c) (d)
(e) (f) (g) (h)
(i) (j) (k) (l)
(m) (n) (o) (p)
(q) (r) (s) (t)
TG two chamber
ME AV LAX
ME RV inflow–outflow
desc aortic SAX desc aortic LAX UE aortic arch LAX UE aortic arch SAX
TG RV inflow ME asc aortic SAX ME asc aortic LAX
TG LAX deep TG LAX ME bicaval
TG basal SAX ME mitral commissural ME AV SAX
ME two chamber ME LAX TG mid SAX
Fig.3.19 The20recommendedviewsforacomprehensivetransesophagealechocardiography(TEE)examinationby
theAmericanSocietyofEchocardiographyandtheSocietyofCardiovascularAnesthesiologists.(FromShanewiseJS,
CheungAT,AronsonS, etal.AnesthAnalg 1999;89:870–84,withpermission.)AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch03” — 2007/7/17 — 20:28 — page 68 — #27
68 Chapter3
probe:
• Angles 0–45◦: ﬂex the transverse probe to the
patient’sleft.
• Angles45–90 ◦:ﬂexthelongitudinalprobetothe
patient’sright.
• Angles90–135 ◦:ﬂexthelongitudinalprobetothe
patient’sleft.
• Angles135–180 ◦:ﬂexthetransverseprobetothe
patient’sright.
In this text, rotation to the right always means
to the patient’s right (clockwise) and rotation
to the left always means to the patient’s left
(counterclockwise).
Figure3.20showsviewsfromtheupperesopha-
gus.Atthislevel,therecanbeinterferencefromair
intherightandleftmainstembronchi.Goodviews
of the proximal ascending aorta can be obtained.
Theviewat0 ◦ isusefulforDopplerinterrogationof
themainpulmonaryartery.Forsomepatients,the
pulmonicvalveandasmallportionoftheRVOTcan
beseenaswell.
CFDopplerinterrogationjustabovethislevelbut
at a level just below the aortic arch is useful for
0°
RPA
SVC
LPA
MPA
RPA LPA
MPA
LA
RA AoAo
30–40°
90–110°110–120°
Ao
Ao
RA
RV
Fig.3.20 Transesophagealechocardiography(TEE)
viewsatthebaseoftheheart.Ao,aorta;LA,leftatrium;
LPA,leftpulmonaryartery;MPA,mainpulmonary
artery;RA,rightatrium;RPA,rightpulmonaryartery;
SVC,superiorvenacava.(FromDiNardoJA.Monitoring.
In:DiNardoJA(ed). AnesthesiaforCardiacSurgery ,
2ndedn.Stamford,CT:Appleton&Lange,1998:37–80,
withpermission.)
detectionofapatentductusarteriosus(PDA).Gen-
tleanteﬂexionmaybenecessarytogetgoodcontact
withtheesophagusatthislevel.
Figure 3.21 shows views obtained with slight
advancementoftheprobefromthepreviouslevel.
Thislevelprovidesexcellentviewsofthepulmonary
veins and allows Doppler interrogation. At 0◦ the
left lower pulmonary vein (LLPV) is lateral to and
seen at a slightly deeper level (10–50mm) than
the left upper pulmonary vein (LUPV). The LLPV
usuallyisseeninconjunctionwiththedescending
aorta.At0 ◦,therightlowerpulmonaryveinispos-
terior to and at a slightly deeper level (10–50mm)
than the right upper pulmonary vein (RUPV). The
RUPVisseeninconjunctionwiththesuperiorvena
cava (SVC). The LUPV and LLPV usually can be
seen in the same image at 100–110◦ while the
RUPV and RLPV can usually be seen in the same
image at 50–60◦. A persistent left superior vena
cavawouldappearasavascularstructure(circular
inthesulcusbetweentheleftatrialappendageand
theLUPV).
Figure 3.22 shows views obtained at a slightly
deeper level in the upper esophagus. Some of the
mostvaluableviewsareobtainedatthislevel.Both
long- and short-axis views of the aortic valve are
seen. In the short-axis views, the right coronary
cuspisanterior,thenoncoronarycuspisnexttothe
rightatrium,andtheleftcoronarycuspisnexttothe
leftatrialappendage(LAA).Inthelong-axisviews,
twocuspsareseen:therightcoronarycuspisante-
riorandthenoncoronarycuspisincontinuitywith
the anterior mitral valve leaﬂet. A good long-axis
viewofthemainpulmonaryarteryandtwoleaﬂets
ofthepulmonicvalveareseen.Viewsofthetricus-
pidvalvesuitableforDopplerinterrogationareseen
aswell.
Figure 3.23 shows views obtained at the mid-
esophageal level. Varying amounts of retroﬂexion
are needed to prevent foreshortening of the left
ventricle (LV) and right ventricle (RV). The clas-
sic four-chamber view is seen at 0◦. These views
allow good alignment for Doppler interrogation of
the mitral valve. The anterior mitral valve leaﬂet
is seen in continuity with the ventricular septum
at0 ◦ andincontinuitywiththenoncoronarycusp
of the aortic valve at 130–150◦. The LAA alsoAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch03” — 2007/7/17 — 20:28 — page 69 — #28
Monitoring 69
Fig.3.21 Transesophageal
echocardiography(TEE)viewsofthe
pulmonaryveinsatthebaseoftheheart.
Ao,aorta;LA,leftatrium;LAA,leftatrial
appendage;LLPV,leftlowerpulmonary
vein;LPA,leftpulmonaryartery;LUPV,left
upperpulmonaryvein;MPA,main
pulmonaryartery;RA,rightatrium;
RLPV,rightlowerpulmonaryvein;
RPA,rightpulmonaryartery;RUPV,right
upperpulmonaryvein;SVC,superior
venacava.(FromDiNardoJA.Monitoring.
In:DiNardoJA(ed). AnesthesiaforCardiac
Surgery,2ndedn.Stamford,CT:Appleton&
Lange,1998:37–80,withpermission.)
0° 0–30°
0–30°
100–110°
LA LPA
LUPVLLPV
LLPVLA
LA
Ao
PA
LAA
LUPV
RV
LV
35–40°
70–80°
RLPV
RUPV
RLPV
RUPVLA
SVC
RLPV
SVC LA
Ao
Ao
RA
PA
RUPV
Fig.3.22 Transesophageal
echocardiography(TEE)viewsobtained
fromtheupperesophagus.Ao,aorta;
AV,aorticvalve;LA,leftatrium;LV,left
ventricle;MV,mitralvalve;PA,pulmonary
artery;PV,pulmonicvalve;RA,right
atrium;RV,rightventricle.(From
DiNardoJA.Monitoring.In:DiNardoJA
(ed).AnesthesiaforCardiacSurgery ,2ndedn.
Stamford,CT:Appleton&Lange,
1998:37–80,withpermission.)
130–150°
110°
90–100°
LA
RA
RV
PV
MV
Ao
LA
Ao
RV
40–60°
0–30°
60–75°
AV
RA
RV PA
LA
RA
LA
RV
LV
LA
LAA
AVRV
RV
isseen.Slightwithdrawalandanteﬂexionwillgive
a short-axis view of the aorta. The coronary arter-
ies can be seen at this level. The left coronary
arteryoftencanbeseendividingintotheleftante-
rior descending (LAD) and circumﬂex branches in
the area near the LAA. The right coronary artery
is anterior and usually requires very slight probe
advancementtobeseen.Slightoffangles(20–30 ◦)
oftenwillallowbettervisualization.
Figure 3.24 shows views also obtained at the
midesophageal level. The probe is rotated to
the patient’s right to obtain these views from
the previous angles. These views provide excellent
visualization of the atrial septum, which makes
themusefulfordetectionofapatentforamenovale
oratrialseptaldefect.Goodvisualizationoftheright
atrium/superiorvenacavaandrightatrium/inferior
venacava(IVC)junctionsalsoisobtained.
Figure 3.25 shows views obtained at the gas-
troesophageal junction (36–38cm from the teeth).
Gentleanteﬂexionusuallyisneededtoobtainthese
views.Thecoronarysinus(CS)isseenenteringthe
right atrium. A large CS should alert one to the
possibility of a persistent left superior vena cava
oranomalouspulmonaryvenousreturn.Theright
atrium/inferior vena cava junction and eustachian
valveareseenasistherightatrialappendage.
Figure 3.26 shows transgastric views of the left
heartstructures.Varyingdegreesofanteﬂexionare
required to obtain these views. These provide theAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch03” — 2007/7/17 — 20:28 — page 70 — #29
70 Chapter3
130–150°
30–60°
0°
90°
LV LV
LV
LV
LARA
RV
LA
LAAAo
RV
Fig.3.23 Transesophagealechocardiography(TEE)
viewsobtainedfromthemid-esophagus.Ao,aorta;LA,
leftatrium;LAA,leftatrialappendage;LV,leftventricle;
PA,pulmonaryartery;RA,rightatrium;RV,right
ventricle.(FromDiNardoJA.Monitoring.In:DiNardoJA
(ed).AnesthesiaforCardiacSurgery ,2ndedn.Stamford,CT:
Appleton&Lange,1998:37–80,withpermission.)
115–130° 90°
30°
0°
IVC
LA LA
LA
LA
IVC
RA RA
RA
RA
IAS
Ao
Ao
SVC
Fig.3.24 Transesophagealechocardiography(TEE)
viewsobtainedfromthemidesophagus.Ao,aorta;IAS,
interatrialseptum;IVC,inferiorvenacava;LA,left
atrium;RA,rightatrium;SVC,superiorvenacava.(From
DiNardoJA.Monitoring.In:DiNardoJA(ed). Anesthesia
forCardiacSurgery ,2ndedn.Stamford,CT:Appleton&
Lange,1998:37–80,withpermission.)
0°
50°
90°110° LA
RA
RV
RAARA
IVC
CS
RA
RV
LA
Ao
Ao
RA
RV
LV
Fig.3.25 Transesophagealechocardiography(TEE)
viewsobtainedatthegastroesophagealjunction.
Ao,aorta;CS,coronarysinus;IVC,inferiorvenacava;
LA,leftatrium;LV,leftventricle;RA,rightatrium;RAA,
rightatrialappendage;RV,rightventricle;SVC,superior
venacava.(FromDiNardoJA.Monitoring.In:
DiNardoJA(ed). AnesthesiaforCardiacSurgery ,2ndedn.
Stamford,CT:Appleton&Lange,1998:37–80,with
permission.)
0° 120° 90°
40–60°
0–30°
RV
MMVMV LV LVAoAo
LALA
LA
LV
LV
RV
LAA
MV
RV
LA
Ao
Fig.3.26 Transesophagealechocardiography(TEE)
viewsatthetransgastricposition.Ao,aorta;IVC,inferior
venacava;LA,leftatrium;LAA,leftatrialappendage;
LV,leftventricle;MV,mitralvalve;RA,rightatrium;
RV,rightventricle;SVC,superiorvenacava.(From
DiNardoJA.Monitoring.In:DiNardoJA(ed). Anesthesia
forCardiacSurgery ,2ndedn.Stamford,CT:Appleton&
Lange,1998:37–80,withpermission.)AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch03” — 2007/7/17 — 20:28 — page 71 — #30
Monitoring 71
0°
30°
90–100°110–130°
RVRV
RA
RV
TV
SVC
AoAoPAPA
RV
AoPA
TV
Ao
RV
LV
Fig.3.27 Transesophagealechocardiography(TEE)
viewsoftherightventriclefromthetransgastricposition.
Ao,aorta;IVC,inferiorvenacava;LV,leftventricle;
PA,pulmonaryartery;RA,rightatrium;RV,right
ventricle;SVC,superiorvenacava;TV,tricuspidvalve.
(FromDiNardoJA.Monitoring.In:DiNardoJA(ed).
AnesthesiaforCardiacSurgery ,2ndedn.Stamford,CT:
Appleton&Lange,1998:37–80,withpermission.)
short-axisviewsoftheLVandRVusedinregional
wall motion analysis. The anterior and posterior
papillarymusclesareseen.Withmanipulation,the
view at or around 1200 can provide views of the
LVOTandaorticvalveamenabletoDopplerinterro-
gation.Ashort-axisviewofthemitralvalvesuitable
for planimetry often is obtainable either by with-
drawing the probe slightly or ante-ﬂexing it to a
greaterdegree.
Figure3.27showstransgastricviewsoftheright
heartstructures.Varyingdegreesofanteﬂexionare
requiredtoobtaintheseviews.Theyareobtainedby
rightward rotation of the probe from the previous
position. These views provide excellent visualiza-
tion of the RVOT, which is very useful in the
congenital heart disease patient. They also provide
goodvisualizationofwallmotionintheRVinferior
wallandfreewall.
Figure 3.28 shows the deep transgastric views.
These views are obtained by passing the probe in
a neutral position all the way into the stomach.
At this point, the probe is maximally ﬂexed and
withdrawn until contact is made and resistance is
0°
120–140°
0°
RV
LV
AV
AoRA
RARA
RV
LV
PAPA
TV
SVC
AoAoPAPA
RA
PA
AoPA
Fig.3.28 Transesophagealechocardiography(TEE)
viewsfromthedeeptransgastricposition.Ao,aorta;
IVC,inferiorvenacava;LA,leftatrium;LV,leftventricle;
PA,pulmonaryartery;RA,rightatrium;RV,right
ventricle;SVC,superiorvenacava.(FromDiNardoJA.
Monitoring.In:DiNardoJA(ed). AnesthesiaforCardiac
Surgery,2ndedn.Stamford,CT:Appleton&Lange,
1998:37–80,withpermission.)
felt.Flexionoftheprobetotheleftandrotationto
thepatient’srighthelpsaligntheimagesothatthe
LVOT, aortic valve, and proximal ascending aorta
arevertical.Thislocationreliablyprovidesviewsof
theLVOTandaorticvalveandoftheRVOTandpul-
monary valve amenable to Doppler interrogation.
These views also provide images equivalent to the
thoseobtainablewithsubcostaltransthoracicimag-
ingwhicharevaluableinchildrenwithcongenital
heartlesions.
Figure3.29showstheprobesetinthetransverse
planeandpositionedasdepictedinFig.3.23.Next,
theprobeisrotated90–100 ◦tothepatient’sleftand
thedescendingthoracicaortaisvisualized.Onceitis
located,itcanbeviewedfromthearch(seebelow)
to just below the diaphragm. Inability to see the
descendingaortatotheleftshouldarousesuspicion
thatthereisarightaorticarch.Thiscanbelocalized
byrotatingtheprobetothepatient’srightfromthe
originalposition.
Figure 3.30 shows, with the descending tho-
racic aorta visualized, the probe being withdrawn,
keeping the image of the aorta in the center ofAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch03” — 2007/7/17 — 20:28 — page 72 — #31
72 Chapter3
0–30°
30–60°
80–110°
Fig.3.29 Transesophagealechocardiography(TEE)
viewsofthedescendingthoracicaorta.(From
DiNardoJA.Monitoring.In:DiNardoJA(ed). Anesthesia
forCardiacSurgery ,2ndedn.Stamford,CT:Appleton&
Lange,1998:37–80,withpermission.)
0–30°
90°
90°
LCA
LSCA
Ao arch
Fig.3.30 Transesophagealechocardiography(TEE)
viewsoftheaorticarch.Ao,aorta;LCA,leftcarotid
artery;LSCA,leftsubclavianartery.(FromDiNardoJA.
Monitoring.In:DiNardoJA(ed). AnesthesiaforCardiac
Surgery,2ndedn.Stamford,CT:Appleton&Lange,
1998:37–80,withpermission.)
thescreen.Asthearchisapproachedintheupper
esophagus, the probe is rotated slightly to the
patient’sright.Atthispoint,theinferiorportionof
theaorticarchisseen.At90 ◦,ashort-axisviewof
thearchisobtained.Withslightfurtherwithdrawal
and rotation to the patient’s right, the left CA can
beseen.Withrotationtotheleft,theleftsubclavian
arterycanbeseencurvingoffinferiorly.
TEEexamination
There is no one way to conduct a comprehensive
TEE examination. Each examiner has a particular
protocol. What is important is that the examiner
conducts the same examination on every patient
in a consistent format. This is the only way to
avoidmissingwhatmayturnouttobecriticalﬁnd-
ings. The examiner should concentrate on known
diseases, but not to the exclusion of a complete
examination. This should include complete 2-D
imaging with a comprehensive Doppler examina-
tion. When the TEE probe is not being used, it
should be left in the unlocked position and the
imageshouldbefrozen.Freezingtheimagewillter-
minate ultrasound transmission. Some examiners
advocateadvancingtheprobetothestomachwhen
it is not being used to prevent undue pressure on
theesophagusfromtheprobetip.
LVsystolicfunction,ejectionfraction,
andpreload
One of the most powerful applications of periop-
erative TEE is the quick assessment of LV systolic
function and regional wall motion abnormalities.
LV systolic function can be determined by gross
observation or it can be calculated using several
differentparameters.
Intraoperative changes in the shape and posi-
tion of the LV pressure–volume relationship make
the traditional pressure measurements used to
assess LV preload unreliable, whereas hemody-
namicassessmentofLVejectionfractionisnotpos-
sible. Both qualitative and quantitative assessment
of LV end-diastolic area (EDA), end-systolic area
(ESA),andfractionalareachange(FAC)arepossible
usingTEE.
Quantitative assessment of EDA using TEE pro-
vides an accurate assessment of preload in adultsAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch03” — 2007/7/17 — 20:28 — page 73 — #32
Monitoring 73
andchildren.QuantitativeassessmentofLVEDAis
frequently performed using the short-axis view of
the LV at the mid-papillary muscle level, although
the most accurate assessments are derived from a
combination of several views. EDA is determined
byoneoftwoways:
1 Computer planimetry – this method requires
freezing the LV end-diastolic TEE image and trac-
ing the endocardial border using a trackball. The
computerthencalculatesEDA.Theshort-axisEDA
forseveralcardiaccyclesareobtainedandaveraged.
This method also can be used to determine ESA
using the frozen end-systolic echocardiographic
image.ESAandEDAcanbeusedfortheFAC,which
isanalogoustoEF.
FAC% = (EDA −ESA)/EDA ×100
2 Automatedborderdetection(ABD)–alsocalled
acoustic quantiﬁcation (AQ), this method makes
use of backscattered signals from the blood–tissue
interface to outline the endocardial borders in real
time. When the data are gated to the ECG, a beat-
to-beatdisplayofEDA,ESA,andFACisprovided.
Both methods can be performed online, but obvi-
ously,theﬁrstmethodismoretimeconsumingand
isnotacontinuousreal-timeassessment.ABDisa
continuousreal-timeassessmentbutiscumbersome
and,for20–30%ofpatients,isunreliablebecauseof
poorimagequality.FACobtainedbybothmethods
hasbeenshowntocorrelatewellwithEFobtained
byradionuclideangiography.
Qualitative assessment of EDA, ESA, and FAC
requiresnospecialtechniquesexceptatrainedeye.
Inpractice,cliniciansmustoftenmakequickjudg-
mentsfortreatmentplansbasedonlimitedinforma-
tion.TEEallowstheabilityforclinicianstoquickly
lookattheheartanddetermineifitishypokinetic,
normaloremptyandhyperdynamicisinvaluable.It
isquickandcanbeascontinuousasdesired.Several
cautionsareinorder,however.Thedevelopmentof
end-systolic cavity obliteration commonly is used
as one of the visual signs of a reduced EDA. How-
ever,ithasbeendemonstratedthatalthoughmany
of the episodes of end-systolic cavity obliteration
areassociatedwithreducedEDA,end-systoliccav-
ity obliteration does not always indicate reduced
EDA.End-systoliccavityobliterationmaybecaused
by increases in contractility or decreases in after-
load.Theclinicianmayalsobefooledifusingonly
one view to render an opinion or form judgment.
RememberthattheTEEslicerepresentsonlyalim-
itedviewoftheheart.Oneareamayappeargrossly
hypokinetic,whiletheremainderoftheheartfunc-
tions normally. With experience, clinicians can
estimate FAC or ejection fraction area (EFA) to
within 10% of ofﬂine values in 75% of cases.
The assessment of EDA as either low or normal
corresponds well with ofﬂine assessment of EDA
aswell.
Regionalwallmotionanalysis
TEEanalysisofregionalwallmotionabnormalities
(RWMA)canbeusedtodetectmyocardialischemic
andhaspredictivevalueconcerningadverseclinical
outcomes.
Intraoperative assessment of RWMA involves
imaging the heart in several planes to view all of
the 17 wall segments (Table 3.3). The most pop-
ular view for general surveillance, perhaps, is the
transgastricshort-axisviewoftheLVatthelevelof
themid-papillarymusclelevel.Thisviewisobtained
easilyandcontainsregionsofmyocardiumsupplied
by all three coronary arteries. Most data regarding
intraoperative use of TEE to monitor for ischemia
usesthisviewwithanalysisthathasbeenperformed
ofﬂine. One should not forget to assess RV wall
motion. The RV is imaged in many planes includ-
ingtheRVinﬂow–outﬂowview,thefour-chamber
view,andthetransgastricshortaxisview.
Wallmotionisgradedbothonexcursionandwall
thickening. Excursion is deﬁned as inward move-
ment along an imaginary radius to the center of
Table3.3 Leftventricular17segmentanatomicmodel.
Base Mid Apex
Anterior Anterior Anterior
Anterio-lateral Anterio-lateral Lateral
Infero-lateral Infero-lateral Inferior
Inferior Inferior Septal
Infero-septal Infero-septal Apical cap
Anterio-septal Anterio-septalAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch03” — 2007/7/17 — 20:28 — page 74 — #33
74 Chapter3
theventricularcavity.Bothassessmentsareneces-
sary because it is possible for an infarcted segment
of myocardium to move passively by surround-
ing areas of normal myocardium; however, the
infarctedmyocardiumwillnotthicken.Byconcen-
tratingonbothexcursionandthickening,itispos-
sible to account for the translation (lateral motion
of the entire heart) and rotation of the echocar-
diographic image during contraction. Wall motion
is graded as follows: 1, normal; 2, hypokinetic;
3,akinetic;and4,dyskinetic.
Anewwallmotionabnormalityisdeﬁnedwhen
thewallmotionscorechangestwoormoregrades.
The recognition of a new RWMA is more difﬁ-
cult than it sounds, particularly in the presence
of a preexisting RWMA. Furthermore, recogni-
tion of mild degrees of RWMAs are more difﬁ-
cult than recognition of normal wall motion or
severeRWMA.
LVdiastolicfunction
LVdiastolicfunctionischaracterizedusinganinte-
grated approach, involving analysis of the mitral
inﬂow pattern, the pulmonary venous blood ﬂow
pattern and tissue Doppler. Diastole commences
with isovolumic relaxation. As ventricular relax-
ation continues, LV pressure falls. LAP eventually
exceeds LV pressure and the mitral valve opens,
allowing early (E) rapid ﬁlling of the LV. Next, a
period of diastasis occurs as LA and LV pressure
equilibrate. Finally, atrial contraction (A) occurs
and augments LV ﬁlling as diastole terminates. All
oftheseeventsaredetectablewithDopplerspectra.
Isovolumicrelaxationtime
Isovolumicrelaxationtime(IVRT)isthetimefrom
aortic valve closure to the commencement of ﬂow
across the mitral valve. IVRT can be detected by
placing the CW Doppler cursor across the mitral
inﬂowandaorticoutﬂowtracts.Thetimefromthe
aortic valve closure click to the commencement of
mitralﬂowistheIVRT.
Mitralinﬂow
MitralinﬂowcanbeassessedwiththePWDoppler
sample volume placed at the tips of the mitral
Mitral
Normal
S
D
S
SD
D D
AC ACAC
RestrictionAbnormal
relaxation
“Pseudo-
normalization”
Pulmonary
vein
Fig.3.31 Schematicoftherelationshipbetweenmitral
inﬂowandpulmonaryvenousﬂowpatterns.(From
DiNardoJA.Monitoring.In:DiNardoJA(ed). Anesthesia
forCardiacSurgery ,2ndedn.Stamford,CT:Appleton&
Lange,1998:37–80,withpermission.)
Table3.4 Normalvaluesformitralinﬂowparameters
aswellasthoseencounteredwithimpairedrelaxation
andrestriction.(FromDiNardoJA.Monitoring.In:
DiNardoJA(ed). AnesthesiaforCardiacSurgery ,2ndedn.
Stamford,CT:Appleton&Lange,1998:37–80,with
permission.)
Abnormal
relaxation
Normal Restriction
DT >240ms 160–240ms <160ms
E ↓ 0.8–1.5M/s ↔↑
A ↑ 0.75M/s ↓
E/AE < AE > A( >1.0) E ≫ A
IVRT ↑ 55–90ms <70ms
leaﬂets. The spectra will contain E and A veloci-
ties,whichcorrespondtopassive(E)andatrial(A)
ﬁlling of the LV (Fig. 3.31). Normal values for the
parameters derived from the spectra are shown in
Table3.4.
Pulmonaryvenousﬂow
Pulmonaryvenousﬂowismeasuredbyplacingthe
PWsamplevolume1.0–2.0cmintothepulmonary
vein from its junction at the left atrium. Typically,
the LUPV or LLPV is used. A typical pulmonary
vein spectra is shown in Fig. 3.31. The systolic (S)
velocityoccursasaresultofLAﬁllingduringLVsys-
tole,whereasthediastolic(D)velocityoccursasthe
resultofLAﬁllingduringLVdiastole.Thereisﬂow
reversalseenwithatrialsystole(A).TheDvelocity
usuallymirrorstheEvelocityofmitralinﬂow.The
S velocity often is seen to have an early (S1) andAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch03” — 2007/7/17 — 20:28 — page 75 — #34
Monitoring 75
late (S2) velocity with S1< S2. S1 is the result of
LArelaxation,whereasS2istheresultofmovement
ofthemitralannulustowardtheLVapexduringLV
contraction.
AbnormalitiesofLVdiastolicfunction
The range of LV diastolic abnormalities is summa-
rized in Fig. 3.32. With impaired relaxation, the
E velocity is reduced, the A velocity is increased,
andthemitralDTandIVRTareincreased.Thepul-
monaryvenousspectramirrorthesechangeswitha
reductioninthevelocityandanincreaseintheDTof
the diastolic component (D) of pulmonary venous
return.Thesechangesallareaconsequenceofpro-
longedventricularﬁllingduringearlydiastole.This
pattern is very common in patients with coronary
artery disease and in patients with left ventricular
hypertrophy.
Pseudonormalization occurs due to an eleva-
tion in mean LAP. This normalizes the passive
mitralﬁlling,mitralDT,andIVRTbyincreasingthe
pressure gradient between the LA and LV and
masking the impaired relaxation. This pattern is
distinguished from the normal pattern by analysis
of the pulmonary venous blood ﬂow and the tis-
sue Doppler pattern. The systolic component (S)
of pulmonary venous return is reduced because
of the elevated LAP. In addition, the ﬂow reversal
withatrialcontractionismoreprominentbecauseof
enhancedatrialcontractionintheexpandedatrium
andreducedventricularcompliance.
RapidmitralDTandIVRTcharacterizetherestric-
tive pattern. In this pathology, ventricular ﬁlling
is restricted resulting in rapid equilibration of LAP
and LV pressure. The velocity of early ﬁlling (E)
is high because of an elevated LAP. There is little
Transmitral
flow velocity
Pulmonary vein
flow velocity
Mitral annular
velocity
(lateral wall)
Normal
E ≥ A
DT 140–220
IVRT 60–100
Normal
S ≥ D
Ar < 25 cm/s
Normal
EM/AM > 1
EM > 8cm/s
Mild dysfunction
(delayed
relaxation)
EM ≤ 8cm/s
Moderate
dysfunction
(pseudonormal)
EM < 8cm/s
Severe
dysfunction
(restrictive)
EM     8 cm/s
Delayed
relaxation
S > D
Ar < 25 cm/s
Pseudonormal
S < D
Ar >25 cm/s
LAP increased
Restrictive
S < D
Ar > 25 cm/s
LAP increased
Delayed
relaxation
E < A
DT>200 
IVRT>100
Pseudonormal
E < A
DT 140–220
LAP increased
Restrictive
E     A
DT< 140
IVRT< 60
Fig.3.32 TransmitralDopplerimaging,pulmonaryviewDopplerimaging,andtissueDopplerimagingproﬁles
correspondingtonormal,delayedrelaxation,pseudonormal,andrestrictiveﬁllingpatterns.(FromGrobanL,
DolinskySY Chest2005;128:3652–63,withpermission.)AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch03” — 2007/7/17 — 20:28 — page 76 — #35
76 Chapter3
contribution to LV ﬁlling from atrial contraction,
and thus, atrial ﬁlling velocity (A) is low The pul-
monaryveinsexhibitmarkedreductionofthesys-
toliccomponent(S)ofﬁllingduethehighLAP.The
velocityofthediastoliccomponent(D)ishighasit
corresponds to the early ﬁlling (E) velocity across
themitralvalve.Thereispronouncedﬂowreversal
with atrial contraction because of enhanced atrial
contractionandminimalantegradeﬂowacrossthe
mitralvalvewithatrialsystole.Thisrestrictivepat-
tern is common in patients with dilated cardiomy-
opathies and in patients with ventricular volume
overload.
Unfortunately, the velocity patterns are load
dependent, which can make application difﬁcult.
A normal pattern can be converted to an impaired
relaxation pattern with hypovolemia or afterload
increases.Similarly,animpairedrelaxationpattern
canbepseudonormalizedwithvolumeexpansion.
TissueDoppler
TissueDoppleristheapplicationofaPWDopplerin
the annular ring of the mitral valve and sampling
for the velocity of the heart tissue during relax-
ation. There are two measured components: the
early diastolic movement (E′) and the atrial con-
traction component of ventricular ﬁlling (A′). The
E′andA ′correspondtothemitralinﬂowvelocities
ofEandA.AnE ′lessthan8cm/sisabnormaland
indicatesdiastolicdysfunction.
Figure 3.33 provides an easy step-by-step
algorithm to determine the degree of diastolic
dysfunction.
Rightventricularfunction
GlobalRVfunctionisassessedusingthesametech-
niques as described for the LV to determine EDA,
ESA,andFAC.Thisusuallyisperformedinashort-
axisview,thefour-chamberview,andthetransgas-
tric view. This allows all ﬁve wall segments of the
RVtobeanalyzed:inferiorwall,septalwall,lateral
wall,anteriorwall,andanteriorwalloftheRVOT.
Use of the biplane and multiplane probes allows a
longviewofboththeRVinﬂowandoutﬂowtracts
and of the RV inferior wall and anterior wall of
the RVOT. This view is valuable for assessing RV
sizeandsystolicfunction.
Valvularheartdisease
All four heart valves are well visualized with TEE.
Althoughmostcardiacsurgicalpatientswillpresent
to the operating room with a complete diagnostic
work up of anatomic structure, a comprehensive
examinationisrequiredinallpatientswhenaTEEis
performed.Heartvalvestructureandfunctionmust
beobservedanddocumented.Itisnotuncommon
toﬁndnewpathologyornewinformationthatwill
help steer the planned operative procedure. There
aremanyexcellenttextbooksdetailingthevarious
techniques and anatomic ﬁndings seen with TEE.
Inthisnextsection,diseaseofthemitral,aorticand
tricuspidvalvearebrieﬂyreviewed.
Mitralvalve
The mitral valve separates the LV from the left
atrium,pulmonarycirculationandentirerightside
oftheheart.Thevalveisbicuspidwithananterior
andposteriorleaﬂet.Theanteriorleaﬂetisthelarger
ofthetwoleaﬂets,accountingfortwo-thirdsofthe
surfaceareaofthevalve.Theposteriorleaﬂetwraps
aroundtheanteriorleaﬂet,accountingforonlyone-
third of the valve’s surface area and two-thirds of
theannularcircumference.Themitralannulusisa
ﬁbrous ring surrounding the mitral valve. During
ventricularsystole,thecontractionofthepapillary
muscles prevent mitral leaﬂet prolapse. Ruptured
chordaeareacommoncauseofmitralinsufﬁciency.
TheCarpentierclassiﬁcationdividesthethreescal-
lops of the posterior leaﬂet into P1, P2, and P3;
andtheanteriorleaﬂetintothethreesegmentsA1,
A2, and A3, which oppose the corresponding scal-
lopsoftheposteriorvalve.ThecoaptationofA1/P1
at the annulus form the anterolateral commissure.
The coaptation of A3/P3 at the annulus form the
posteromedialcommissure.
Mitralstenosis(MS)
Normal mitral valve areas range from 4–6 cm2,
and symptomatic stenosis is seen when the valve
approaches 1.5 cm2. Rheumatic heart disease is a
commoncauseofMSanditischaracterizedbycom-
missural fusion with doming of the valve leaﬂets.
Leaﬂettipthickeningandchordaetendineaethick-
ening, fusion, and calciﬁcation result in restrictedAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch03” — 2007/7/17 — 20:28 — page 77 — #36
Monitoring 77
EF ≥ 45%
TDI
Impaired
relaxation
normal filling
pressures
Impaired
relaxation
normal filling
pressures
Doppler
pulmonary
vein
Valsalva
and
mitral inflow
Impaired
relaxation
increased filling
pressures
Impaired
relaxation
increased filling
pressures
Normal
diastolic
function
Normal
diastolic
function
High
suspicion of
pericardial
disease
Restrictive
myocardial
disease
Valsalva
and
mitral inflow
Reversible,
restrictive
Fixed,
restrictivePseudonormal
And/or
Doppler
pulmonary
vein
Ar wave
<25 cm/s
Normal Pseudonormal
Ar wave
≥ 25 cm/s
Ar wave
≥ 25 cm/s
Ar wave
< 25 cm/s
Pseudonormal
TDI
To do
Diagnosis
TDI
DT>140 msDT>140 ms DT< 140 ms
EM> 8 cm/sEM ≤ 8 cm/s EM ≤ 8 cm/s EM> 8 cm/s E M ≤ 8 cm/s
Doppler
mitral inflow
E > AE < A
E/EM≤ 88 ≤E/EM≤ 15 E/EM>15 E/EM ≤88 ≤E/EM ≤15 E/EM>15 E/EM<8 E/EM>15
E >AE < AE > A E     A
(unchanged)
E    A
Fig.3.33 Analgorithmtodeterminethedegreeofdiastolicdysfunctionusingtransesophagealechocardiography
(TEE).A,atrialpeakvelocity;Ar,retrogradevelocity;E,earlyﬁllingpeakvelocity;E M,earlyﬁlling;TDI,tissue
Dopplerimaging.(FromGrobanL,DolinskiSY.Transechocardiographicevaluationofdiastolicfunction. Chest
2005;128:3652–63,withpermission.)
leaﬂet motion. MS increases transvalvular pres-
sure gradients leading to increased left atrial (LA)
pressures and LA distention. Increased LA pres-
sures can lead to pulmonary hypertension with
right ventricular dysfunction and tricuspid regur-
gitation.Theleftatriumwillbeenlargedandhypo-
kineticandmaybeﬁlledwithspontaneouscontrast
(swirling, smoke-like contrast). Spontaneous con-
trastisindicativeofalowﬂowstateandispredictive
ofsubsequentdevelopmentofleftatrialthrombus.
The left atrium should be examined carefully for
thrombus,particularlyintheleftatrialappendage.
Ifthereisatrialﬁbrillationorﬂutter,theatriumwill
appearakinetic.
Two-dimensional(2-D)anatomy
Two-dimensional imaging of the stenotic mitral
valve typically demonstrates thickening and ﬁbro-
sis of the mitral valve leaﬂets, restricted leaﬂet
motion, and mitral annular calciﬁcation. The MV
area can be estimated directly with planimetry in
thetransgastricbasalshort-axisview.
Doppler
CWDopplerisusedtodeterminethemeanvelocity
and mean grade using the VTI. Because the mean
gradientcanunderestimatetheseverityofMSwith
low cardiac outputs and overestimate the severity
in the presence of mitral regurgitation, the valveAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch03” — 2007/7/17 — 20:28 — page 78 — #37
78 Chapter3
Table3.5 Severityestimationofmitralstenosis.
Grade Mild Moderate Severe
Mean gradient (mmHg) <6 6–10 >10
PHT (ms) 100 200 >300
DHT (ms) <500 500–700 >700
MVA (cm2) 1.6–2.0 1.0–1.5 <1.0
areashouldbedetermined.MVAcanbecalculated
usingthePHTmethod.Thesummaryofmeangra-
dients,PHT,decelerationtime,andMVAinMSare
seeninTable3.5.ColorﬂowDopplercanbeusedto
calculate valve area using the proximal isovolemic
surfacearea(PISA)equation.ThePHTwilloveresti-
mateMVA(underestimateseverity)inconditionsin
whichLVpressurerisesquicklyindiastole,suchas
aorticinsufﬁciency(AI)orreducedLVcompliance.
PHTisunreliablewhenthereismergingoftheEand
A waves or an alteration in the E wave decay pat-
ternduetotachycardia,atrioventricular(AV)block,
or atrial ﬂutter. In these instances, the continuity
equation using the MVVTI and the LVOTVTI and
LVOTAREA canbeusedtocalculateMVAassuming
there is no MR. Details of the use of LVOTVTI and
LVOTAREA are explained in the section on aortic
stenosis.
Mitralregurgitation
Mitral regurgitation is commonly seen in the
cardiac surgical patient. There are a myriad of
causesincludinghasincludingmyxomatousdegen-
eration, rheumatic disease, endocarditis, Marfan
syndrome, inﬁltrative diseases (amyloid, sarcoid,
mucopolysaccharidosis), collagen-vascular disor-
ders (SLE, rheumatoid arthritis), papillary muscle
rupture or dysfunction (ischemia), and cardio-
myopathies. General anesthesia, changing hemo-
dynamicconditionsandvolumestatusgreatlyaffect
measured mitral regurgitation. It is important for
theechocardiographertoquantifythedegreeofMR
under physiologic conditions if possible. It may be
necessarytousephenylephrinetoelevateafterload
andattempttoduplicatepreoperativeconditionsfor
patients in whom the intraoperative assessment of
MR is signiﬁcantly different from the preoperative
assessment.
Two-dimensional(2-D)anatomy
Mitral leaﬂet motion is well visualized with TEE
and will direct the echocardiographer to the cor-
rectdiagnosis.Therecanbeexcessiveleaﬂetmotion,
restricted leaﬂet motion, or normal leaﬂet motion
with poor coaptation. Excessive leaﬂet motion can
beclassiﬁedasbillowing,prolapseorﬂail.Abillow-
ing mitral leaﬂet demonstrates bowing of part of
themitralvalveleaﬂetabovethelevelofthemitral
annulus.Theleaﬂetedge,however,stillcoaptswell,
and there is no MR. Prolapse occurs when the
leaﬂetedgeextendsabovetheleveloftheannulus.
Flailleaﬂetoccurswhenthesupportingstructures,
the papillary muscle or chordae tendinae rupture,
allowingleaﬂetmovementintotheleftatriumdur-
ingsystole.MRduetoexcessiveleaﬂetmotionwill
result in a regurgitant jet directed away from the
affected valve leaﬂet. Conversely, MR caused by
restricted leaﬂet motion results in a regurgitant jet
directed towards the affected valve leaﬂet. Severe
MR is associated with a dilated left atrium and
elevatedpulmonarypressure.
Doppler
Comprehensive quantitative evaluation of MR
should be performed intraoperatively. Color ﬂow
(CF) Doppler analysis of the regurgitant jet (see
Fig. 3.15) is performed in combination with PW
Dopplerinterrogationofthepulmonaryveins.The
areaoftheregurgitantjetrelativetotheareaofthe
LA is a useful CF Doppler technique. This should
beperformedinasmanyplanesaspossibletogain
a good understanding of the extent of the MR. It
shouldbeperformedatthelevelofthemitralvalve
usingafull180 ◦sweepwithamultiplaneprobeorat
multipleanglesusingabiplaneprobe.Table3.6lists
severalmeasuresonecanusetoassessMRseverity.
Regurgitant jets, which hug the atrial wall
(Coandaeffect),areconsideredconstrainedjetsand
will be 30–40% smaller than a free jet (such as a
central jet) under the same conditions of regurgi-
tation. Jets that exhibit the Coanda effect usually
are associated with moderate to severe MR. WhenAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch03” — 2007/7/17 — 20:28 — page 79 — #38
Monitoring 79
Table3.6 Gradingofmitralregurgitationseverity.
Method Mild Moderate Severe
Jet area (cm2) <3 3–6 >6
Vena contracta (cm) <0.3 0.3–0.55 >0.55
Regurgitant fraction (%) <30 30–50 >50
Mitral oriﬁce area (cm2) <0.2 0.2–0.39 ≥0.4
Regurgitant volume (mL) <30 30–59 ≥60
Pulmonary vein ﬂow Blunted S wave S wave < D wave Systolic reversal
the MR jet width at the mitral leaﬂet (vena con-
tracta)isgreaterthan0.6cm,MRusuallyissevere.
Quantitative methods to classify MR exist, such
as regurgitant fraction calculations and proximal
isovelocity surface area (PISA), but they generally
arecumbersomeandtimeconsuming.
Technical factors such as CF Doppler gain and
Nyquist limit will affect the imaging of the regur-
gitant jet. Proper technique calls for turning the
color gain up all the way, then reduce it until
the “sparkling” disappears, and starting with the
velocity scale peak at 50–60cm/s. Both right and
left pulmonary veins should be examined because
eccentric jets may reverse ﬂow in the pulmonary
veinsononlyonesideoftheatrium.
Theaorticvalve
The aortic valve consists of three semilunar valves
named according to their relationship to the coro-
nary arteries: the right coronary cusp, the left
coronary cusp, and the noncoronary cusp. At the
center of the free-edge of each cusp is a tiny, ele-
vated nodule commonly referred to as the nodule
of Arantius. The aortic valve complex is composed
ofthesinotubularjunction,thesinusesofValsalva,
the valve cusps, the junction of the aortic valve
withtheventricularseptum,andtheanteriormitral
valveleaﬂet.Allofthesestructuresareimagedeasily
withTEE.
Aorticstenosis
Aorticstenosisoccurswhenthereisaﬁxedobstruc-
tion to left ventricular ejection of blood into the
aorta. Normal aortic valve area is 2.5–3.5cm2.
The severity of aortic stenosis is divided into
three categories by valve area as follows: mild
(1.5–1.0cm2), moderate (1.0–0.8cm2), or severe
(<0.8cm2).Theclassictriadofsyncope,anginaand
congestiveheartfailureareassociatedwiththelate
stages of aortic stenosis and are ominous signs at
theironset.
Two-dimensional(2-D)anatomy
A number of views of the aortic valve are avail-
able,buttheshort-andlong-axisviewsoftheaortic
valve are most useful. Leaﬂet mobility should be
observed.Astenoticvalvewillhavelimitedopening
andheavycalciﬁcationmaybepresentintheleaﬂets
and commissures. A bicuspid aortic valve can be
identiﬁedeasilyinashort-axisview.Unfortunately,
2-D imaging is limited by the occasional inability
to evaluate the stenotic valve in the correct plane,
thereby underestimating the true area of valvular
stenosis.Therefore,itisimperativetoexaminethe
valve until the narrowest area of stenosis is iden-
tiﬁable and the stenotic area is reproducible with
multiplemeasurements.Asecondarysignofaortic
stenosisisleftventricularhypertrophy.
Doppler
SeveritycanalsobequantiﬁedusingDopplermea-
surementsofthepeakandmeangradientsandthe
calculatedaorticvalvearea.Themeangradientand
peak instantaneous gradient are determined with
theVTIobtainedbyusingCWDoppleralignedpar-
allel(orwithin20 ◦)totheLVOT,aorticvalve,and
proximal ascending aorta. If the peak aortic veloc-
ity is greater than 4.5m/s, the aortic stenosis is
severe. Either the peak or the mean aortic veloc-
ity can be substituted into the simpliﬁed BernoulliAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch03” — 2007/7/17 — 20:28 — page 80 — #39
80 Chapter3
equationthatisusedtocalculatethetransvalvular
pressuregradient.ThesimpliﬁedBernoulliequation
forthepeakgradientiscalculatedwiththefollow-
ing equation: Peak Gradient (mmHg)= 4 (Aortic
Peak Velocity)2. Based on the peak aortic gradient
value,theseverityofaorticstenosisisgradedasmild
(<36mmHg), moderate (>50mmHg), or severe
(>80mmHg).ThesimpliﬁedBernoulliequationfor
the mean gradient is calculated with either of the
following equations: Mean Gradient (mmHg) =
4 (Mean Velocity)2 or 2.4 (Vmax)2. The value
of the mean aortic velocity grades the severity
of aortic stenosis as mild (<20mmHg), moderate
(20–50mmHg), or severe (>50mmHg). Unfortu-
nately,thistechniqueissometimesdifﬁcultbecause
the deep transgastric long-axis view can be very
elusiveevenforanexperiencedechocardiographer.
Remember that gradients will underestimate the
severityofthestenosiswhenoutputislowandmay
overestimateitwhenoutputishigh.Ifthereissuspi-
cionthatthegradientismisleading,theaorticvalve
areashouldbecalculatedorthedimensionlessindex
(DI)shouldbeused:
DI =peakvelocityLVOT /peakvelocityAoVor
LVOTVTI/AoVVTI.
ADI <0.2indicatessevereaorticstenosis.Because
the peak velocity in the LVOT and across the aor-
tic valve will change proportionally, this index is
independentofcardiacoutput.
Dopplerinformationcanbeusedtocalculatethe
aortic valve area using the continuity equation:
AoVAREA = (LVOTAREA) × (LVOTVTI)/AoVVTI.
The LVOT area is determined using the diame-
ter method. The long-axis view of the aortic valve
can be used to measure the diameter at the point
at which the aortic valve cusps abut the LVOT.
AoVVTIisobtainedwithCWDoppleracrosstheaor-
ticvalveinsystolewiththeviewsusedtoobtainVTI.
LVOTVTI isobtainedwithPWDopplerintheLVOT
just below the aortic valve leaﬂets in systole with
theviewsusedtoobtainVTI.
Aorticregurgitation(AR)
TEE can identify the presence of regurgitation,
quantify its severity, determine the etiology, and
examine the secondary effects on other heart
structures (i.e. left ventricle, mitral valve). In gen-
eral, the etiology of aortic regurgitation is classi-
ﬁed into two major groups: leaﬂet abnormalities
andaorticrootabnormalities.Leaﬂetabnormalities
includecongenitalbicuspidvalves,calciﬁcvalvedis-
ease, rheumatic valve disease, myxomatous valve
disease, endocarditis, and nonbacterial thrombotic
endocarditis.Aorticrootabnormalitiesarethemost
common cause of aortic regurgitation. Aortic root
abnormalities include annular dilatation, hyper-
tensive aortic root dilation, cystic medial necrosis,
Marfansyndrome,andaorticdissection.
Two-dimensional(2-D)anatomy
Similar to the evaluation of aortic stenosis, 2-D
examinationoftheaorticvalvewillyieldinforma-
tion on the etiology and extent of aortic regurgi-
tation. In severe AR there may be ﬂuttering of the
anteriormitralvalveleaﬂetindiastolewhentheAR
jet is directed along it. There may be enlargement
oftheascendingaortaandaorticrootcausingpoor
coaptationoftheaorticleaﬂetsandAR.Retrograde
aorticdissectioncancausemechanicaldeformation
of the aortic valve annulus and AR. The AR may
be associated with vegetations and leaﬂet perfora-
tion. The presence of AR may alter the manner in
whichcardioplegiaisdeliveredasinfusionintothe
aorticrootmaynotbeeffectivewhenmoderateor
severeARispresent.TheLVmayexhibiteccentric
hypertrophy.
Doppler
CF Doppler imaging of the aortic valve in the long
axisisusedtomeasuretheminimumwidthofthe
regurgitantjet(usuallyattheoriginofthejetatthe
leaﬂets) relative to the width of the LVOT. AR is
graded,basedonthisassessment,asfollows:
• Trace:jetarea/LVOTwidth <0.25
• Mild:jetarea/LVOTwidth0.25–0.46
• Moderate:jetarea/LVOTwidth0.47–0.64
• Severe:jetarea/LVOTwidth >0.65
CFDopplerimagingoftheaorticvalveintheshort
axisatorjustbelowthelevelofaorticvalveleaﬂets
is used to measure the regurgitant jet area relative
to the circular LVOT area at this level (Fig. 3.34).AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch03” — 2007/7/17 — 20:28 — page 81 — #40
Monitoring 81
Fig.3.34 M-modecolorDopplerimagejustbelowthe
aorticvalveintheleftventricularoutﬂowtrack
demonstratingaorticregurgitation.
ARisgraded,basedonthisassessment,asfollows:
• Trace:jetarea/LVOTwidth <0.20
• Mild:jetarea/LVOTwidth0.20–0.40
• Moderate:jetarea/LVOTwidth0.40–0.60
• Severe:jetarea/LVOTwidth >0.60
CWDopplerisusefulforquantifyingARbydeter-
mining the PHT of the regurgitant spectra. A PHT
<300msisindicativeofsevereAR;whereas,aPHT
>800ms is associated with mild AR. This occurs
because, in severe AR, there is more rapid equili-
bration between aortic and LV pressure in diastole
and thus a more rapid decay in the velocity of the
regurgitant spectra. In severe AR, the CW Doppler
spectrawillbedense,whereasinmildAR,itwillbe
faint.CFDopplerwillhelpguidepositioningofthe
CWcursor.
PW Doppler of the mitral inﬂow will reveal
a restrictive pattern in severe or acute AR. PW
Doppler of the proximal descending thoracic aorta
willrevealholodiastolicﬂowreversalinsevereAR.
ItisimpossibletoaligntheDopplerbeamparallelto
thedescendingaorta,butitstillmaybepossibleto
detectdiastolicﬂowreversal.
Tricuspidandpulmonicvalves
The tricuspid valve consists of anterior, posterior
andseptalcuspstetheredbychordaetendinaeand
papillarymusclesallsuspendedbyaﬁbromuscular
annulus.Thecommisuresofthetricuspidvalveare
Fig.3.35 PulsewaveDopplerinthehepaticveins
ofapatientwithseveretricuspidregurgitation(TR).
Thereisreversalofhepaticvenousﬂowindicating
severeTR.
notaswelldeﬁnedasthoseofthemitralvalve.The
oriﬁce is larger than that of the mitral valve and
is triangular in shape, as compared to the saddle-
shape of the mitral valve. The pulmonic valve is
anterior and superior to the aortic valve. Similar
to the aortic valve, it is trileaﬂet and semilunar,
consisting of anterior, left and right leaﬂets. The
plane of the valve is roughly perpendicular in ori-
entation to the aortic valve. The pulmonic valve is
isolated from the other three heart valves by the
infundibulum.
Insigniﬁcant tricuspid insufﬁciency is very com-
monandisoftenseeninpatientswithtransvenous
pacemaker leads and/or PACs. Moderate to severe
tricuspidinsufﬁciencyismostfrequentlytheresult
of dilation of the right ventricle and the tricuspid
annulus. Any condition resulting in elevated right
ventricularpressure( >55mmHg)orrightventricu-
lardilationcancausetricuspidinsufﬁciency.Com-
mon causes observed in surgical patients include
myocardial ischemia, cor pulmonale, pulmonary
embolism,leftheartfailure,pulmonicvalvesteno-
sisandpulmonaryhypertension.Signiﬁcantmitral
insufﬁciency is a common cause of right ventric-
ular dilation and secondary tricuspid insufﬁciency.
Reversal of ﬂow in the hepatic veins is associated
withmoreseveretricuspidregurgitation(Fig.3.35).
Tricuspid stenosis is much less common than
tricuspid insufﬁciency. Rheumatic heart diseaseAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch03” — 2007/7/17 — 20:28 — page 82 — #41
82 Chapter3
is the most common cause of tricuspid stenosis
and results in thickened, immobile valve leaﬂets
with commissural fusion. Diastolic doming of the
leaﬂetsisusuallypresent.Inthesecases,themitral
valve is usually also involved. Other causes of
tricuspid stenosis, although rare, include congeni-
tal anomalies, endocarditis, carcinoid heart disease
and endomyocardial ﬁbrosis. Tricuspid valve area
is estimated by the pressure half-time method or
planimetry.
Pulmonary insufﬁciency is commonly observed
in cardiac surgical patients, especially if a PAC is
in place. Severe pulmonary insufﬁciency is always
pathologic and usually the result of dilation of
the main pulmonary artery as seen in patients
with pulmonary hypertension from any etiology.
The causes of pulmonary insufﬁciency include
fenﬂuramine–phentermine valvulopathy and car-
cinoid syndrome. These lesions result in short and
thickenedvalveswhichfailtoproperlycoapt.Infec-
tious endocarditis can affects the tricuspid and
pulmonic valves and presents as mobile masses
attachedtothevalveleaﬂets.
Pulmonicstenosisiscategorizedasvalvular,sub-
valvular,orperipheral(supravalvular).Ninetyper-
cent of the lesions are valvular in nature and the
majority of pulmonary stenosis in the adult popu-
lationisfromuntreatedorrecurrentcongenitaldis-
ease,suchastetralogyofFallot.Pulmonarystenosis
ismorecommonlyseenasindividualswithcomplex
congenital heart disease increasingly survive into
adulthood. Pressure gradients using CW Doppler
across the stenotic valve allow the quantiﬁcation
of pulmonary stenosis as follows: Peak gradients
<30mmHg are associated with mild stenosis, peak
gradientsbetween30and65mmHgindicatemod-
erate stenosis, and gradients>65mmHg are seen
with severe pulmonary stenosis. The continuity
equation can be used to determine the area of the
pulmonaryvalvetofurtherassessdiseaseseverity.
TEEaftervalverepairorreplacement
After any valvular surgery, the repair or replace-
ment must be assessed for both regurgitation and
stenosis.ThepresenceoftracetomildMRafterMV
repairdoesnotconferincreasedmorbidityormor-
tality. The valve should be evaluated for stenosis
Fig.3.36 Zoomviewofaperivalvularleakafteramitral
valvereplacement.Transesophagealechocardiography
(TEE)evaluationafterallvalverepairandreplacement
proceduresmustincludeanexaminationfor
regurgitation,perivalvularleak,andgradientsacrossthe
valve.
eitherdirectlybyplanimetryorindirectlywiththe
PHTmethod.Systolicanteriormotion(SAM)lead-
ing to LVOT obstruction should be evaluated. Dis-
cussion of all types of prosthetic valves is beyond
the scope of this presentation. However, several
important points deserve discussion. All mechani-
cal valves have some small quantity of regurgitant
ﬂowbuiltintotheirdesigntopreventthrombusfor-
mation.Thisregurgitantﬂowischaracterizedbylow
velocity,smallarea,andlocationwithintheannulus
of the valve. If a leaﬂet is stuck in the open posi-
tion, the amount of regurgitation present will be
large.Tissuevalvesarenotregurgitantunlessthey
havedegenerated.Perivalvularleaksgenerallyhave
ahighvelocityandarelocatedattheoutermargin
oftheannulusorsewingring(Fig.3.36).
Prostheticvalvesshouldhavetransvalvulargradi-
entsthatarephysiologicfortheparticularposition.
If the gradient across a prosthetic valve is high,
an aggressive examination to determine whether
the leaﬂets are opening is warranted. A leaﬂet
may be stuck closed because of impingement on
surroundingtissue.
Removingairfromtheheart
All procedures in which the heart is opened
have potential to introduce air into the systemic
circulation. In addition, closed procedures haveAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch03” — 2007/7/17 — 20:28 — page 83 — #42
Monitoring 83
thepotentialtointroduceairbecauseoftheplace-
ment of vents to decompress the left side of the
heart.TEEcandetectintracardiacairandguideair
evacuation before termination of CPB. Air is par-
ticularly likely to be retained in the LV apex, left
atrium, right coronary sinus, and the pulmonary
veins,particularlytherightupperpulmonaryvein.
Estimationofintracardiacpressures
Peakpressuregradients
Thismethodrequiresthepresenceofaregurgitant
valve or a communication between cardiac cham-
bers.Itisbasedonthepremisethatthepeakvelocity
of a regurgitant jet can be used to determine the
pressure gradient between two cardiac chambers
during either systole or diastole. Peak velocity is
convertedtothepeakpressuregradientusing4V 2.
For example, if there is a TR jet with a peak
velocity of 3.0m/s, then a peak pressure gradient
of36mmHgexistsbetweentheRVandRAduring
systolebecauseTRisasystolicevent.Ifwemeasure
the central venous pressure (CVP) to be 10mmHg
(or assume that it is 10mmHg), then RV systolic
pressuremustbe36 +10 =46mmHg.Ifweknow
(orassume)thatthereisnoRVOTobstruction,then
PAsystolicpressureisalso46mmHg.
Pulmonary regurgitation (PR) Doppler spectra
can be used in the same way. The peak PR veloc-
ity (velocity at the beginning of diastole) is used
to calculate the pressure difference between the
pulmonary artery (PA) and the RV at the time of
pulmonary valve closure in diastole which gives a
goodestimateofmeanPApressure(PAP).
Mean PAP = 4(peak PR velocity)2 + RV end-
diastolic pressure (EDP); RV EDP= CVP, which
again is measured or assumed. If the PR velocity
attheendofdiastoleisused,PAEDPcanbecalcu-
lated.PAEDP =4(end-diastolicPRvelocity) 2 +RV
EDP; RV EDP= CVP, which again is measured or
assumed.
The same arguments can be used with MR and
ARvelocities.
Movementoftheatrialseptum
Theshapeoftheatrialseptumisdeterminedbythe
atrial pressure gradient. Normally, LAP is greater
than RAP and the atrial septum is bowed toward
the RA. During the passive, expiratory phase of
mechanical ventilation, there is a transient mid-
systolicreversalofinter-atrialseptumpositionwith
bowing of the atrial septum into the LA from
the RA. This ﬁnding is highly predictive of a
pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (PCWP) less
than 15mmHg. Conversely, absence of this ﬁnd-
ing is highly predictive of a PCWP greater than
15mmHg.
Theobservationofanatrialseptumcontinuously
shiftedtotheleftwouldpredictelevatedRAP.
Pulmonaryandhepaticvenousblood
ﬂowvelocities
Reductions in the systolic portion of the hepatic
venous Doppler spectra relative to the diastolic
portion are strongly correlated with increases in
RAP. In fact, progressive decreases in the ratio
VTIsystolic/(VTIsystolic + VTIdiastolic) are associ-
ated with increasing RAP. Similar observations
have been made regarding pulmonary venous
DopplerspectraandPCWPandLAP.WhenLVEDP
>15mmHgtheﬂowdurationofpulmonaryversus
atrialﬂowreversalismorethan30mslongerthan
thedurationofthemitralAwave.
Thoracicaorta
TEEisusefulforexaminationoftheascendingaorta,
aorticarch,anddescendingthoracicaorta.Thedis-
tal ascending aorta and proximal aortic arch are
poorly visualized because of interposed interfer-
ence from air in the trachea and/or left main stem
bronchus.Unfortunately,thisareaencompassesthe
region in which the aortic cannula, aortic cross-
clamp, and proximal ends of the saphenous vein
grafts are typically placed. Because of the higher
incidenceofstrokeseeninpatientswithatheroma
in the ascending and descending aorta undergoing
undergo cardiac surgery with CPB, there is con-
cernaboutmanipulationoftheaorticifitcontains
atheroma.Presently,onlyepiaorticscanning(place-
ment of a transducer directly on the aorta) can
reliablyvisualizethisarea.
Atheromatous disease of the aorta is graded I
to V as follows: I, normal; II, extensive intimal
thickening;III,sessileatheromaprotruding <5mmAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch03” — 2007/7/17 — 20:28 — page 84 — #43
84 Chapter3
Fig.3.37 Moderateplaqueinthedescendingaorta.
Suchanimagemaypromptanepiaorticexaminationof
theascendingaorta.
Fig.3.38 Anepiaorticscanoftheascendingaorta
revealsgradeIIIatheromatousdisease.
into the aorta; IV, sessile atheroma protruding
>5mm into the aorta; and V, mobile atheroma
(Figs3.37&3.38).
Observation of atheroma in the aorta should
promptattentiontoplacementoftheaorticcannula.
Although TEE can rarely be used to visualize the
siteofaorticcannulation,itcanbeusedtovisualize
the jet out of the aortic cannula. This is accom-
plishedusingCFDopplerinconjunctionwitha2-D
image of the aortic arch. The direction of the jet
out of the aortic cannula is important because the
jetcandislodgeplaque.Misdirectionofthecannula
jet down the left subclavian artery or left CA also
can be detected using CF Doppler in conjunction
with 2-D images of those vessels. TEE also is used
extensively to diagnosis aneurysm, dissection, and
disruption of the ascending aorta, aortic arch, and
descendingaorta.Ultrasoundartifactsarefoundin
50–60%ofpatientsandmayresultinmisdiagnosis.
Therearetwoclassesofartifacts:linearandmirror
image.Linearartifactsoccurintheascendingaorta
andaretheresultofreﬂectionsfromeithertheleft
atrium(LA)orrightpulmonaryartery(RPA).They
canbedistinguishedfromintimalﬂapsbecausethey
donotdisplayrapidoscillatorymotion,donotdis-
rupt the CF Doppler ﬂow pattern, are parallel to
theposterioraorticwall,havemovement(bestseen
withMmode)paralleltothatoftheposterioraortic
wall,andarelocatedtwiceasfarfromtheposterior
walloftheLAorRPAasfromtheposteriorwallof
the aorta. Mirror image artifacts occur in the arch
anddescendingaortaandgivetheappearanceofa
double barrelled aorta. They are caused by reﬂec-
tions from the lung–aorta interface. They can be
distinguishedfromintimalﬂapsorfalselumensby
the double-barrelled mirror image appearance and
by the lack of interruption of the CF Doppler ﬂow
pattern.
Congenitalheartdisease
AcomprehensivetreatmentoftheuseofTEEofthe
widevarietyofcongenitallesionsthepediatriccar-
diacanesthesiologistislikelytoencounterisbeyond
the scope of this chapter. However, by becom-
ing familiar with some basic principles, the reader
should be able to begin conducting a good quality
examination in patients with congenital heart dis-
ease.Withabiplaneormultiplaneprobe,acompre-
hensive2-DandDopplerexaminationoftheheart,
including the LVOT and RVOT can be obtained.
The LVOT and RVOT are not well-oriented for
performance of a Doppler examination with stan-
dard single-plane imaging. If only a single-plane
probeisavailable,thedeeptransgastricpositionwill
allowvisualizationoftheLVOTandRVOTandthe
ventriculo-arterialconnections.Insomesituations,
deep transgastric imaging may provide superior
delineation of anatomy than biplane examination.
From a practical point of view, deep transgastric
imagingwithabiplaneprobeisdifﬁcultandmuchAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch03” — 2007/7/17 — 20:28 — page 85 — #44
Monitoring 85
less satisfactory because the extra transducer ele-
mentmakesthedistancefromthetipoftheprobe
to the ﬂexion point longer. This makes good tis-
sue contact difﬁcult, particularly in small infants.
Thefollowingissuesshouldbeaddressedwhileper-
forminganexaminationofapatientwithcongenital
heartdisease.
Atrialidentityandlocation
Identity of the atrial chamber by examining the
appendage is helpful. The right atrial appendage
(RAA) is best seen in the transverse plane at
the level demonstrated in Fig. 3.22. Flexion of the
probe will allow better visualization. The RAA has
a broad junction to the RA which is short and
blunt (Snoopy’s nose). The LAA is seen in multi-
ple views. The LAA has a narrow junction to the
LA, it is long, narrow, and crenulated (Snoopy’s
ear). The IVC almost always returns to the RA;
whereas, the return patterns of the SVC and pul-
monary veins are much less reliable. The RA will
have a eustachian valve and the LA septal surface
hastheﬂapofthefossaovalis.Theatrialsitussoli-
tusisthenormalcondition:theRAontherightside
oftheheart,LAontheleftsideoftheheart.Atrial
situsinversusoccurswhentheRAisontheleftside
of the heart, and the LA on the right side of the
heart.
Ventricularsizeandidentity
A chamber is considered a ventricle if it receives
more than 50% of the ventricular inlet or ﬁbrous
ringofanAVvalve.TheAVvalveneednotbepatent
for the chamber to be considered a ventricle, as is
the case with tricuspid or mitral atresia. Likewise,
thechamberdoesnotneedtobelargetobeconsid-
eredaventricle,asisthecasewithhypoplasticleft
heart syndrome. The right and left ventricles have
differentmorphologies:
1 RV:
a has the tricuspid valve (three leaﬂets) with one
the leaﬂets having a chordal attachment to the
septum; there are three papillary muscles that are
locatedapically.
b the septal leaﬂet of the tricuspid valve inserts
slightly lower on the intraventricular septum than
theanteriorleaﬂetofthemitralvalve.
c theRVhasatriangularshapeandatrabeculated
endocardialsurface.
d theRVhasthemoderatorband,abandoftissue
that stretches from lower intraventricular septum
to the anterior RV wall and is best seen in the
four-chamber view with retroﬂexion of the TEE
probe.
2 LV:
a hasthemitralvalve(twoleaﬂets)withnochordal
attachment to the septum; there are two papillary
musclesthatarelocatedatthejunctionoftheapical
andmiddletwo-thirdsofthechamber.
b hasanellipsoidalshapeandasmoothendocardial
surface.
Greatvesselorientationandidentity
Normally, the great vessels are oriented at 45◦ to
eachotherwhentheyleavetheheartwiththepul-
monary artery (PA) anterior to the aorta. When
theyareviewedwithechocardiography,onevessel
willbeobservedintheshortaxisandtheotherwill
haveasausageshape.Thisisseeninthetransverse
planeimage.Whenthegreatvesselsaretransposed,
theyareorientedparalleltoeachotherwhenthey
leave the heart. When they are viewed by TEE,
bothvesselswillbeobservedinthesameaxis.The
rule of thumb when viewing transposed vessels in
the short axis is that the anterior vessel is invari-
ablytheaorta.Whenthevesselsarealignedsideto
side,thedeterminationismoredifﬁcultandusually
requiresﬁndingthearchoftheaortaorthebranch
pulmonaryarteriestomakethedetermination.
After the great vessels are identiﬁed, their rela-
tionship to the ventricles must be delineated. This
requires creativity in ﬁnding the views that allow
this to be seen. This is an instance in which
deeptransgastricviewsareuseful,althoughbiplane
imagingalsoworkswell.
Presenceofintracardiacshuntsand
obstructivelesions
CF Doppler is indispensable in identifying intra-
cardiac shunts, including those not seen with 2-D
imaging. CW Doppler is useful in determining
velocities and gradients across restrictive commu-
nications or valves, whereas PW Doppler assesses
less restrictive oriﬁces as well as hepatic andAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch03” — 2007/7/17 — 20:28 — page 86 — #45
86 Chapter3
pulmonary venous blood ﬂow. The RVOT must
be examined carefully for both dynamic and ﬁxed
obstructive lesions. Two-dimensional echocardio-
graphy in combination with Doppler will clearly
delineate dynamic obstructive lesions. The use of
CWDopplertodetermineintracardiacpressuresas
describedpreviouslyisalsovaluable.
Evaluationofthesurgicalrepair
Acomprehensivepreoperativeintraoperativestudy
is the foundation of repair assessment. This allows
the operator to focus the examination on the
repairedlesions.Lookforthecommonthings:
1 Patchleaks.Afterventricularseptaldefect(VSD)
and atrial septal defect (ASD) repairs, detection
of residual VSD leaks can be more difﬁcult than
it sounds, because the VSD patch produces areas
of echo attenuation in the RV and RVOT that
may mask leaks. The use of multiplane imaging
improvesdetectionbutdoesnotcompletelyresolve
thisproblem.
2 Regurgitant valves. After valvuloplasty but also
after transvalvular approaches to the lesion (such
asapproachtoaVSDviathetricuspidvalve).
3 Stenotic anastomoses. Pulmonary vein anasto-
mosistoLAintotalanomalouspulmonaryvenous
return(TAPVR).SVCtoPAinbidirectionalcavopul-
monaryconnections(bidirectionalGlenn)andtotal
cavopulmonaryconnections(Fontan).PWDoppler
interrogation of these cavopulmonary connections
willrevealaphasicvenousbloodﬂowpatternwith
respiratoryvariation.
4 Residual outﬂow tract gradients. After tetralogy
ofFallotrepairsandrepairofsubaorticmembranes.
5 Residual gradients across ASD or VSD left open
in the course of a staged repair (tricuspid atresia,
doubleoutletRV,hypoplasticleftheartsyndrome).
6 Ventricularfunctionassessment.Afterallrepairs.
Particular attention paid to patients with reim-
planted coronary arteries such as vessel switch for
transpositionofthegreatvesselsorRossprocedure
(transplantationofthepulmonicvalvetotheaortic
positionandcreationofanRV-to-PAconduit)and
to patients who may have had air in the coronary
arteriesduringthesurgicalprocess.
7 Patencyofaortopulmonaryshunts.CWDoppler
willdetectahighvelocitysignalwithﬂowinsystole
anddiastole.CFDopplerwillhelppositiontheCW
Dopplerbeam.
Saline-contrastechocardiography
Saline-contrast echocardiography is a technique
thatcanbeusedtodetectintracardiacshunting.The
basis of the technique is opaciﬁcation of the right
heartchambersusingagitatedsalineinjectedrapidly
intoacatheter.Microbubbleformationoccursasthe
solutionleavesthecatheteroriﬁceasdissolvedgas
escapes from solution. The presence of micro bub-
bles in high concentrations opaciﬁes the RA and
RV. The amount of opaciﬁcation with a properly
performedprocedureisimpressive.
Saline-contraststudiesareusedmostcommonly
in conjunction with a provocative maneuver to
detect right-to-left ﬂow patency of the foramen
ovale. Agitated saline is produced by vigorously
transferring 10mL of saline with a small amount
of air between two syringes connected by a stop-
cock. Alternatively, 8mL of saline and 2mL of the
patient’s blood can be used. The agitated mixture
canbeinjectedperipherallyorcentrally.
Detectionoftheright-to-leftﬂowpatencyofthe
patent foramen ovale (PFO) is dependent on tran-
sientlyincreasingRAPabovethatofLAP.Theeasiest
way to accomplish this is by applying a Valsalva
maneuver (actually sustained positive inspiratory
pressure)duringpositive-pressureventilation.This
transientlyimpedesvenousreturntotherightheart
andsubsequentlytotheleftheart.Uponreleaseof
the Valsalva, the rapid increase in venous return
totherightheartwillprecedetheincreaseinreturn
totheleftheartandtheresultwillbeatransientele-
vationinRAPabovethatofLAP.Theatrialseptum
mustbowintotheLAforthetesttobeeffective.The
testisaccomplishedbyinjectingthesalinecontrast
during the Valsalva maneuver. After opaciﬁcation
of the RA occurs, the Valsalva is released and the
TEEisobservedforappearanceofsalinecontrastin
theLA.Appearanceofthreeormoremicrobubbles
intheLAwithinthreecardiaccyclesisindicativeof
aﬂow-patentPFO.
Intracardiacandendovascularcatheters
TEE can be used in a wide variety of ways to
imageintracardiacandendovascularcathetersandAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch03” — 2007/7/17 — 20:28 — page 87 — #46
Monitoring 87
devices.Afewofthemostcommonandimportant
aresummarizedhere:
• Intra-aortic ballon pump (IABP). TEE views of the
descending thoracic aorta can and should be used
to document that the tip of the IABP is below the
level of the aortic arch and the takeoff of the left
subclavian artery. In addition, inﬂation and deﬂa-
tioncanbeobserved,whichmayaidindetectionof
arupturedballoon.
• Coronary sinus cannula for cardioplegia. The coro-
nary sinus is easily seen in most patients and is
obliteratedwhenthecatheterisplacedproperly.
• Ventricular assist devices. The inﬂow and outﬂow
cannulas to the devices can be seen and should be
checkedtoruleoutobstruction.
• Venous cannulas for CPB. Position in the IVC and
SVCcanbechecked.Inparticular,theIVCcannula
should not impinge on any hepatic veins. Difﬁ-
culty in placing an IVC cannula can be caused by
aprominenteustachianvalve.
• PACs. The position of a PAC can be documented
bysequentialviewsoftheRA,RV,andPA.Thismay
havesomeuseifcatheterplacementisdifﬁcult.
Contraindicationsandcomplications
The relative and absolute contraindications to use
ofaTEEprobearesummarizedbelow:
• Relative:
a Recentgastroesophagealoperation
b Esophagealvaricies
c Uppergastrointestinalbleed
d Cervicaldiskdisease
e Severecervicalarthritis
f Unexplaineddysphagiaorodynophagia
• Absolute:
a Esophagealobstruction(stricture,neoplasm)
b Esophagealﬁstula,laceration,orperforation
c Esophagealdiverticulum
d Cervicalspineinstability
A number of complications have been reported in
associationwithuseofTEEprobes.Mostcomplica-
tionsinadultsinvolvetraumatotheuppergastro-
intestinal(GI)tractrangingfromminorlacerations
to perforation of the esophagus. The incidence of
swallowing complications after cardiac surgery in
adults having undergone intraoperative TEE also
maybehigher.
The complications reported in infants and chil-
dreninvolvehemodynamicorrespiratorycompro-
mise.VigilanceisrequiredwhenusingTEEprobes
in a small child, even with the availability of pedi-
atric probes. Airway obstruction may occur due
to compression of the small trachea or bronchus
between surrounding tissue and the rigid probe.
Likewise, aortic or aortic arch vessel compression
mayoccur.
Prophylactic antibiotic coverage for patients
undergoingTEEexaminationsisdebatedbecauseit
carriesariskofinducingbacteremialikeanyother
endoscopic procedure. Most patients undergoing
cardiac surgery receive prophylactic antibiotics of
some kind, and many consider this sufﬁcient
prophylaxisforendocarditis.
Coagulationmonitoring
By necessity, cardiac anesthesiologists must be
familiarwithcoagulationmonitoring.CPBrequires
anticoagulation,andreversaloftheanticoagulated
condition. In addition, the patient is often prone
to bleeding disorders wither through their pre-
operative medication regimen, thrombocyptope-
nia or the inﬂammatory response associated with
surgery.Whetheratthebeginningofthecasewith
heparinizationorattheendofthecasewhenthere
maybeexcessivebleedingfromanunknowncause,
theanesthesiologistmustbefamiliarwiththetools
totreatthepatient.
Activatedcoagulationtime
TheActivatedcoagulationtime(ACT)ismostcom-
monly used to monitor for heparin effect. Whole
blood is added to a test tube containing either
diatomaceousearth(celite)orkaolin.Thisactivator
induces thrombosis which is measured in seconds.
NormalACTvaluesrangebetween80–120seconds.
Whenaprotininisusedasanantiﬁbrinolyticagent,
kaolin ACT cartridges should be used; celite ACT
cartridges are associated with falsely elevated ACT
values (thereby making the patient appear fully
anticoagulated when, in fact, this is not the case).
The ACT test can be modiﬁed by adding hepari-
nase to one of the chambers. In this situation,
heparinisreveredwiththeheparinase,andthere-
fore any abnormality in ACT value is likely due toAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch03” — 2007/7/17 — 20:28 — page 88 — #47
88 Chapter3
somefactorotherthaninadequateheparinreversal
with protamine. The ACT is subject to variability,
and there are elevated ACT values seen with both
hemodilution and hypothermia. Nonetheless, the
ACTisthestandardmonitorofcoagulationinmost
operating rooms. The ACT should be checked at
leasteveryhalf-hourwhileonCPB.
Heparindose–responsetest
The Heparin dose–response test (HDR) allows the
clinician to ﬁne tune the patient variability in
responsetoaheparindosebyconstructinganindi-
vidualized heparin dose–response curve. The HDR
usesaknownquantityofheparininanACTdeter-
mination,andanalgorithmusingthebaselineACT
andtheestimatedbloodvolumetoconstructadose–
responsecurve.Theadvantageofthissystemisthe
greater accuracy in dosing eliminating both under
and over dosing with heparin. Further, this test
provides information on individualized protamine
doingattheterminationofCPB.
Heparinconcentrationtesting
Heparin concentration can be measured using a
device that automatically titrates protamine in
known quantities in whole, heparinized blood.
Protamine neutralizes heparin in the ratio of
1mg/100units of heparin. With this information,
a protamine–heparin titration can yield the circu-
lation concentration of heparin. When monitoring
heparinconcentration,higherdosesofheparinare
typicallyadministeredthanwhentheACTismon-
itored likely because of the effects of hypothermia
andhemodilutionontheACT.Inside-by-sidecom-
parisons between ACT and heparin concentration
monitoring, the additional heparin administered
seems to have little effect on blood loss or blood
administrationoutcomes.
Highdosethrombintime
TheHighdosethrombintime(HiTT)measuresthe
conversionofﬁbrinogentoﬁbrinbythrombin.HiTT
is not altered by hemodilution, hypothermia or
aprotinin.
Standardbloodtestsofcoagulation
AfterCPBandreversalofheparinwithprotamine,
there are some patients that continue to bleed
for unknown reasons. In these patients, stan-
dard tests of coagulation are indicated. These tests
include a prothrombin time (PT), activated partial
thromboplastintime(aPTT),ﬁbrinogenandplatelet
count. The PT (normal 12–14seconds) measures
the extrinsic and common coagulation pathways.
It is prolonged with factor VII deﬁciency, warfarin
treatment, vitamin K deﬁciency and in the pres-
ence of large heparin doses. The aPTT measures
theintrinsicandﬁnalcommonpathwayofcoagula-
tion.Itisextremelysensitivetoheparin,deﬁciencies
of factors XII, XI, IX and VIII, and kallikrein. Nor-
malaPTTis28–32seconds.Fibrinogenandplatelet
levels measure the quantitative amount of these
substances in the blood. Normal ﬁbrinogen levels
rangefrom180to220mg/dL.
Cryoprecipitate (a source of concentrated
ﬁbrinogen) is indicated when the ﬁbrinogen
level is below 150mg/dL. Thrombocytopenia is
encountered when the platelet count falls below
100000/ µL.Plateletcountsgreaterthan50000/ µL
havenocorrelationwithbleedingtimeorobserved
postoperative bleeding in cardiac surgical patients.
Qualitative defects in platelet function are often
moreimportantthantheplateletcount.
Fibrindegradation
Evidence of normal or abnormal ﬁbrinolysis is
obtained by measuring the end products of ﬁb-
rin degradation. When plasmin cleaves ﬁbrin,
dimeric units are released into the blood, and
these “d-dimers” can be quantiﬁed. The presence
of d-dimers in the blood signiﬁes ﬁbrin cross-
link degradation and may represent a condition of
abnormalﬁbrinolysis.
Bleedingtime
The bleeding time is obtained by performing a
precisely measured incision in the patient’s fore-
arm above which a cuff is inﬂated to 40mmHg.
The wound is dabbed with an absorbent tissue
and the time until clot formation is measured.
The bleeding time has no predictive value in car-
diac surgical patients and has largely fallen out of
favor.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch03” — 2007/7/17 — 20:28 — page 89 — #48
Monitoring 89
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e)
Fig.3.39 Thromboelastographtracings.(a)Normal.
(b)Coagulationfactordeﬁciency.(c)Plateletdysfunction
ordeﬁciency.(d)Fibrinolysis.(e)Hypercoagulability.
(FromMallettSV,CoxDJ. BrJAnaesth 1992;69:307–13,
withpermission.)
Plateletaggregometry
Activated platelets aggregate. Aggregometry mea-
suresplateletresponsivenesstovariousagonistsand
providesinformationonthequalityofthecirculat-
ing platelets to respond to various stimuli. Various
agonists include epinephrine, adenosine diphos-
phateandcollagen.Impairedaggregationisseenin
patientstakingaspirinandafterexposuretoCPB.
Thromboelastography
Thromboelastography (TEG) is a method of mon-
itoring blood viscosity that can be used to evalu-
atevariouscomponentsofthecoagulationsystem.
The device usually contains two identical chan-
nels so that two blood samples can be run at
once. Each channel consists of a disposable cylin-
drical plastic cup mounted in a base. The cup is
ﬁlled with a blood and maintained at 37◦C dur-
ing testing. A piston is attached to a torsion wire
that generates a signal as the blood clots. With
this presentation, the real-time development of
the TEG pattern can be assessed. A TEG sam-
ple trace is shown in Fig. 3.39. The test usually
takes between 15–30minutes to complete and
allowsdiagnosisofavarietyofpathologicconditions
includingcoagulationfactordeﬁciency,plateletand
ﬁbrinogenfunctionandﬁbrinolysis.Inclinicalprac-
tice the TEG has been shown to function well as
a predictor of abnormal bleeding. In some centers,
TEGuseisassociatedwithareductioninmediastinal
exploration for bleeding and transfusion of blood
products.
Suggestedreading
American Society of Anesthesiologists. Standards for
Basic Anesthetic Monitoring. Available online at: http://
www.asahq.org/publicationsAndServices/standards/
02.pdf.AccessedJune28,2006.
CheitlinMD,ArmstrongWF,AurigemmaGP, et al.ACC;
AHA;ASE.ACC/AHA/ASE2003GuidelineUpdatefor
the Clinical Application of Echocardiography: sum-
mary article. A report of the American College of
Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force
on Practice Guidelines (ACC/AHA/ASE Committee to
Update the 1997 Guidelines for the Clinical Appli-
cation of Echocardiography). J Am Soc Echocardiogr
2003;16:1091–110.
Groban L, Dolinski SY. Transesophageal echocardio-
graphicevaluationofdiastolicfunction. Chest2005;128:
3652–63.
Practice Guidelines for Pulmonary Artery Catheteriza-
tion.AmericanSocietyofAnesthesiologists,Inc.Avail-
able online at: http://www.asahq.org/publicationsAnd
Services/pulm_artery.pdf.AccessedJune28,2006.
Shanewise JS, Cheung AT, Aronson S,et al. ASE/SCA
Guidelines For Performing a Comprehensive Intraop-
erative Multiplane Transesophageal Echocardiography
Examination:recommendationsoftheAmericanSoci-
ety of Echocardiography Council for Intraoperative
Echocardiography and the Society of Cardiovascular
Anesthesiologists Task Force for Certiﬁcation in Peri-
operative Transesophageal Echocardiography. Anesth
Analg1999;89:870–84.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch04” — 2007/7/17 — 20:30 — page 90 — #1
CHAPTER 4
AnesthesiaforMyocardial
Revascularization
Coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) surgery
accounts for approximately 500000 operative
proceduresperyearintheUnitedStates.Although
thereisgreatinterestanddevelopmentinalterna-
tivestoCABG,thisoperativeprocedureremainsan
appropriate,indicatedtherapyforalargenumberof
patients.Patientoutcomeafterpercutaneouscoro-
nary intervention (i.e. stent placement, atherec-
tomy,angioplasty,other)remainsamovingtarget
asnewtherapiesandtechnologiesaredeveloped
andemployed.Similartothis,outcomeafterCABG
isevolving.TheindicationsforCABGareperiod-
icallyreviewedbytheAmericanCollegeofCardi-
ology(ACC)andtheAmericanHeartAssociation
(AHA)(Tables4.1and4.2).Thereaderisreferred
totheACC’swebsite(www.acc.org)forthelatest
update.
Aﬁrmunderstandingofthedynamicsofcoronary
bloodﬂow,thedeterminantsofmyocardialoxygen
balance, and the consequences and treatment of
ischemiaarenecessarytocareforpatientsunder-
goingcoronaryrevascularization.Thischapterwill
reviewthephysiologyofcoronarybloodﬂow,the
elementsofmyocardialoxygenation,thecareand
treatmentofpatientswithactiveischemia,andthe
anestheticcareofpatientspresentingforCABG.
Control of coronary blood ﬂow
Coronary perfusion pressure
Coronary perfusion can only occur when aortic
rootpressureexceedssubepicardialandsubendo-
cardialpressure.Myocardialback-pressure,which
isthesummationoffactorsthattendtocollapse
microvessels, is important in determining coro-
naryperfusionpressure(CPP).Inclinicalpractice,
myocardial back-pressure is equal to myocardial
tissue pressure. The best estimate of myocardial
tissuepressureistheventricularpressure.Indias-
tole,thiswillbetheventricularend-diastolicpres-
sure.Thebestclinicalestimateofleftventricular
end-diastolic pressure (LVEDP) is the pulmonary
capillarywedgepressure(PCWP);whereasthebest
estimate of right ventricular end-diastolic pres-
sure(RVEDP)isthecentralvenousorrightatrial
pressure(RAP).
In the absence of obstruction to ﬂow within
thecoronaryarterialsystem,leftventricular(LV)
CPP is the driving force for blood going into
the myocardium – the resistance to blood ﬂow.
Physiologically,intheleftventricle,thisrelation-
shiptranslatesasCPP =aorticrootdiastolicblood
pressure–PCWP(Fig.4.1).CPPwilldifferduring
systoleanddiastole.Intheleftventricle,ventricular
pressureduringsystoleisequaltoor,asinthecase
ofaorticstenosis,greaterthanaorticrootpressure.
Forthisreason,mostcoronarybloodﬂowtotheleft
ventricleoccursduringventriculardiastole.Inthe
rightventricle,inwhichrightventricular(RV)sys-
tolicanddiastolicpressuresarebothconsiderably
lessthanaorticrootpressure,coronarybloodﬂow
isdistributedevenlybetweensystoleanddiastole.
Autoregulation
Changes in coronary vascular resistance are nec-
essary for the myocardium to regulate coronary
90AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch04” — 2007/7/17 — 20:30 — page 91 — #2
AnesthesiaforMyocardialRevascularization 91
Table4.1 Thelistofindicationsforcoronaryarterybypassgraftsurgeryforpatientswithstableanginaandunstable
angina/Non-ST-segmentelevationmyocardialinfarction(MI).Theindicationsareassignedclassandthelevelof
evidenceprovidedfortherecommendation.(FromEagleKA,GuytonRA,DavidoffR etal.ACC/AHA2004
GuidelineUpdateforCoronaryArteryBypassGraftSurgery:summaryarticle.AreportoftheAmericanCollegeof
Cardiology/AmericanHeartAssociationTaskForceonPracticeGuidelines(CommitteetoUpdatethe1999
GuidelinesforCoronaryArteryBypassGraftSurgery). Circulation2004;110:1168–76.)
Stable angina
Class I
1CABGisrecommendedforpatientswithstableanginawhohavesigniﬁcantleftmaincoronaryarterystenosis (Level of
evidence: A)
2CABGisrecommendedforpatientswithstableanginawhohaveleftmainequivalent:signiﬁcant( ≥70%)stenosisof
theproximalLADandproximalleftcircumﬂexartery (Level of evidence: A)
3CABGisrecommendedforpatientswithstableanginawhohave3-vesseldisease.(Survivalbeneﬁtisgreaterwhen
LVEFis <0.50) (Level of evidence: A)
4 CABGisrecommendedinpatientswithstableanginawhohave2-vesseldiseasewithsigniﬁcantproximalLADstenosis
andeitherEF <0.50ordemonstrableischemiaonnoninvasivetesting (Level of evidence: A)
5CABG is beneﬁcial for patients with stable angina who have 1- or 2-vessel CAD without signiﬁcant proximal
LAD stenosis but with a large area of viable myocardium and high-risk criteria on noninvasive testing(Level of
evidence: B)
6CABGisbeneﬁcialforpatientswithstableanginawhohavedevelopeddisablinganginadespitemaximalnoninvasive
therapy,whensurgerycanbeperformedwithacceptablerisk.Iftheanginaisnottypical,objectiveevidenceofischemia
shouldbeobtained (Level of evidence: B)
Class IIa
1CABG is reasonable in patients with stable angina who have proximal LAD stenosis with 1-vessel disease.
(ThisrecommendationbecomesClassIifextensiveischemiaisdocumentedbynoninvasivestudyand/orLVEFis <0.50)
(Level of evidence: A)
2CABGmaybeusefulforpatientswithstableanginawhohave1-or2-vesselCADwithoutsigniﬁcantproximalLAD
stenosisbutwhohaveamoderateareaofviablemyocardiumanddemonstrableischemiaonnoninvasivetesting
(Level of evidence: B)
Class III
1CABGisnotrecommendedforpatientswithstableanginawhohave1-or2-vesseldiseasenotinvolvingsigniﬁcant
proximalLADstenosis,patientswhohavemildsymptomsthatareunlikelyduetomyocardialischemia,orpatientswho
havenotreceivedanadequatetrialtherapyandthefollowing:
aHaveonlyasmallareaofviablemyocardium (Level of evidence: B) or
bHavenodemonstrableischemiaonnoninvasivetesting (Level of evidence: B)
2CABGisnotrecommendedforpatientswithstableanginawhohaveborderlinecoronarystenoses(50–60%diameter
inlocationsotherthantheleftmaincoronaryartery)andnodemonstrableischemiaonnoninvasivetesting (Level of
evidence: B)
3CABGisnotrecommendedforpatientswithstableanginawhohaveinsigniﬁcantcoronarystenosis( <50%diameter
reduction) (Level of evidence: B)
Unstable angina/non-ST-segment elevation MI
Class I
1CABGshouldbeperformedforpatientswithunstableangina/non-ST-segmentelevationMIwithsigniﬁcantleftmain
coronaryarterystenosis (Level of evidence: A)
2CABGshouldbeperformedforpatientswithunstableangina/non-ST-segmentelevationMIwhohaveleftmain
equivalent:signiﬁcant( ≥70%)stenosisoftheproximalLADandproximalleftcircumﬂexartery (Level of evidence: A)
Continuedp.92AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch04” — 2007/7/17 — 20:30 — page 92 — #3
92 Chapter4
Table 4.1 (Continued).
3CABGisrecommendedforunstableangina/non-ST-segmentelevationMIinpatientsinwhomrevascularizationis
notoptimalorpossibleandwhohaveongoingischemianotresponsivetomaximalnonsurgicaltherapy (Level of
evidence: B)
Class IIa
1CABGisprobablyindicatedinpatientswithunstableangina/non-ST-segmentelevationMIwhohaveproximalLAD
stenosiswith1-or2-vesseldisease (Level of evidence: A)
Class IIb
1CABGmaybeconsideredforpatientswithunstableangina/non-ST-segmentelevationMIwhohave1-or2-vessel
diseasenotinvolvingtheproximalLADwhenpercutaneousrevascularizationisnotoptimalorpossible.(Ifthereisa
largeareaofviablemyocardiumandhigh-riskcriteriaaremetonnoninvasivetesting,thisrecommendationbecomes
ClassI) (Level of evidence: B)
Class I:Conditionsforwhichthereisevidenceand/orgeneralagreementthata
givenprocedureortreatmentisusefulandeffective
Class II:Conditionsforwhichthereisconﬂictingevidenceand/oradivergence
ofopinionabouttheusefulness/efﬁcacyofaprocedureortreatment
IIa:Weightofevidence/opinionisinfavorofusefulness/efﬁcacy
IIb:Usefulness/efﬁcacyislesswellestablishedbyevidence/opinion
Class III: Conditions for which there is evidence and/or general agreement
thattheprocedure/treatmentisnotuseful/effectiveandinsomecasesmaybe
harmful
Level of Evidence
LevelofEvidenceA: Dataarederivedfrommultiplerandomizedclinicaltrials
ormeta-analyses
Level of Evidence B:Data are derived from a single randomized trial, or
nonrandomizedstudies
Level of Evidence C:Only consensus opinion of experts, case studies, or
standardofcare
Table 4.2Theclassiﬁcationof
recommendationsandlevelof
evidenceusedbytheAmerican
CollegeofCardiologyandthe
AmericanHeartAssociation
GuidelinesforCoronaryArteryBypass
GraftSurgery.(FromEagleKA,
GuytonRA,DavidoffR etal.ACC/AHA
2004GuidelineUpdateforCoronary
ArteryBypassGraftSurgery:summary
article.AreportoftheAmerican
CollegeofCardiology/AmericanHeart
AssociationTaskForceonPractice
Guidelines(CommitteetoUpdatethe
1999GuidelinesforCoronaryArtery
BypassGraftSurgery). Circulation
2004;110:1168–76.)
blood ﬂow in response to changes in myocardial
oxygen consumption. Coronary autoregulation is
the intrinsic ability of the myocardium to main-
tain coronary blood ﬂow constant over a variety
of perfusion pressures. As illustrated in Fig. 4.2,
coronaryautoregulationmaintainscoronaryblood
ﬂow constant between perfusion pressures of
60and140mmHg.Belowandabovethesepres-
sures,myocardialbloodﬂowispressure-dependent;
thatis,myocardialbloodﬂowvarieslinearlywith
pressureandwiththetimeavailableforperfusion
(diastolefortheleftventricle,systoleanddiastole
fortheRV).
Autoregulationisdependentonchangesincoro-
nary vascular resistance. The arterioles are the
primarysourceofresistanceinthecoronaryarte-
rial system. Autoregulation is tied to myocardial
oxygen metabolism and coronary venous partial
pressureofoxygenP O2,althoughtheexactmedi-
ators at the vascular level are unknown. During
exercise, reductions in coronary vascular resis-
tance result in increased coronary blood ﬂowAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch04” — 2007/7/17 — 20:30 — page 93 — #4
AnesthesiaforMyocardialRevascularization 93
100BP (mmHg)
0
Time
Systole
MADBP
Aortic blood 
pressure
LAP or PCWP
Fig. 4.1 Leftventricularcoronaryperfusionpressure
(CPP)isthedifferencebetweenaorticdiastolicblood
pressureandleftventricularend-diastolicpressure
(LVEDP).Clinically,LVEDPisestimatedbyleftatrial
pressure(LAP)orpulmonarycapillarywedgepressure
(PCWP).DiastolicCPPisrepresentedbycross-hatched
areaandcanbeseentodecreaseasdiastoleprogresses.
AveragediastolicCPPcanbeobtainedbytaking
differencebetweenmeanaorticdiastolicbloodpressure
(MADBP)andLAPorPCWP.Lengthoftimeavailablefor
perfusionofleftventricleisdependentonlengthof
diastole.Shorteningdiastolebyincreasinglengthof
systoleperbeatorbyincreasingheartratewilldecrease
thetimeavailableforleftventricularperfusion.(From
DiNardoJA.Anesthesiaformyocardialrevascularization.
In:DiNardoJA(ed). AnesthesiaforCardiacSurgery ,
2ndedn.Stamford,CT:Appleton&Lange,1998:81–108,
withpermission.)
(up to six-times normal). Likewise, as CPP falls,
coronary vascular resistance decreases to main-
taincoronarybloodﬂow.Atpressures <60mmHg,
there is a progressive loss of autoregulation. At
somepoint,thecoronaryarteriesdilatemaximally
and coronary blood ﬂow now decreases linearly
withCPP.Autoregulationinthesubendocardium
isexhaustedbeforethatofthesubpericardium.
Collateral blood ﬂow
The development of collateral blood ﬂow in
humans is dependent on enlargement of pre-
existing anastomoses between coronary arteries.
These anastomoses may be either serial (pre-
stenosis to post-stenosis in the same artery) or
parallel(onearterytoanother).Collateralpathways
enlargeinresponsetopressuregradients.Afterthe
collateralpathwayshaveenlarged,thedirectionand
magnitudeofcollateralbloodﬂowremainpressure
dependent.Forthisreason,collateralbloodﬂowto
apost-stenoticsegmentcanbesigniﬁcantlyreduced
Coronary blood flow (mL/min/100 g)
150
100
50
0
Coronary perfusion pressure (mmHg)
0 40 80 120 160
Autoregulatory
vasodilator
reserve
Fig. 4.2 Coronarybloodﬂowisseentobeconstant
(autoregulated)overcoronaryperfusionpressuresfrom
60–140mmHg.Whencoronaryperfusionpressure
reaches60mmHg,therewillbemaximalautoregulatory
vasodilationtomaintaincoronarybloodﬂow.Further
decreasesincoronaryperfusionpressurewillresultin
decreasesincoronarybloodﬂow.Atpressureshigher
than60mmHg,maximalautoregulatoryvasodilationwill
provideautoregulatoryvasodilatorreserve.Thisreserve
providestheincreasedcoronarybloodﬂownecessary
tomeetincreasesinmyocardialoxygenconsumption
suchasthoseinducedbyexercise.(FromDiNardoJA.
Anesthesiaformyocardialrevascularization.In:
DiNardoJA(ed). AnesthesiaforCardiacSurgery ,2ndedn.
Stamford,CT:Appleton&Lange,1998:81–108,with
permission.)
ifperfusionpressureattheoriginofthecollateralis
reduced.
There is evidence that coronary collateral ﬂow
improves the outcome in patients with an acute
myocardialinfarction(MI).Thissamerelationship
is also true after CABG surgery. In a review of
561patientswithalow-riskproﬁle,thepresence
ofcollateralsprotectsagainstcardiacdeathandMI
at1yearaftercoronaryrevascularization(Fig.4.3).
Causes of increased myocardial
oxygen demand
Three factors are primarily responsible for deter-
miningmyocardialoxygenconsumption(MV O2):
walltension,contractility,andheartrate(HR).
Wall tension
Myocardialwalltensionisdeterminedbytherela-
tionshipbetweenventricularradius( r),ventricularAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch04” — 2007/7/17 — 20:30 — page 94 — #5
94 Chapter4
6.0(a)
(b)
5.0
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.0
14.0
12.0
10.0
8.0
6.0
4.0
2.0
0.0
0 60 120 180 240 300 360 420
0
No. at risk
Collaterals −
Collaterals +
60 120 180 240
Time since randomization (days)
Collaterals absent: 13.5%
Collaterals present: 5.7%
P < 0.01
0
0
19
1
21
1
22
2
22
2
22
2
22
2
23
2
300 360 420
P = 0.01
Collaterals absent: 5.3%
Collaterals present: 1.1%
Cardiac death or MI (%)All cardiac events (%)
Time since randomization (days)
Fig. 4.3 Kaplan–Meierestimatesofproportionofﬁrst
clinicaleventsat1yearaftercoronaryrevascularization
asstratiﬁedbycollaterals.The P-valueswerecalculated
usingthelog–ranktest.(a)Cardiacdeathornonfatal
myocardialinfarction(MI).(b)All-causedeath,nonfatal
stroke,nonfatalMI,orrepeatcoronaryrevascularization.
(FromNathoeHM,KoerselmanJ,BuskensE etal.
Determinantsandprognosticsigniﬁcanceofcollaterals
inpatientsundergoingcoronaryrevascularization.
AmJCardiol 2006;98:31–5,withpermission.)
pressure (P), and ventricular wall thickness (h)
according to Laplace’s law:T =Pr/h. Ventricular
walltensionconstantlychangesduringthecardiac
cycle. For example, during isovolumic contrac-
tion, ventricular pressure and wall thickness
willbeincreasingwhileventricularradiusremains
unchanged.Duringventricularejection,ventricular
pressurewillremainrelativelyconstantwhileradius
decreasesandwallthicknessincreases.Inherentin
the analysis of wall tension are the concepts of
preload, afterload, and hypertrophy. Increases in
end-diastolicvolume(EDV)(preload)willincrease
ventricularradiusandwillreducewallthicknessif
dilationissevere.Thesechangeswillincreasewall
tension.Increasesintheimpedancetoventricular
ejection(afterload)willnecessarilyincreaseventric-
ularpressureandincreasewalltension.Concentric
ventricularhypertrophywillincreasewallthickness
andreducewalltension.
There are important differences between the
increaseinMV O2 inducedbyincreasesinpreload
and by those induced by increases in afterload.
Workdoneintheisovolumicphaseofventricular
contractionisveryenergy-consumptive.Increases
intheimpedancetoventricularejectionincrease
thepressurerequiredtobeginventricularejection,
andthusincreasetheworkdoneintheisovolumic
contraction phase. The ejection phase of ventric-
ular contraction, on the other hand, is a more
energy-efﬁcientprocess.Increasesinpreloadinduce
ejection of a larger stroke volume (SV) and an
increaseintheworkdoneintheejectionphase.
Forthesereasons,whencomparingequalwork,the
increaseinMVO2inducedbyanincreaseinpreload
(volumework)ismuchlessthanthatinducedby
anincreaseinafterload(pressurework).
Contractility
Contractilityisthestateofmyocardialperformance
(inotropy) independent of preload and afterload.
Increasing the contractile state of the heart will
increaseMVO2.However,anincreaseincontrac-
tilitymayactuallyresultinareducedorunchanged
MVO2 under certain conditions. For example, if
ventricular dilation (increased ventricular radius)
existstomaintaincardiacoutput(CO),wallten-
sionandMVO2willbehigh.Improvingcontractility
throughuseofaninotropicagentcanreduceven-
tricularradiuswhilemaintainingCO.Thereduction
inMVO2thataccompaniesthereductioninventric-
ularradiusmaymorethanoffsettheincreasethat
accompaniesanincreaseincontractility.
Heart rate
Heartratedirectlyaffectsmyocardialoxygenbal-
ance. Tachycardia increases myocardial oxygen
demandandreducessupplybydiminishingthetimeAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch04” — 2007/7/17 — 20:30 — page 95 — #6
AnesthesiaforMyocardialRevascularization 95
in diastole. Perhaps more importantly, one must
consider the imbalance on a beat-to-beat basis.
Myocardialischemiadoesnotoccurwithtachycar-
diasimplybecausetherearemorebeatsperminute;
rather, ischemia occurs with tachycardia because
supply per beat is inadequate to meet demand
perbeat.IncreasesinHRincreaseMV O2 perbeat
byincreasingcontractilityviatheBowditcheffect.
Normally,increasingHRdecreasesEDV.Thisreduc-
tion in preload reduces wall tension and MVO2
per beat. Thus, with tachycardia, the increase in
MVO2 per beat caused by enhanced contractility
is offset by the reduction in MVO2 per beat that
accompanies reduced wall tension. On the other
hand,oxygendeliveryissometimescompromised
bytachycardia-inducedreductionsinthelengthof
diastoleperbeat(discussedlater).
Causes of reduced myocardial
oxygen delivery
Adequatemyocardialoxygensupplyisdependent
on delivery of the appropriate volume of oxy-
genatedcoronarybloodﬂow.Thefollowingsections
describefactorsthatmaycompromisemyocardial
oxygendelivery.
Reduction in CPP
LV CPP falls with either a reduction in diastolic
blood pressure (DBP) or an increase in LV end-
diastolicpressure.Acommonlyoverlookedcause
ofreducedCPPisbradycardia.Bradycardiaencour-
agesdiastolicrunofffromtheproximalaortaand
mayresultinawidepulsepressureandreduced
DBP.Furthermore,maintenanceofCOwithbrady-
cardiarequiresanincreasedSV.TheincreasedSV
occursprimarilybyanincreaseinleftventricular
end-diastolicvolume(LVEDV)andpressure.This
furtherreducesCPP.
Reduction in time available for
coronary perfusion
Theleftventriclereceivesmostitsperfusiondur-
ingdiastole;therefore,reductionsindiastolictime
are potentially detrimental. Figure 4.4 illustrates
that as HR increases the length of time per beat
spent in diastole falls while the length of systole
1000
(a)
800
600
Time (ms)400
200
0
80
(b)
70
60
50
40
30
R–R
QS2
30
% Diastole
40 50 60
30 50 70 90 110 130 150
70 80 90
Heart rate
100 110 120 130 140 150
Total
   diastolic
        period
             (R–R)–(QS2)
Heart rate
Fig. 4.4 (a)Increasesinheartratecausedecreasesin
lengthofeachcardiaccycle(R–Rinterval).Decreases
inlengthofsystole(OS 2)withincreasesinheartrateare
farlessdramaticthandecreasesinlengthofdiastole
(R–R–OS2).(b)Percentofeachcardiaccycle
(R–Rinterval)spentindiastoleatvariousheartrates.
Smallchangesinheartrateareseentocauselarge
decreasesinpercentoftimespentindiastole.(From
BoudoulasH.Changesindiastolictimewithvarious
pharmacologicagents. Circulation1979;60:165,with
permission.)
remainsconstant.BecauseMV O2 perbeatismin-
imally affected by tachycardia, the primary dis-
advantageoftachycardiaisareductionindiastolic
perfusiontimeperbeat.
Obstruction to ﬂow
Any obstruction to ﬂow in a coronary artery
results in a pressure drop across the obstruction.
The high velocity of blood ﬂow in the area of
a stenosis (either stable, i.e. plaque disease; orAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch04” — 2007/7/17 — 20:30 — page 96 — #7
96 Chapter4
dynamic, i.e. coronary spasm) necessarily results
in the conversion of pressure energy to kinetic
energy.Onthedistalsideoftheobstruction,tur-
bulent eddies form and dissipate. The transfer of
kineticenergytothisturbulentenergyandthesub-
sequent dissipation of the turbulence reduce the
quantity of kinetic energy available for conver-
siontopressureenergy.Thisresultsinapressure
dropacrosstheobstruction.Thepressuredropwill
increase in direct proportion to any increase in
ﬂow across the obstruction as a greater propor-
tionofkineticenergydissipatesasturbulence.For
this reason, requirements for increased coronary
bloodﬂow,suchasthosethataccompanyexercise,
willincreasethehemodynamicsigniﬁcanceofany
obstructivelesion.
Arteriolardilatationdistaltotheobstructionwill
help compensate for this pressure loss until the
stenosis becomes critical. A stenosis is “critical”
whenthevasodilatorreservedistaltothestenotic
lesionisexhausted.Thisoccurswithstenosis >90%.
Intheabsenceofautoregulation,coronaryblood
ﬂowdistaltoastenoticlesionwillfalllinearlywith
decreasesinperfusionpressure.Thisplacesthedis-
talsubendocardiumatriskforischemia.Itfollows
that in the presence of an obstructive coronary
lesion,coronaryperfusioniscriticallydependenton
aorticDBP.Thefactorsdescribedinthefollowing
sectionsdeserveattention.
Atheroscleroticdisease
Atherosclerosis is a complex, heterogeneous dis-
easeoftenstartingintheveryyoungandevolving
over several decades. There are both acute and
chronic manifestations of the disease, the most
signiﬁcantofwhich,involvesthedevelopmentof
coronaryocclusivedisease,unstablecoronarysyn-
dromes, MI, and death. Other systemic manifes-
tationsincludeprogressiveneurologicdysfunction
(dementia),renalimpairment,claudication,mesen-
tericischemia,hypertension,andstroke.Thedis-
easeisprogressiveinnaturewithadeﬁnedpattern
ofmorphologicevolution(Fig.4.5).
Thefateofatheromatouslesionsisdependenton
threeadditionalfactors:
• Plaque disruption.Atheromatouslesionsarelipid
rich,soft,andpronetodisruptionfrommechanical
forces. Plaque rupture may result in exposure of
superﬁcialvascularwallelementsorofdeepﬁbrillar
collagen.
• Thrombosis.Exposureofvascularwallelementsis
astimulusforthrombusformation.Plateletdepo-
sition occurs at the site of disruption. Superﬁcial
plaquedisruptionisamuchmilderthrombogenic
stimulus than deep plaque disruption. Thrombus
formationatthesiteofasuperﬁcialinjuryislikely
tobelabileandtransient,whereasthrombusforma-
tionassociatedwithdeepplaquedisruptionislikely
tobestableandpermanent.Thisisoftenthecause
ofacutecoronarysyndromes.
• Vasoconstriction. Transient vasoconstriction
accompanies plaque disruption and thrombus
formation. Injury to the endothelium produces
thrombin-mediated vasoconstriction; whereas,
subsequentplateletdepositionmediatesvasocon-
strictionviareleaseofthromboxane-A 2 andsero-
tonin.Inaddition,endothelialinjurymayimpair
thereleaseofnitricoxide(NO).
Using these concepts, one can understand the
spectrum of coronary artery disease (CAD) from
chronicstableanginatoacuteMI.Chronicstable
stenotic lesions that cause angina develop as the
result of progression of atherosclerotic lesions.
Progressionofearlylesionsismorerapidinpatients
withcoronaryriskfactors.Progressionistheresult
of mural thrombus formation and ﬁbrotic orga-
nization, which follows minor plaque disruption.
Initially,plateletthrombiformonthedisruption.
This is followed by migration of smooth muscle
cellsfromthemediaintotheintima.Duringthe
ﬁnalphase,intimalthickeningandprogressionof
the lesion occur. Repetition of this process leads
togradualprogressionofthelesion.Ultimately,it
mayleadtoachronicvesselocclusion.Theslow
progressionofthelesionallowstimeandprovides
stimulus for distal arteriolar collateral formation.
Thisexplainswhythromboticocclusionisfrequent
inpatientswithhigh-gradestenosesbutdoesnot
leadtoinfarction.
In unstable angina, a small plaque disruption
may change plaque morphology such that coro-
nary blood ﬂow is acutely reduced and angina
intensiﬁes.Alternatively,plaquedisruptionmaybe
associatedwithlabilethrombus,temporaryvesselAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch04” — 2007/7/17 — 20:30 — page 97 — #8
AnesthesiaforMyocardialRevascularization 97
LDL1
2
3
MCP-1 5
6
Smooth muscle mitogens
Foam cell
8
7
Cell
apoptosis
Smooth muscle
proliferation
Smooth muscle
migration
IL-1
Oxidized LDL
Internal elastic
lamina
Vascular
endothelium Monocytes Scavenger receptor
Macrophage
Cell adhesion
molecule
4
Fig. 4.5 Schematicoftheevolutionofthe
atheroscleroticplaque. 1.Accumulationoflipoprotein
particlesintheintima.Themodiﬁcationofthese
lipoproteinsisdepictedbythedarkercolor.Modiﬁcations
includeoxidationandglycation. 2.Oxidativestress,
includingproductsfoundinmodiﬁedlipoproteins,
caninducelocalcytokineelaboration. 3.Thecytokines
thusinducedincreaseexpressionofadhesionmolecules
forleukocytesthatcausetheirattachmentand
chemoattractantmoleculesthatdirecttheirmigration
intotheintima. 4.Bloodmonocytes,uponenteringthe
arterywallinresponsetochemoattractantcytokines
suchasmonocytechemoattractantprotein1(MCP-1),
encounterstimulisuchasmacrophagecolonystimulating
factor(M-CSF)thatcanaugmenttheirexpressionof
scavengerreceptors. 5.Scavengerreceptorsmediatethe
uptakeofmodiﬁedlipoproteinparticlesandpromotethe
developmentoffoamcells.Macrophagefoamcellsare
asourceofmediatorssuchasfurthercytokinesand
effectormoleculessuchashypochlorousacid,superoxide
anion(O −
2),andmatrixmetalloproteinases. 6.Smooth
musclecellsintheintimadivideothersmoothmuscle
cellsthatmigrateintotheintimafromthemedia.
7.Smoothmusclecellscanthendivideandelaborate
extracellularmatrix,promotingextracellularmatrix
accumulationinthegrowingatheroscleroticplaque.
Inthismanner,thefattystreakcanevolveintoa
ﬁbrofattylesion. 8.Inlaterstages,calciﬁcationcanoccur
(notdepicted)andﬁbrosiscontinues,sometimes
accompaniedbysmoothmusclecelldeath(including
programmedcelldeath,orapoptosis)yieldinga
relativelyacellularﬁbrouscapsulesurroundinga
lipid-richcorethatmayalsocontaindyingordeadcells
andtheirdetritus.IL-1,interleukin-1;LDL,low-density
lipoprotein.(FromLibbyP.Thevascularbiologyof
atherosclerosis.In:ZipesDP,LibbyP,BonowRO,
BraunwaldE(eds). Braunwald’sHeartDisease:ATextbook
ofCardiovascularMedicine ,7thedn.Philadelphia:
Elsevier–Saunders,2005:921–37,withpermission.)
occlusion,andanginaatrest.Coronarybloodﬂow
isfurthercompromisedbyreleaseofvasoconstrictor
substancesandimpairedendothelialrelaxation.
Innon-Q-waveMI,theprocessissimilartothatin
unstableangina,exceptthatthedurationofvessel
occlusionbylabilethrombusislongerandthereis
resultantmuscleinjuryandnecrosis.Spontaneous
thrombolysis or resolution of arterial spasm ulti-
mately limits occlusion and prevents Q-wave MI
(fullthickness,ortransmuralMI).Thisprocessis
responsiblefor75%ofnon-Q-waveMIs.Theother
25%occurwhenthereiscompleteocclusionofthe
infarct-relatedvesselwithdistalcollateralization.
In a Q-wave MI, plaque disruption is associ-
atedwithformationofaﬁxed,persistentocclusion
(usuallybyathrombus,althoughthismayoccur
withanembolizedvegetationorothermaterial).
This leads to cessation of blood ﬂow and myo-
cardial necrosis. The coronary lesion involved
usuallyismildtomoderateinseveritywithlim-
iteddistalcollateralization.Thus,itistheintensity
ofplaquedisruptionandsubsequentthrombusfor-
mationratherthantheseverityofthelesionthatis
thedeterminingfactor.
Further discussion is necessary to explain the
spectrumofanginalsymptomsthatcanaccompanyAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch04” — 2007/7/17 — 20:30 — page 98 — #9
98 Chapter4
achronic,stable,stenoticcoronarylesion.Themain
coronary artery epicardial branches have lumens
that are 2–4mm in diameter. In the absence of
collaterals,exertionalanginaoccurswhenlumen
areaisreducedto1.0mm 2 (50–60%reductionin
lumendiameteror75%reductionincross-sectional
area)andanginaatrestoccurswhenlumenarea
isreducedto0.65mm 2 (75%reductioninlumen
diameteror90%incross-sectionalarea).
Figure 4.6 illustrates how changes in coronary
vasculartonecanaltertheclinicalcharacteristics
ofachronic,stablestenoticlesion.Atheromatous
lesionsmaybelocalizedtooneareaofthearterial
wall.Astheseeccentricallylocatedlesionsenlarge,
they encroach upon the arterial lumen. Because
theremainderofthearterialwallisfreeofplaque,
itremainsresponsivetovasoactivestimuliandis
capableofcontraction.Suchcontractionwillcause
theﬁxedatheromatouslesiontooccupyagreater
portionofthearteriallumenandwillresultina
larger pressure drop across the lesion. Therefore,
the severity of the stenosis is not static but is
dynamicanddependentonthevasomotoractiv-
ity of the free arterial wall. This phenomenon is
knownasdynamiccoronarystenosis.Asillustrated
inFig.4.6,anormalchangeincoronaryvasomotor
toneresultingina10%circumferentialshortening
oftheouterarterialwallcanconvertaninsigniﬁcant
49% eccentric stenosis to a 76% stenosis, which
willresultinrestischemia.Likewise,Fig.4.6illus-
tratesthatanormalincreaseinarterialtonecan
convertaneccentricstenosis,whichcausesischemia
onexertion(60%stenosis),toonethatalsocauses
ischemiaatrest(76%stenosis).
Atheromatouslesionsmaybestaticiftheathero-
matouschangesinvolvetheentirecircumference
of the arterial wall. In this instance, the luminal
areaisﬁxedandisunalteredbychangesinarte-
rial vasomotor activity. Figure 4.6 illustrates that
alesionthatoccupiestheentirecircumferenceof
the arterial wall and causes exertional ischemia
(60% stenosis) will be unaffected by changes in
arterialvasoconstriction.
Variationsincoronaryvasomotortone
There is a large variation in the extent of coro-
naryvasomotoractivityacrossapopulation.Atone
end of the spectrum is the normal 10% reduc-
tioninouterarterialwallcircumferencethatoccurs
with α-adrenergicstimulation.Attheotherendof
Normal
Young, thin
intima
Resting lumen
cross-section
“Normal”
vasoconstriction
(0% outer
circumferential
shortening)
Diffuse intimal
smooth muscle
proliferation
Moderate sized
eccentric lumen plus
intimal proliferation
Small eccentric
lumen
Morphologic variants of atherosclerosis
Circumferential
atheroma
central lumen
17% 76%76% 76%76% 76%76%
47% 49%
1/3 fixed
Clinical syndrome: Asymptomatic Rest pain only Rest pain only Rest and 
exertional pain
Exertional
pain only
2/3 fixed 100% fixed
circumference
60% 60%
60%76% 76% 76%
Fig. 4.6 Cross-sectionsofnormalanddiseased
coronaryarteries.Morphologicstateofarteriesis
illustrated.Percentreductioninlumendiameterforeach
morphologicstateatrestandfollowingnormaldegreeof
vasoconstrictionisalsoshown.Clinicalsyndromes
associatedwithbothrestingandvasoconstrictedstateof
normalanddiseasedarteriesaresummarizedatbottom
ofdiagram.(FromBrownBG.Dynamicmechanismsin
humancoronarystenosis. Circulation1985;70:921,with
permission.)AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch04” — 2007/7/17 — 20:30 — page 99 — #10
AnesthesiaforMyocardialRevascularization 99
thespectrum,istheintensevasoconstrictionthat
occurs with variant or Prinzmetal’s angina. The
exaggeratedcoronaryspasmseeninthesepatients
resultsintotalorneartotalocclusioninresponse
tostimulithatcauseonlyminimalconstrictionin
individualswhodonothavevariantangina.For
patientswithcoronaryspasm,myocardialischemia
maydevelopintheabsenceofcoronarystenosis.
Forpatientswithnormalcoronaryvasoconstriction,
myocardial ischemia will occur only if coronary
stenosesalsoexist.
Coronarysteal
Coronary steal refers the physiologic condition
wherebybloodﬂowisdirectedawayfromischemic
prone areas of the myocardial dependant upon
upstream coronary artery anatomy (Fig. 4.7).
Coronarystealoccursinsomepatientswithspeciﬁc
coronaryarterylesionsupontheexposureofcoro-
nary vasodilators. Approximately one-fourth of
patientswithCADmeettheseanatomicalcriteria.
Inthesepatients,theadministrationofanarterio-
lardilator,suchasdipyridamoleoradenosine,may
produceasteal.
In the mid-1980s a series of reports suggested
that isoﬂurane induced coronary steal by abnor-
mallyredistributingﬂowawayfromischemicareas
ofthemyocardium.Subsequentworkandclinical
experience,however,haverefutedthisproposition.
Although isoﬂurane-induced hypotension may
reduce myocardial perfusion, true coronary steal
doesnotoccurwhenCPPismaintained.Further
studies demonstrate that the volatile agents
donotabnormallyreduceorredistributecoronary
collateralﬂow.
In contrast to these initial concerns regarding
isoﬂurane,recentevidencesuggestsamyocardial
protectivebeneﬁtwithvolatileagentuse(Fig.4.8).
Theseprotectivebeneﬁtsextendbeyondafavor-
ablealterationintheoxygensupplyanddemand
balance.Thebeneﬁtsmayberelatedtophysiologic
alterations in response to ischemia and reperfu-
sion. Many of these actions are similar to those
found with ischemic preconditioning, and are in
fact, termed, anesthetic-induced preconditioning
(discussedlater).
Anemia
Myocardial oxygen delivery is the product of
coronary blood ﬂow and the oxygen content of
thetransportedblood.Anemiareducesmyocardial
oxygendeliverybyreducingtheoxygen-carrying
capacityofblood.Thedegreeofanemiathatanarea
of myocardium can tolerate without developing
ischemiaisdependentontherelationshipbetween
regionalMVO2 andregionalcoronarybloodﬂow.
In the absence of coronary stenoses, hematocrit
levels <15% result in subendocardial ischemia
in anesthetized canines. In the presence of the
increasedMVO2 thataccompanieslargeincreases
Coronary
arteriolar
vasodilator
Preferential
vasodilatation
increases flow to
nonischemic
area
Stenosis
>50%
Blocked
epicardial
coronary
Area A
Dependent on collaterals
No autoregulatory reserve
Maximally dilated
Area B
Normal autoregulation
Area A
Ischaemic as collateral
perfusion diverted away
Area B
Normal regulation lost
Luxury perfusion
Collateral flow Reduced
collateral
flow
Fig. 4.7 Schematicdiagramillustratingcoronarysteal.Arrowsrepresentcoronarybloodﬂow.(FromAgnewNM,
PennefatherSH,RussellGN.Isofuraneandcoronaryheartdisease. Anaesthesia2002;57:338–47,withpermission.)AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch04” — 2007/7/17 — 20:30 — page 100 — #11
100 Chapter4
10
8
6
4
2
0
Control T0 T3 T12 T24 T36
14
12
10Troponin I (ng/mL) Troponin I (ng/mL)
8
6
4
2
0
Control T0 T3 T12 T24 T36
Control T0 T3 T12 T24 T36 Control T0 T3 T12 T24 T36
Propofol Desflurane Sevoflurane
10
8
6
4
2
0
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
10
8
6
4
2
0
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
Control T0 T3 T12 T24 T36 Control T0 T3 T12 T24 T36
Fig. 4.8 Coronaryarterypatients( n =45)were
randomlyassignedtoreceiveeithertargetcontrolled
infusionofpropofolorinhalationalanesthesiawith
desﬂuraneorsevoﬂurane.Aftercoronaryarterybypass
(CPB),thecardiacindexwaslowerinthepropofol
group.CardiactroponinIconcentrationsinthethree
groupsbeforesurgery(control),atarrivalintheintensive
careunit(T0),andafter3(T3),12(T12),24(T24),and
36(T36)hours.Theupperpanelshowthemedianvalues
with95%conﬁdenceintervals.Thelowerpanelsshow
theevolutionoftheindividualvalues.Concentrations
weresigniﬁcantlyhigherwithpropofolanesthesia.(From
DeHertSG,CromheeckeS,tenBroeckePW etal.Effects
ofpropofol,desﬂurane,andsevoﬂuraneonrecoveryof
myocardialfunctionaftercoronarysurgeryintheelderly
high-riskpatients. Anesthesiology2003;99:314–23,with
permission.)
in afterload, hematocrit levels <30% produce
subendocardialischemiainthesamecaninemodel.
Thereisgreatdebateabouttheidealhematocrit
in any patient and especially in the patient with
knownCAD.Recentinvestigationinamedicalpop-
ulation after MI reveals that a hematocrit of at
least 33% is associated with improved outcome.
Hematocritlevelsmustbeindividualizedforeach
patient;however,lowhematocritlevels( <30%)are
potentiallydangerousinawakepatientswithCAD
forthefollowingreasons:
• Increased CO necessarily accompanies normo-
volemic anemia to maintain systemic oxygen
transport;thisCOincreaseresultsinanincreased
MVO2.
• Increases in coronary blood ﬂow to main-
taincoronaryoxygendeliveryresultinincreased
pressure drops across stenoses and potential for
subendocardialhypoperfusion.
Myocardial ischemia
Regionalorglobalimbalancesinmyocardialoxygen
supplyanddemandresultinmyocardialischemia.
The metabolic consequences of ischemia are dis-
cussedindetailinChapter12.Theclinicalmanifes-
tationsofmyocardialischemiaarevaried.Angina
pectoris,withorwithoutsignsofventricularfail-
ure or dysrhythmias, is the classic manifestation
ofmyocardialischemia.However,itisimportant
torememberthatanginaisnotauniversalmani-
festationofischemia.Infact,myocardialischemia
may present as ventricular failure or dysrhyth-
miaswithoutangina.Insomeindividuals,especially
diabetics,ischemiamayremainclinicallysilent.Fur-
thermore,patientshavevaryingthresholdsforthe
developmentofischemiaduringthecourseofaday.
Thedynamicnatureofcoronarystenosesaccounts
for the changes in the caliber of a stenosis thatAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch04” — 2007/7/17 — 20:30 — page 101 — #12
AnesthesiaforMyocardialRevascularization 101
mayproducerestpainatonetimeandanginawith
varyingdegreesofexerciseatothertimes.
Despite these varied clinical presentations, the
progression of hemodynamic and electrocardio-
graphic changes with ischemia tends to follow a
consistent pattern in a given patient. Myocardial
ischemia is heralded by a decrease in regional
ventriculardiastolicdistensibility(seeChapter2),
whichusuallyresultsinanelevationinLVEDPor
RVEDP, and central venous pressure (CVP). This
isfollowedbysystolicdysfunction,electrocardio-
gram(ECG)changes,andﬁnallybyanginaduring
symptomaticepisodes.Patientsmanifestingeleva-
tionsinPCWPwithsymptomaticepisodesarelikely
todosowithasymptomaticepisodesaswell.Some
patientswillnotmanifestwedgepressurechanges
witheithersymptomaticorasymptomaticepisodes.
Symptomatic versus asymptomatic
myocardial ischemia
Ambulatory Holter monitoring of patients with
chronic stable angina demonstrates that 83% of
ischemic episodes with ST-segment depression of
1–2mm are asymptomatic, and 63% of ischemic
episodes with ST-segment depression of 3 mm
or more are asymptomatic. Of the ischemic ECG
changes seen in elective CABG surgery patients
monitoredfor48hoursinthepreoperativeperiod,
up to 80% are asymptomatic. The reasons why
someepisodesofischemiaaresymptomaticwhile
othersarenotremainunclear.Thereissomeevi-
dence that asymptomatic episodes are of shorter
duration and lesser severity than symptomatic
episodes,butthisisnotconsistentlytrue.Thereis
alsoevidencetosuggestthatpatientswithasymp-
tomatic episodes have a higher pain tolerance,
but this is not uniformly true. Diabetic patients
withautonomicdysfunctionareathigherriskfor
asymptomaticischemia.
Incidence of perioperative ischemia
Efforts to prevent myocardial ischemia usually
target control of the readily obtainable hemody-
namicdeterminantsofmyocardialoxygendemand
suchasHRandbloodpressure(BP).Contraryto
thispractice,however,mostischemicepisodesare
notprecededbyincreasesinHRorrate-pressure
product(RPP)(theproductofHRandsystolicBP).
Infact,mostepisodesareclinicallysilent.Thesame
istrueincardiacsurgicalpatientsinthepreopera-
tiveperiod.Approximately40%ofcardiacsurgical
patients will experience ST-segment evidence of
ischemiasometimeinthe48hourspriortoelec-
tivecardiacsurgery.Lessthanone-fourthofthese
episodes are preceded by a HR increase of 20%
or more. In addition, most of these episodes are
clinicallysilent.
Aswithpreoperativeischemicevents,approxi-
mately half of intraoperative ischemic events are
unrelatedtochangesinHRandBP.Thisunpro-
vokedischemiasuggeststhatdecreasesinmyocar-
dialoxygensupplymaybeimportantinthegenesis
of intraoperative ischemia. In the cardiac sur-
gical patient, ischemia consists of a background
of hemodynamically unrelated silent ischemia,
upon which is superimposed episodes of hemo-
dynamicallyrelatedischemia.Rigorousintraoper-
ative hemodynamic control will not worsen the
preoperative ischemic pattern and may actually
improveit.
Inthenoncardiacsurgicalpopulation,thepost-
operative period is the most common time for
ST-segment myocardial ischemia. In addition to
theunderlyingpropensitytowardssilentischemia
(as described above), the postoperative period is
subjecttoincreasingmetabolicdemands,increased
MVO2,andahypercoagulablestate.Theremaybe
plaqueﬁssureandsubsequentthrombusformation.
InthepatientrecoveringfromCABG,oneantic-
ipates a reduction in the incidence of ischemia.
Afterall,thecoronaryarterystenosesarebypassed,
andmyocardialbloodﬂownormalized.Inreality,
however,CABGpatientsmaysufferpostoperative
ischemiaforanumberofreasonsincludingacute
graft occlusion, coronary air or debris embolism,
technical anastomoses failure or disruption, tam-
ponade with graft obstruction, or myocardial
oxygensupply–demandmismatch.CABGpatients
requireclosemonitoringforischemiainthehours
aftersurgery.
Outcome after myocardial ischemia
The most signiﬁcant consequence of pre- and
intraoperativeischemiaispostoperativemyocardialAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch04” — 2007/7/17 — 20:30 — page 102 — #13
102 Chapter4
infarction (PMI). The risk of PMI is approxi-
mately 7% in CABG patients who had preoper-
ative ischemia, intraoperative ischemia, or both,
and2.5%inpatientswhodidnothaveischemia.
The risk of PMI correlates with the severity of
ischemia.InpatientswithST-segmentdepressions
>2mV, the PMI incidence is 9%; whereas those
withST-segmentdepressionsbetween1.0–1.9mV,
theincidenceis6%.
Therearemanyfactorswellbeyondthecontrolof
theanesthesiologistthatareresponsibleforincreas-
ingtheincidenceofPMI.Anaorticcross-clamptime
inexcessof40minutesincreasestheincidenceof
PMIfrom2.6to10.9%.PMIoccursin14.3%of
patientsinwhomthedistalanastomoseswererated
bythesurgeonaspoorascomparedwith3.4%of
patientsinwhomtheanastomoseswereconsidered
ofgoodquality.
Diagnosing myocardial ischemia
ECGchanges
The gold standard for diagnosis of myocar-
dial ischemia is the presence of ECG changes.
Unfortunately,ECGchangesoccurrelativelylatein
thetemporalsequenceofmyocardialischemiaafter
deterioration of ventricular diastolic and systolic
function.Leadselectiongreatlyenhancesischemic
detection.SimultaneousmonitoringofleadsIIand
V5 is commonly used because of the high sensi-
tivityofthiscombinationindetectingmyocardial
ischemia.
PCWPtrace
ThePCWPtraceofthepulmonaryarterycatheter
(PAC) can assist in the early diagnosis of LV
ischemia. Reduction in LV compliance occurs in
the early stages of LV ischemia because of dias-
tolicdysfunction.Inparticular,LVEDPiselevated.
Underthesecircumstances,leftatrialpressure(LAP)
will be elevated to maintain LV diastolic ﬁlling.
Movement of the left atrium (LA) to a steeper
potion of its pressure–volume relationship will
resultinmagniﬁcationofthenormalLAPwave-
forms.Inaddition,dilationoftheLAmayresultin
amoreforcefulatrialcontractionandproduction
ofanenlargedAwave.ThepeakofthisAwave
willreﬂectLVEDP.LVischemia,whichproducesLV
dilationorpapillarymuscledysfunction,maycause
mitralregurgitationwithgenerationofaprominent
Vwave.IfthereisinferiorischemiawithRVdys-
function,someofthesesameobservationsmaybe
seenontheCVPwaveform.
ThePCWPtraceisareﬂectionofLAP.However,
becausethePCWPwaveformistransmittedthrough
the compliant pulmonary venous system, it is a
dampedversionoftheLAP.Inparticular,theleft
atrialAwavemaybepoorlyseen.Asaresult,ithas
beendemonstratedthatmeanPCWPreﬂectsmean
LVdiastolicpressureandmayunderestimateLVEDP
by10–15mmHgduringischemia.
ChangesinPCWPandthePCWPwaveformhave
poorsensitivityandspeciﬁcityindetectingepisodes
ofmyocardialischemia.Thisistrueforanumberof
reasons:
• PCWP does not necessarily reﬂect LVEDP as
previouslydescribed.
• WhenonlyasmallregionofLVwalldevelops
diminishedcompliancewithanischemicepisode,
overallLVfunctionmaybeonlyminimallyaffected.
ThiswillreducetheobservedchangesinLVEDPas
reﬂectedbythePCWP.
• ThequantitativechangeinPCWPandthequal-
itative change in the PCWP waveform neces-
sary to deﬁne an ischemic event have not been
systematicallydeﬁned.
• Acuteelevationsinafterloadintheabsenceof
ischemiacanproduceelevationsinPCWP.Thismay
leadtoafalsepositiveinterpretationofthePCWP
tracing.
Myocardial ischemia does not result in PCWP
chancesinallpatients,andtherefore,PCWPcannot
berelieduponasthesoleindicatorofischemia.For
thisreason,itisimportanttoemphasizethatsus-
piciousECGortransesophagealechocardiography
(TEE)changescannotbeignoredsimplybecause
there is no change in the PCWP or the PCWP
waveform.
Transesophagealechocardiography
Regional wall motion abnormalities (RWMA)
during systole (diminished inward excursion and
thickening) occur with ischemia. These RWMA
precedeECGchanges.ThedevelopmentofsevereAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch04” — 2007/7/17 — 20:30 — page 103 — #14
AnesthesiaforMyocardialRevascularization 103
hypokinesis,akinesis,ordyskinesisismorespeciﬁc
for ischemia than mild hypokinesis. Changes in
wall thickening are more sensitive for detecting
ischemiathanchangesinwallexcursion.Typically,
wallmotionabnormalitiesandECGchangesoccur
within60secondsofeachother.However,inasit-
uation in which ischemia is less severe, RWMA
mayprecedeECGchangesbyseveralminutes.In
fact,numerousstudieshaveshownintraoperative
TEEqualitativeanalysisofregionalwallexcursion
andthickeningtobeamoresensitivedetectorof
myocardialischemiathanECGchangesandtobe
capableofdetectingischemiabeforeECGchanges.
As with all monitors, there are occasional dis-
crepancies between ischemia detected by ECG
and that detected by TEE. There are both TEE-
detected ischemic episodes not detected by ECG
andECG-detectedischemicepisodesnotdetected
byTEE.Thismaybeduetoseveralfactors:
• Normally,theTEEprobeisplacedatthemid-LV
level(levelofthepapillarymuscles),atwhichwall
segmentsinthedistributionofallthreecoronary
arteriescanbemonitored.Becauseashort-axisview
oftheleftventriclecanonlybeobtainedatonelevel
atatime,ischemicchangesoccurringinthebasalor
apicalventricularlevelswillbemissed.Obtaining
multipleTEEwindows,allowingvisualizationofall
17segmentsoftheheartwillreduceoreliminate
thisasasourceoferror.
• Ischemicepisodesmaybemissedbecausequal-
itativewallmotionanalysisisdifﬁcultforpatients
withpreexistingwallmotionabnormalities.
• SomeRWMA(particularlyinareastetheredto
scar) may not be ischemic in origin. Changes in
afterloadmayunmaskareasofpreviousscarring.
• Ventricularpacingorabundle-branchblockmay
makedetectionofRWMAmoredifﬁcultbecauseof
asynchronouscontraction.
• Stunned myocardium may exhibit continued
RWMAdespiteadequateperfusion.
• TheECGmaydetectischemiawithsmallareasof
subendocardialischemiaundetectablebyTEE.
Predicting myocardial ischemia
Theabilitytopredicthemodynamicalterationsthat
arelikelytoresultinmyocardialischemiainindi-
vidualpatientswouldallowprompttreatmentand
avoidance of events initiating ischemia. Unfortu-
nately, the diverse nature of myocardial oxygen
imbalance in patients leaves the anesthesiolo-
gist with no predictor of myocardial ischemia
that is reliable in all circumstances. The indices
described in the next sections all have limited
usefulness.
Rate-pressureproductandtripleindex
The RPP is the product of HR and systolic BP,
whereas the triple index (TI) is the product of
HR, systolic BP, and PCWP. The RPP provides a
usefulassessmentofMV O2 andpredictsischemia
inpatientsundergoingstresstesting.Mostpatients
experience the onset of ischemia at an RPP of
20000.However,itsusefulnessinassessingMV O2
andpredictingischemiainanesthetizedpatientsis
notreliable.Infact,itiscommonforapatientunder
anesthesiatohavealowRPPandyetbeathigh
riskforischemia(tachycardiaandhypotensionwith
acutebloodloss).
The TI is subject to the same criticisms as the
RPP.TheadditionofPCWPtotheproductaddsthe
variableofwallradiustotheassessmentofMV O2.
However,theTIstillfailstoaccountforlargereduc-
tionsinmyocardialoxygendeliveryinthegenesis
ofischemia.
Myocardialsupply–demandratio
(DPTI:SPTI)
Effortstoaccountforbeat-to-beatvariationsinboth
myocardial supply and demand in the genesis of
ischemialedtodevelopmentofthesupply–demand
ratio.Inthisevaluation,supplyisdeﬁnedbythe
diastolicpressuretimeindex(DPTI):DPTI=(mean
diastolicpressure–LVEDP) ×durationofdiastole.
Demand is deﬁned as the systolic pressure time
index (SPTI): SPTI= (mean arterial pressure)×
durationofsystole.Ratiosbelow0.5mayresultin
subendocardialischemia.Unfortunately,useofthis
ratioisalsounreliableforseveralreasons:
• Increases in MVO2 due to increased contractil-
ity are not reﬂected in BP and HR changes and
thereforearenotaccountedforbySPTI.
• Ahigherratioisrequiredinthepresenceofane-
miatocompensateforthereducedoxygencarrying
capacityofblood.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch04” — 2007/7/17 — 20:30 — page 104 — #15
104 Chapter4
• Thepresenceofpressuredropsacrosscoronary
stenoses makes the DPTI an unreliable index of
distalcoronaryperfusion.
• Changes in coronary vascular resistance make
DPTI an unreliable index of distal coronary
perfusion.
• Useoftheratioiscumbersomebecauseitrequires
calculation of the areas under the diastolic and
systolicpressurecurves,respectively.
Meanarterialbloodpressure–heartrate
(BP–HR)quotient
Animal work demonstrates that ischemia occurs
in the distribution of a critical coronary stenosis
andincollateral-dependentmyocardiumwhenthe
pressureratequotient(PRQ),deﬁnedasmeanarte-
rial pressure (MAP)/HR, is<1. This relationship
isvalidoverawiderangeofpressuresandHRs.
AnincreaseinHRcancauseorworsenischemic
dysfunctionatanymeanarterialBP;however,the
absoluteHRatwhichischemiaoccursisdependent
onthepre-existingMAP.Inotherwords,higher
HRsaretoleratedwithoutischemiaathigherMAPs.
Forpatientsundergoingcoronaryrevascularization,
PRQ <1.0 has poor sensitivity and speciﬁcity in
predictingmyocardialischemiaasdetectedbyboth
ECGandTEE.
Insummary:
• Thecombinationofhypertensionandtachycar-
diamayresultinmyocardialischemiabyincreasing
myocardialoxygendemand.
• The combination of hypotension and tachy-
cardia is particularly detrimental to myocardial
oxygenbalancebecauseitreducesboththetime
andthepressuregradientavailableformyocardial
perfusion.
• Tachycardia, in and of itself, is detrimental to
myocardialoxygenbalance.Experimentally,tachy-
cardiacausesorworsensischemicdysfunctionat
any given mean arterial BP. Clinically, tachycar-
diaisassociatedwiththedevelopmentofischemia
inpatientsundergoingcoronaryrevascularization
whereas hypertension per se is not a risk factor.
Inparticular,HRs >110b/minareassociatedwith
a dramatically increased incidence of intraoper-
ative ischemia in patients undergoing coronary
revascularization.
Treatment of ischemia
The most effective ischemic therapy involves
identiﬁcation of the cause of ischemia and tar-
getedtreatmentofthiscausativefactororfactors.
Insomecases,thespeciﬁccausefornewischemia
isunclear.
Tachycardia
No single value of HR is uniformly detrimental
tomyocardialoxygenbalanceinagivenpatient.
Asalreadydiscussed,theHRatwhichischemiais
likelytooccurwillvarywithmeanarterialBPand
theotherdeterminantsofmyocardialoxygenbal-
ance.WhenanincreaseinHRresultsinischemia
orislikelytoresultinischemia,immediatetherapy
isnecessary.
Eliminating inadequate anesthetic depth as a
cause is among the ﬁrst and immediate steps in
the patient undergoing surgery. Preload must be
adequate.Thisisparticularlyimportantforpatients
withdiminishedventricularcompliance.Inthese
patients,ahigher-than-normalend-diastolicpres-
sureisnecessarytoensureanadequateventricular
EDV.Onceanestheticdepthandvolumestatusare
eliminated as a cause of the tachycardia, treat-
mentwithabeta-blockermaybenecessary.Many
patients taking beta-blockers preoperatively may
have plasma concentrations that are too low to
bluntthehemodynamicresponsestosurgeryand
willrequiresupplementalmedication.Propranolol
inincrementaldosesof0.5–1.0mgIVtoatotalof
0.1mg/kgmaybeusedforpatientswithoutsevere
ventricularsystolicdysfunction.Forpatientswitha
historyofbronchospasmorreactiveairwaydisease,
a β1 selectiveagentsuchasmetoprololisuseful.
Incremental doses of 2.5–5.0mg IV to a total of
0.5mg/kgcanbeused.BecauseelevationsinPCWP
willreduceCPP,concomitantintravenous(IV)ther-
apy with nitroglycerin 0.5–1.0µg/kg/min is indi-
cated in the presence of an elevated PCWP. The
clinicianmusttitratedruguseagainstanticipated
orobservedhypotension.
In some instances, the ultra-short-acting beta-
blocker esmolol may be useful. Esmolol has an
eliminationhalf-lifeof9minutesduetometabolism
by red-cell esterases and isβ1 selective. Esmolol
is started with a bolus of 0.5mg/kg given overAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch04” — 2007/7/17 — 20:30 — page 105 — #16
AnesthesiaforMyocardialRevascularization 105
several minutes followed by an infusion of
50 µg/kg/min and titrated up to 300µg/kg/min
asnecessary.Inapatientundergeneralanesthe-
sia, however, the initial dose should be signiﬁ-
cantly reduced (10–50µg). Esmolol is useful in
patients with poor ventricular function or bron-
chospastic disease. A striking advantage to this
medication is the short half-life. If the drug is
poorly tolerated, therapy can be quickly termi-
nated. Furthermore, unlike longer-acting beta-
blockers,esmololcanbeusedaggressivelyinthe
pre-cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) period with-
out fear that it will compromise termination
ofCPB.
Hypotension
Many patients with coronary disease will toler-
atebriefepisodesofhypotensionwithoutischemic
sequelae,butotherswillnot.Theextentofhypoten-
sionthatcanbetoleratedbeforeischemiadevelops
is dependent on several variables. For example,
a reduction in arterial BP may reduce MVO2
byreducingafterload(decreasingdemand);how-
ever, at the same time, aortic perfusion pressure
may fall to a critical level (decreasing supply).
Furthermore, as discussed previously, at higher
HRs,hypotensionadverselyeffectsperfusion.Inany
case,thesourceofhypotensionmustbequicklyand
accurately determined. Determination of CO and
systemicvascularresistance(SVR)willhelpdirect
therapy.
When hypotension is due to a reduction in
CO, HR and preload should be optimized. If
thesemeasuresfailtocorrectthefallinCO,one
shouldconsiderstartinganinotropeandeliminat-
ingorreducinganyinhalationalanestheticagents
(eliminating their negative inotropic properties).
AfallinSVRcanbetreatedwithan α-adrenergic
agonistsuchasphenylephrineinincrementaldoses
of 40–100µg IV. It should be kept in mind
that α-adrenergicagonistsmayconstrictcoronary
arterieswithdynamicstenosesandshouldthere-
fore be titrated carefully. Because elevations in
PCWPwillreduceCPP(increasingventricularwall
tension), concomitant therapy with nitroglycerin
0.5–1.0 µg/kg/minisindicatedinthepresenceof
anelevatedPCWP.
Hypertension
Hypertension is classically associated with tachy-
cardia in the genesis of myocardial ischemia.
Treatment, in this instance, is directed toward
deepeningofanesthesia.Ifhypertensionispersis-
tentdespiteadequateanestheticdepth,vasodilator
therapyiswarranted.Manyagentsreducesystemic
BP.Sodiumnitroprussideisaneasilytitrated,potent
arteriolar dilator that effectively treats hyperten-
sion.Aninfusioncanbestartedat0.25 µg/kg/min
and titrated upward. However, because sodium
nitroprussideisapotentarteriolardilator,ithasthe
potentialtoinduceacoronarystealinthepresence
of the appropriate anatomy. Another concern is
overtreatingthepatientandinducingacute,severe
hypotension.
Nitroglycerinpreferentiallydilateslargecoronary
vessels and is not implicated in the steal phe-
nomenon. Nitroglycerin has its greatest dilating
effect on the venous beds and arterial dilatation
occursonlyathigherdoses.Despitethis,whenused
inappropriatedoses,nitroglycerinandnitroprus-
side have been shown to be equally effective in
treatmentofhypertensionassociatedwithcoronary
arterybypasssurgery.Bothagentshavecomparable
effects on HR, CO, and PCWP. With compara-
blereductionsinsystolicBP,nitroglycerincauses
lessreductionindiastolicBPthandoesnitroprus-
side.Therefore,CPPmaybebetterpreservedwith
nitroglycerinthanwithnitroprusside.Fortheserea-
sons,nitroglycerinmaybethepreferredagentfor
treatmentofhypertensionassociatedwithmyocar-
dial ischemia. For treatment of hypertension,
startnitroglycerinat0.5 µg/kg/minandtitrateto
effect.
Dynamicstenosis
Evidenceofmyocardialischemiamayoccurwith
little or no initial change in HR or BP. In these
instances,acutereductionsincoronarybloodﬂow
mayoccurduetovasoconstrictionintheareaofa
coronarystenosisorduetotruecoronaryspasmin
anareafreeofastenosis.Themainstaysofther-
apyarenitroglycerinandcalciumchannelblockers
toreducecoronaryvasomotortone.Nitroglycerin
canbestartedat0.5 µg/kg/minandtitratedupward.
WhenanelevatedPCWPaccompaniestheischemicAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch04” — 2007/7/17 — 20:30 — page 106 — #17
106 Chapter4
episode, nitroglycerin effectively reduces PCWP
throughbothvasodilation(reducingpreload)and
treatmentoftheunderlyingischemia.Nifedipineis
acalciumchannelblockerandsystemicvasodilator
thatcanbeadministeredsublinguallyina10-mg
dosetoreducecoronaryvasomotortone.
Systemichypotensionmayoccurwithadminis-
tration of these agents. CPP improves when the
pressuredropacrossthestenosisdiminisheswith
vasodilationintheareaofthestenosisandwhen
vasodilation reduces PCWP. However, extreme
diastolichypotensionoffsetsanypotentialimprove-
ment of CPP. For this reason, administration of
phenylephrineinadditiontonitroglycerinactsto
preservesdiastolicBPandCPP.
Anesthetic management for
CABG surgery
Goals
• Avoid increases in myocardial oxygen
consumption.
• Avoid tachycardia; it compromises oxygen
deliveryatanyMAP.
• Appreciate that the patient’s baseline ischemic
pattern will continue into the preoperative and
intraoperative periods; these episodes must be
treatedwhenrecognized.
Preoperative cardiac assessment
Preoperative evaluation is discussed in detail in
Chapter1.Carefulreviewofthecardiaccatheteriza-
tiondataisalsoanessentialpartofthepreoperative
visit.Theimportantfeaturesofthecatheterization
reportarereviewedhereanddiscussedindetailin
Chapter2.
Diastolicfunction
Tovaryingdegrees,manypatientswithCADman-
ifestdiminishedventricularcompliance.Inmany
patients with diastolic dysfunction, an elevated
LVEDPisnecessaryforadequateLVEDV.Themea-
surementofLVEDPatthetimeofcardiaccatheter-
ization will provide some index of the degree of
diastolic impairment. In addition to diminished
distensibility,patientswithlong-standingsystemic
hypertensionmayhaveconcentrichypertrophyand
diminishedventricularcompliance.Patientsfunc-
tioning on the steep portion of their diastolic
pressure–volume curve will be dependent on a
well-timedatrialsystole(theAwaveintheatrial
pressuretrace)toadequatelyﬁlltheventricleatend
diastole.
Echocardiographyoffersanotheravenueforeval-
uation of diastolic dysfunction. This noninvasive
modality allows precise quantiﬁcation of dias-
tolic parameters. The function can be character-
izedasnormal,delayedrelaxation,pseudo-normal
and restrictive. These quantiﬁcations represent a
continuumofdisease(Figs4.9and4.10).
Forpatientsundergoingrepeatcoronaryrevascu-
larizationprocedures,elevatedrightheartpressures
increase the risk of inadvertent right atriotomies
andventriculotomiesduringsternotomy.Similarly,
if the pericardium was left open after the origi-
nalsurgicalprocedure,theanteriorsurfaceofthe
RVismorelikelytobeadherenttothesternum
(Fig.4.11).Thehemorrhageinducedbythesetrau-
maticatriotomies,andventriculotomiescanbelife
threatening.Afemoralveinandarteryareoften
exposedbeforesternotomyinredopatientssothat
partialbypasscanbeinitiatedemergentlyifhem-
orrhageoccurswithsternotomy.Partialbypasspro-
videsthecirculatorysupportandthedecompression
oftherightheartthatmaybenecessaryforsurgical
repair.
Systolicfunction
Ejection fraction (EF) and assessment of wall
motion are the most commonly obtained assess-
mentsofsystolicfunction(Fig.4.12).BecauseEF
isanejection-phaseindex,itisdependentonload-
ingconditions.Forthisreason,thepresenceofa
low-impedanceoutﬂowtract,suchasthatwhich
existsviathemitralvalveinmitralinsufﬁciency,
will cause the EF to overestimate systolic func-
tion.EFisanassessmentofglobalsystolicfunction
andwillnotbedepresseduntilarelativelylarge
portionofventricleexhibitscompromisedsystolic
function.AnEFlowerthan40%isabnormal.Wall
motionabnormalitiesareseenwithventriculogra-
phy,advancedmagneticresonanceimaging(MRI)
or computed tomography (CT) imaging, or com-
monly,withechocardiography.WhenlargeareasofAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch04” — 2007/7/17 — 20:30 — page 107 — #18
AnesthesiaforMyocardialRevascularization 107
Normal
E ≥ A
DT 140–220
IVRT 60–100
Transmitral
flow velocity
Pulmonary vein
flow velocity
Mitral annular
velocity
(lateral wall)
Normal
S ≥ D
Ar < 25 cm/s
Normal
EM/AM > 1
EM > 8cm/s
Mild Dysfunction
(Delayed
relaxation)
EM ≤ 8cm/s
Moderate
Dysfunction
(Pseudonormal)
EM < 8cm/s
Severe
Dysfunction
(restrictive)
EM     8 cm/s
Delayed
relaxation
S > D
Ar < 25 cm/s
Pseudonormal
S < D
Ar >25 cm/s
LAP increased
Restrictive
S < D
Ar > 25 cm/s
LAP increased
Delayed
Relaxation
E < A
DT>220 
IVRT>100
Pseudonormal
E < A
DT 140–220
LAP increased
Restrictive
E     A
DT< 140
IVRT< 60
Fig. 4.9 TransmitralDopplerimaging,pulmonaryviewDopplerimagingandtissueDopplerimaging(TDI)proﬁles
correspondingtonormal,delayedrelaxation,pseudonormal,andrestrictiveﬁllingpatterns.(FromGrobanL,
DolinskiSY.Transechocardiographicevaluationofdiastolicfunction. Chest2005;128:3652–63,withpermission.)
akinesisanddyskinesisexist,systolicfunctionwill
beseverelycompromised.
RVEFandwallmotionanalysisgenerallyarenot
obtainedatthetimeofcatheterization.Forpatients
withsuspectedRVsystolicdysfunction,eitherﬁrst-
passorequilibriumnoninvasiveradionuclearimag-
ingcanbeusedtodetermineEF.
Coronaryanatomyandcoronarylesions
Thesurgeonandanesthesiologistmustknowthe
extent of coronary disease and the presence or
absenceofcollateralﬂow.Thiswillallowintelligent
assessmentoftheareasmostatriskfordeveloping
ischemia.Thisknowledgewillhelpguidemonitor-
ingdecisions(i.e.ECGmonitoringselectionandTEE
window).
The coronary angiograms guide the surgeon
in target vessel location. Distal disease in small
vesselsmakesthetechnicalsuccessoftheoperative
procedure less likely. Furthermore, bypassing
avesselsupplyingadyskineticoraneurysmalarea
ofventriclemayyieldlittleintermsofimproved
systolicfunctionpostoperativelybecausesuchareas
have little salvageable myocardium. There are
strongdatatosuggestthatbypassingareasofhiber-
nating myocardium result in improved LV func-
tionat1yearaftersurgery.Insomepatients,the
EF%maydramaticallyimprovefrom20to40%or
better.
The term “left main equivalent” is commonly
used and deserves clariﬁcation. A high-grade left
maincoronaryarterylesionpotentiallyjeopardizesAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch04” — 2007/7/17 — 20:30 — page 108 — #19
108 Chapter4
EF ≥ 45%
E > AE < A
E/EM≤ 88 ≤E/EM≤ 15 E/EM>15 E/EM≤88 ≤E/EM≤15 E/EM>15 E/EM<8 E/EM>15
TDI
Impaired
relaxation
normal filling
pressures
Impaired
relaxation
normal filling
pressures
Doppler
pulmonary
vein
Valsalva
and
mitral inflow
Impaired
relaxation
increased filling
pressures
Impaired
relaxation
increased filling
pressures
Normal
diastolic
function
Normal
diastolic
function
High
suspicion of
pericardial
disease
Restrictive
myocardial
disease
Valsalva
and
mitral inflow
Reversible,
restrictive
Fixed,
restrictive
E >AE < A
Pseudonormal
And/or
Doppler
pulmonary
vein
Ar wave
< 25
Normal Pseudonormal
Ar wave
≥ 25
E > AAr wave
≥ 25 cm/s
Ar wave
< 25 cm/s
E     A
(unchanged)
Pseudonormal
TDI
E    A
= To do
= Diagnosis
TDI
DT>140 msDT>140 ms DT< 140 ms
EM> 8 cm/sEM≤ 8 cm/s EM≤ 8 cm/s E M>8c m / s E M≤ 8 cm/s
Doppler
mitral inflow
Fig. 4.10 Algorithmfortheassessmentofdiastolicfunctioninthepatientwithanormalornear-normalejection
fraction(EF)(i.e. ≥45%).A,atrialpeakvelocity;Ar,retrogradevelocity;E,earlyﬁllingpeakvelocity; EM,earlyﬁlling;
TDI,tissueDopplerimaging.(FromGrobanL,DolinskiSY.Transechocardiographicevaluationofdiastolicfunction.
Chest2005;128:3652–63,withpermission.)
Fig. 4.11 Lateraland
posterior/anteriorchestradiographsof
awomanpresentingforare-do
sternotomy.Notethesternalwiresand
theheartadherenttothesternum.
Thiswomanhasathoracoabdominal
aorticaneurysm.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch04” — 2007/7/17 — 20:30 — page 109 — #20
AnesthesiaforMyocardialRevascularization 109
(a)
(b)
Fig. 4.12 Systolicfunctioniseasilyassessedwith
transesophagealechocardiography(TEE).(a)Ejection
fraction(EF)isdeterminedbythemodiﬁedmethodof
disk.Capturingtheimageinbothendsystoleandend
diastoleallowstheechocardiographertotracethe
endocardialborderanddetermineejectionfraction.
TheEFinthispatientisnormal(65%).(b)M-mode
Dopplerallowsdeterminationofwallmotionand
fractionalshortening.Inthispatient,thereissigniﬁcant
inferiorwallhypokinesisasevidencedbyalackof
thickeningandmovementduringsystole.Compare
thethickeningandmovementoftheanteriorwall
(farﬁeld)tothatoftheinferiorwall.
mostoftheLVmusclemass.Likewise,high-grade
stenosesofboththeleftanteriordescending(LAD)
and circumﬂex arteries jeopardize the same ter-
ritory. As a result, this combination of lesions is
functionallythesameasaleftmainlesion;hence,
thedesignationleftmainequivalent.Thedifference
isthatwiththetrueleftmainlesion,onlyonevessel
(theleftmain)mustbecomecompletelyoccluded
tocompromiseLVbloodﬂow.Inthecaseofthe
LAD and circumﬂex lesions, both vessels would
have to be occluded simultaneously to produce
the same effect. Another high-risk combination
of lesions occurs when collaterals from a vessel
withahigh-gradestenosissupplymyocardiumdis-
tal to an occluded vessel. An example would be
myocardium distal to an occluded LAD supplied
bycollateralsfromarightcoronaryartery(RCA)
withahigh-gradeproximalstenosis.Inthissetting,
completeocclusionoftheremainingvessel(RCA)
compromisesmostoftheLV.
Forpatientsundergoingredoprocedures,evalua-
tionoftheextracardiacconduits(internalmammary
arteriesandreversesaphenousveins)isrequired.
These grafts may now have varying degrees of
stenosis. Inadvertent compromise (i.e. transec-
tion, laceration, kinking) of these conduits dur-
ing the difﬁcult dissection that often accompa-
nies a redo procedure may severely compromise
myocardialperfusion.Likewise,surgicalmanipula-
tionoftheseconduitsmayresultinembolizationof
atheroscleroticplaquesintothedistalcoronaryvas-
cularbedwithsubsequenttransmuralmyocardial
ischemia.
Premedication
Reassurance and allowing time to address the
patient’sconcernsareperhapsthebestanxiolytic.
This is especially import when one considers the
relative risk CABG surgery involves. In the very
bestofhands,theriskofmortalityisapproximately
1–3%,andthereisafurtherriskofneurocognitive
deﬁcit,stroke,renalfailureandrespiratoryfailure.
Ourpatientsarefacingamajorriskwhichinduces
signiﬁcantanxiety.Itisourobligationtotreatthem
withcare,compassionandpatience.
Thereareanumberofsafepremedicationpre-
scriptionsthanaclinicianmaychose.Patientswith
preservedventricularfunctioncanbepremedicated
with morphine 0.10–0.15mg/kg intramuscularly
(IM),scopolamine0.005mg/kgIM,anddiazepam
0.15mg/kg or lorazepam 0.04mg/kg orally (PO)
approximately 1.5hours before scheduled induc-
tiontime.Alternatively,morphine0.10–0.15mg/kg
IMand midazolam 0.03–0.05mg/kg IMmay be
used.Thedysphoriceffectsofscopolaminemaybe
troublesomeforelderlypatients.Forelderlypatients
orpatientswithpoorventricularfunction,thedoses
can be reduced and supplemental premedication
canbegivenintheoperatingroomholdingareaAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch04” — 2007/7/17 — 20:30 — page 110 — #21
110 Chapter4
under direct observation. Supplemental oxygen
with a face mask should be started at the time
of premedication. Most prudently, premedication
can be held until the patient arrives in the pre-
operativeholdingarea.Atthistime,thephysician
or nurse anesthetist can administer either fen-
tanylormidazolamunderdirectsupervisionand
observation.
All cardiac medications should be continued
on schedule until the time of surgery. Preop-
erative beta-blocker therapy has been shown to
bluntthehemodynamicresponsestosurgicalstim-
ulation during coronary revascularization and to
reducetheincidenceofHR-relatedintraoperative
ischemicevents.Continuationofpreoperativebeta-
blockadetherapydoesnotcompromisemyocardial
performanceduringthepost-CPBperiod.Further-
more,abruptwithdrawalofbeta-blockadetherapy
has been associated with myocardial ischemia,
hypertension, and tachydysrhythmias secondary
toabeta-blockadeinducedincreasein β-receptor
density. In fact, continuation of beta-blockers in
patientsundergoingsurgerywhoarereceivingthe
medicationforangina,symptomaticarrhythmias,
hypertensionorotherACC/AHAclassIindications
carriesaclassIlevelrecommendation.
Some preoperative medications require addi-
tional comment. Patients treated with diltiazem
andnifedipinepreoperativelydemonstrateadimin-
ishedresponsetophenylephrine.Thus,treatment
ofintraoperativehypotensionmayrequirehigher
thanusualdosesofphenylephrineforpatientscon-
tinuedonpreoperativecalciumchannelblockers.
The incidence of perioperative ischemia during
coronary revascularization is greater in patients
receivingjustcalciumchannelblockers(nifedipine,
diltiazem, or verapamil) preoperatively than in
patientsreceivingbeta-blockersoracombinationof
calciumchannelandbeta-blockers.Thisisprobably
due to better attenuation of tachycardia-induced
ischemia in patients receiving beta-blockers. The
angiotensinconvertingenzymeinhibitingdrugsare
associated with refractory hypotension after CPB
in some patients. These medications should be
heldonthemorningofsurgery.Ifhypotensionis
encountered,treatmentismosteffectiveusingIV
vasopressin (2units IV bolus titrated to effect or
aninfusionof2–6units/h).Theantiplateletmed-
ications pose an unusual management problem.
Patientsonclopidogrelshouldhavethemedication
heldfor3–5daysbeforeelectivesurgery.Surgery
inpatientsonclopidogrelisassociatedwithexces-
sivebleedingandtransfusionofbloodandblood
products.
Preinduction
After arrival in the operating room, all patients
should be attached to an ECG system capable of
monitoring leads I, II, III, aVR,a VL,A VF, and
V5. Baseline recording of all seven leads should
be obtained for comparative purposes. Normally,
two leads (II and V5) are monitored simultane-
ously intraoperatively. However, if the areas of
myocardium at risk are better assessed in other
leads,thenthoseleadsshouldbemonitored.
All patients should have a radial arterial
catheterandadequateperipheralIVaccess(14-or
16-gauge). Alternatively, if peripheral IV access
is poor, a peripheral IV suitable for induction
canbestartedandalarge-boremultilumen(16-or
14-gauge)centralvenouslinecanbeplacedatthe
sametimeasthePAC.Forpatientswhoaretohave
aninternalmammaryartery(IMA)harvested,the
arterialwaveformobtainedintheipsilateralradial
orbrachialarterymaybecompromisedduringIMA
dissection. This occurs when the patient’s arm is
tuckedatthesideandiscompressedbetweenthe
bodyandtheretractorusedforIMAdissection.This
resultsincompressionofthebrachialarteryagainst
thehumerusandisparticularlycommoninlarge
patients.Thearteriallinemaybeplacedinthecon-
tralateralarmortheipsilateralarmcanbeabducted
toavoidthisproblem.Whenthearmistuckedatthe
side,careshouldbetakentoprovideamplepadding
betweenthearmandtheretractor.Manysurgeons
harvesttheradialarteryforadditionalarterialcon-
duit. In these cases, the nonsurgical arm is only
siteavailableforradialarterycannulation.Ifcan-
nulationisimpossible,afemoralarterycatheteris
required.
TheuseofPACsforallpatientsundergoingcoro-
naryrevascularizationiscontroversial.PACsallow
measurement of thermodilution CO; pulmonary
artery, right atrial, and PCWPs; systemic andAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch04” — 2007/7/17 — 20:30 — page 111 — #22
AnesthesiaforMyocardialRevascularization 111
pulmonaryvascularresistances(PVRs);andLVand
RVstrokework.SomePACsmonitorcontinuous
CO,mixedvenousoxygensaturation,rightheart
EF,andRVdiastolicvolume.AnalysisofthePCWP
andRAPtracesmaybehelpfulintheearlydiag-
nosis of ischemia. There are several reviews of
outcomeandpulmonaryarterycatheterization.Itis
extremelydifﬁculttodemonstrateabeneﬁtinplac-
ingaPAC,andinmanystudies,thePACisassoci-
atedwithworseoutcome.Nonetheless,PACuseis
commonduringcardiacsurgery.
ThePACmaybesafelyplacedeitherbeforeor
aftertheinductionofanesthesia.Ifplacedbefore,
theinformationcanbeusedduringtheinduction
sequence.However,somepatientsmayexperience
undue anxiety, or if sedated, potential respira-
torycompromiseduringlineplacement.Ifplaced
after induction, the patient will be under gen-
eral anesthesia and paralyzed thereby facilitating
rapidandsafeplacement.Aswithanycentralline
placement, certain precautions are required. All
of the equipment and medications for treatment
ofdysrhythmiasshouldbeonhandbeforeplace-
mentofthecatheterisattempted.Inparticular,a
deﬁbrillatorwithdemonstratedconsistentsynchro-
nizationtothepatient’sECGsignalmustbeinthe
room in case cardioversion is necessary. In addi-
tion,strictsteriletechniqueisrequiredtoreduce
theincidenceofperioperativelinecolonizationand
sepsis.
Theinformationobtainedatcardiaccatheteriza-
tionaboutLVdiastolicfunctionandLVend-diastolic
pressure can be used in conjunction with the
PCWPtooptimizeLVpreload.Patientswithreduced
compliance may require a PCWP in the range
of 12–15mmHg to ensure an adequate preload
(LVEDV).Whenpreloadisinadequate,SVandCO
will be reduced and systemic BP and CPP will
be maintained by increases in SVR. Subsequent
reductionsinSVR(aswithinduction)mayleadto
hypotensionandpotentiallytotachycardia.Inthis
setting,anyadvantageofalowPCWPintermsof
CPPisoffsetbysystemichypotension.
Forpatientswithpoorsystolicfunction,preload
reservewillbelimitedorexhaustedtomeetbaseline
COdemands.Anyincreaseinafterloadwillpro-
duceafterloadmismatchandresultinprogressive
reductions in SV and CO. Because poor systolic
function associated with ischemic heart disease
isaccompaniedbyreduceddiastolicdistensibility,
maintenanceofanadequatepreloadwillrequire
aPCWPintherangeof12–18mmHg.
All episodes of ischemia in the preinduc-
tion period require aggressive therapy. Therapy
shouldbedirectedtowardthespeciﬁccauseofthe
ischemic episode. A high proportion of ischemic
episodesarelikelytobeasymptomaticandtooccur
intheabsenceofhemodynamicchanges,theECG,
RAP,andPCWPtracesareimportantindiagnosing
ischemiainthesepatients.
Induction and maintenance
Nooneanesthetictechniqueissuperiortoanother
forpatientspresentingforcoronaryarterybypass
grafting. Two types of techniques are discussed:
a traditional high-dose narcotic technique and a
“fast-track”techniquegearedtowardshorterpost-
operativeventilationandearlierdischargefromthe
intensivecareunit(ICU).
High-dosenarcotictechnique
Fentanylandsufentanilgenerallyprovidethestable
hemodynamics essential in preventing imbalance
inmyocardialoxygensupplyanddemand.These
agents have no effect on myocardial contractility
andcauseareductioninperipheralvascularresis-
tanceonlythroughadiminutionincentralsym-
pathetic tone. In a high-dose narcotic technique,
50–75 µg/kgoffentanyl,or10–15 µg/kgofsufen-
tanilserveastheprimaryanestheticforinduction
and maintenance before CPB. A benzodiazepine
mustbeincludedtoavoidawareness.
Sufentanilisassociatedwithgreaterdecreasesin
arterial BP and SVR on induction than fentanyl.
However, sufentanil is more effective than fen-
tanyl in blunting the hypertensive responses to
skinincision,sternotomy,sternalspread,andaor-
ticmanipulation.Toavoidhypotensiononinduc-
tion with either narcotic, adequate preload is
essential.
The choice of muscle relaxant inﬂuences the
hemodynamicstabilityofahigh-dosenarcoticanes-
thetic.Pancuroniumhasavagolyticeffectaswell
asthecapacitytoenhancesympatheticoutﬂowbyAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch04” — 2007/7/17 — 20:30 — page 112 — #23
112 Chapter4
blockadeofsympatheticpostganglionicmuscarinic
receptors, inhibition of catecholamine reuptake,
andstimulationofreleaseofcatecholaminefrom
nerveterminals.Vecuroniumandcisatracuriumare
devoid of these effects. Induction with fentanyl–
pancuronium provides stable induction hemo-
dynamics without ischemia. In some patients,
inductionwithfentanyl–vecuroniumorsufentanil–
vecuronium results in bradycardia and hypoten-
sion. Induction with sufentanil–pancuronium
providesstableinductionhemodynamicsandHR.
Cautionisurgedinanycaseinapatientreceiv-
ing beta-blocking agents preoperatively. In these
patients,ahigh-dosenarcoticismorelikelytobe
associatedwithsigniﬁcantbradycardia.
Preoxygenationisimportantincardiacsurgical
patients.Theinductionsequencemustbetailored
totheindividualpatient.Asystemofgradedstimu-
lationisusedtoindividualizethenarcoticdosefor
eachpatient.Afterlossofconsciousness,thehemo-
dynamicresponsetoinsertionofanoralairway,fol-
lowedbyinsertionofaurinarycatheter,cangauge
theneedforadditionalnarcotictoblunttheantic-
ipatedhemodynamicresponsetotrachealintuba-
tion.IfanupwardtrendinHRorBPisnotedduring
laryngoscopy,additionalnarcoticshouldbeadmin-
istered.Ifthereispoorvisualizationofthetrachea,
laryngoscopyshouldbeterminatedandintubating
conditionsshouldbeimprovedbychanginghead
position, using a stylet, or changing blades. This
approachwillhelppreventlong,stimulatinglaryn-
goscopies that compromise hemodynamics. After
theairwayissecure,thestomachshouldbeevac-
uatedwithanoral-gastrictube,afterwhich,aTEE
probecanbeplaced.
Itissometimeshelpfultoadministerapriming
doseofmusclerelaxantpriortothenarcoticadmin-
istration.Vecuroniumorpancuronium0.02mg/kg
orcisatracurium0.04mg/kgareappropriateapprox-
imately 1–2minutes before starting the narcotic
infusion. As the patient loses consciousness, the
remainderofthetotaldoseof0.1mg/kgofvecuro-
niumorpancuroniumor0.2mg/kgofcisatracurium
is administered and controlled ventilation with
100%oxygenisinitiated.Thistechniqueminimizes
theriskofnarcotic-inducedrigiditywithoutundue
stresstothepatient.
Bradycardia with hypotension requires prompt
treatment.Asmalldoseofpancuronium(1–3mg)is
ofteneffectiveifvecuroniumorcisatracuriumhas
beenused.Glycopyrrolate,ephedrine,oratropine
maybeappropriatealternatives.Atropineshouldbe
usedcautiously.Atropineadministrationmayini-
tiate tachycardia. Atropine, unlikeβ1-adrenergic
agents,increasesHRwithoutanyreductioninthe
duration of systole. Thus, for equal increases in
HR,atropinewillcauseagreaterreductioninthe
duration of diastole and will compromise suben-
docardial perfusion to a greater degree than will
a β1-adrenergic agent. Ephedrine (a direct- and
indirect-acting β- andα-agonist), 5mg, is a reli-
ableagenttoincreaseHRwithoutcompromising
diastole. In addition, the augmentation in dias-
tolicBPobtainedisbeneﬁcialwhenhypotension
accompaniesbradycardia.
Tachycardia requires aggressive treatment to
avoidsubendocardialischemiaandhemodynamic
compromise.Theﬁrststrategyshouldbetotermi-
nateanynoxiousstimuli,assureproperintravas-
cularvolumeandincreasethedepthofanesthesia
whennecessary.Failingthis,ashort-orlong-acting
beta-blockerisusuallyappropriatetherapy.
ShouldhypotensionduetoreducedSVRoccur,
small doses of phenylephrine (40–120µg) and
volumeinfusiontoincreasepreloadtopreinduc-
tionlevelsusuallywillcorrecttheproblem.Adose
ofphenylephrinereliablycausesanincreaseinSVR
with a concomitant increase in wall stress and a
reductioninejectionphaseindicesofcontractilityin
CABGpatients.Thepeakeffectofaphenylephrine
doseoccurs30–40secondsafterinjection.
Ifsurgicalstimulation(skinincision,sternotomy,
sternal spreading, and aortic manipulation) pro-
duceshypertension,additionaldosesofsufentanil
(1–5 µg/kg)orfentanyl(5–25 µg/kg)maybenec-
essary.Ifthisfailstocontrolthehypertension,the
useofadditionalagentswillbenecessary.Asdis-
cussedpreviously,treatmentofhypertensionwith
vasodilator therapy must take into account the
effectoftheseagentsonregionalmyocardialblood
ﬂowandontheirabilitytoimproveconcomitant
ischemia.
As mentioned, this technique requires the
administration of benzodiazepines and possiblyAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch04” — 2007/7/17 — 20:30 — page 113 — #24
AnesthesiaforMyocardialRevascularization 113
inhalational anesthetics to reduce the incidence
of operative recall. Diazepam, midazolam, and
lorazepamadministeredinconjunctionwithfen-
tanylorsufentanilmaydecreaseperipheralvascu-
larresistanceresultinginsubsequenthypotension.
Therefore,theymustbetitratedwithcaution.Mida-
zolam in increments of 1–2mg or lorazepam in
incrementsof0.5–1.0mgarereasonable.
Nitrous oxide (N2O), in association with high-
doseopiates,causessystolicdysfunctioninpatients
with CAD, particularly those with an LVEDP
>15mmHg.N2Ocombinedwithhigh-doseopiates
alsoelevatesPVR,particularlyinthepresenceof
pre-existingpulmonaryhypertension.Thepotent
inhalational agents, isoﬂurane, sevoﬂurane and
desﬂuranearesafeinpatientsundergoingcoronary
revascularization.Theroleofanestheticprecondi-
tioningwithinhalationalagentsisdiscussedlaterin
thischapter.
Fast-tracktechnique
The “fast track” is a comprehensive program
designed to improve perioperative outcome and
reducecostsbyreducinghospitalstayforpatients
undergoingcoronaryrevascularization.Earlyextu-
bation( <8hours)isthehallmarkofthisprogram.
Anumberofanesthetictechniquesallowearlyextu-
bationwithoutincreasingtheriskofadversecar-
diacandnoncardiacoutcomes.Generally,patients
selectedforinclusionintheprotocolarelow-risk
coronaryrevascularizationpatients,butmorecen-
tersareincludingallcardiacsurgicalpatients.Risk
factorscontributingtoprolongedpostoperativeven-
tilationincoronaryrevascularizationpatientsare
female sex, advanced age, congestive heart fail-
ure(CHF)requiringpreoperativediuretictherapy,
and unstable angina. Both the anesthetic tech-
niqueandthemaintenanceofnormothermiaare
importantwiththistechnique;however;themost
important element for success in a hospital sys-
tem is the adoption of a “fast-track extubation
protocol.”Usingsuchaprotocolidentiﬁesappro-
priate patients, alerts the care team of the clini-
cal pathway, and facilitates a scheduled weaning
process.
Thefollowingisanexampleofafast-trackpro-
tocol.Therearemanyapproaches,however,and
theclinicianwillsoonmasteratechniquesuitable
forhisorherpractice.
• Premedicationwithmidazolam1–2mgIVinthe
preoperativeholdingarea.
• Fentanyl 15–20 µg/kg and etomidate 0.20–
0.30mg/kg for induction in combination with
cisatracurium or vecuronium. The considerations
usedinchoosingarelaxantarethesameusedin
thehigh-dosenarcotictechnique.
• Maintenance of anesthesia with isoﬂurane
0.5–1.0%.
• EitherPropofol75–100 µg/kg/min,orisoﬂurane
isadministeredwhileonCPB.
• Intermediate-acting neuromuscular blocking
agent(Fig.4.13).
Rocuronium
Pancuronium
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
TOF fade ratio
012
Hours
Postoperative recovery
Variable Rocuronium
90 (40–315)
335 (185–1290)
0.99 (0.87–1.21)
180 (50–180)
460 (225–1350)
0.14 (0.00–1.11)
<0.05
<0.05
<0.05
Pancuronium P value
Duration of ventilatory weaning (min)
ICU arrival until extubation (min)
TOF ratio at initiation of ventilatory weaning
Data are median (range).
ICU, intensive care unit; TOF , train-of-four.
34
Fig. 4.13 Theuseofpancuronium(0.08–0.10mg/kg)or
rocuronium(0.6–0.8mg/kg)wasevaluatedin82patients
undergoingcoronaryarterybypassgraftingsurgery.The
bargraphshowsthetrain-of-fourratiosweremeasured
uponarrivaltotheintensivecareunitandtheneach
hourforthenext4hours.Signiﬁcantdifferenceswere
notedbetweengroupsatalltimeintervals( P <0.05).
Thepostoperativerecoveryproﬁlesareshownbelowin
theﬁgure.Dataaremedian(range).ICU,intensivecare
unit;TOF,train-of-four.(FromMurphyGS,SzokolJW,
MarymontJH etal.Recoveryofneuromuscularfunction
aftercardiacsurgery:pancuroniumversusrocuronium.
AnesthAnalg 2003;96:1301–7,withpermission.)AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch04” — 2007/7/17 — 20:30 — page 114 — #25
114 Chapter4
• Post-CPB, the isoﬂurane is maintained and
no additional narcotic is administered. Either
propofol, 20–50µg/kg/min or dexmedetomidine
0.1–0.7mg/kg/minisstartedpriortotransportto
theICU.
Off-pump coronary artery bypass
grafting
Off-pump coronary artery bypass (OPCAB) graft
surgeryoffersanalternatetechniquetotraditional
on-pump CABG. Advantages of this technique
includepotentiallydecreasedpostoperativemorbid-
ityinsomepatientsandreducedresourceutilization
andtotalcost.CPBisavoidedinthistechnique,and
therefore,soareallofthepotentialproblemswith
myocardialpreservation.Variousinvestigatorshave
demonstrated better myocardial energy preserva-
tion, less oxidative stress, and minimal myocar-
dialdamagewiththistechnique.Newadvancesin
myocardial stabilizing devices allow a still opera-
tiveﬁeldandexcellentsurgicalconditions(themain
advantageofCABGwithcardioplegiaandaﬂac-
cidheart).Thereareseveralreportsintheliterature
comparingoutcomebetweenon-pumpCABGand
OPCAB.Asexpected,theresultsvary;however,it
appearsthatthereisnodifferenceinoutcomeinlow
riskpatientswitheithertechnique(Fig.4.14).There
isaconsistentcostsavingswithOPCAB.Theanes-
thetic management of these patients is strikingly
different from traditional on-pump CABG. These
differencesarereviewedbelow.
Incontrasttoon-pumpCABG,briefperiodsof
ischemia are necessary during the operative pro-
cedure. These ischemic periods may be reduced
insomepatientswiththeplacementofatempo-
rarycoronarystent,however,thereremainssome
timeofinterruptedbloodﬂow.Theischemicbur-
denisusuallyofsuchshortduration,thatthereis
littleriskofsigniﬁcantlong-termdamage;however,
theremaybesomeelementofstunningandimme-
diate myocardial dysfunction. In addition, there
maybeacumulativeglobaldysfunctionafterseveral
sequentialocclusionsinmultiplegraftprocedures.
In fact, it is common for a patient to tolerate
a one-or-two vessel OPCAB bypass, but a three-
or-four-vessel procedure often results in signiﬁ-
cantsupportrequiredtocompletetheprocedure.
Because ischemia is anticipated, monitoring for
P = 0.48 
On pump (90.6%)
Off pump (88.0%)
1.00
0.98Event-free survival
0.96
0.94
0.92
0.90
0.88
0.86
0
0 60 120
Days since randomization
No. at risk
On pump
Off pump
139
142
130
132
128 
131
127 
128
127 
127
127 
126
126
125
180 240 300 360
Fig. 4.14 Kaplan–Meierestimatesofsurvivalfreefrom
stroke,myocardialinfarction,andrepeatedcoronary
revascularization.P =0.48bylog-ranktest.Resultsfrom
amulticenter,randomizedevaluatingoffpumpcoronary
arterybypassgraftingtotraditionalon-pumpcoronary
arterybypassgrafting.Inthisinvestigation,139patients
withsingleordoublevesselcoronarydiseasewere
randomlyassignedtoon-pumpsurgeryand142patients
tooff-pumpsurgery.At1year,therateoffreedomfrom
death,stroke,myocardialinfarctionandcoronary
reinterventionwas90.6%afteron-pumpsurgeryand
88.0%afteroff-pumpsurgery(absolutedifference,2.6%;
95%conﬁdenceinterval, −4.6 −9.8).Thegraftpatency
wassimilarbetweengroups.On-pumpsurgerywas
associatedwith$1839inadditionaldirectcostsper
patientcomparedtooff-pumpsurgery.(From
NathoeHM,vanDijkD,JansenEW etal.Acomparison
ofon-pumpandoff-pumpcoronarybypasssurgeryin
lowriskpatients. NEnglJMed 2003;348:394–402,with
permission.)
signiﬁcantischemiaisessential.Duringtheocclu-
sionandanastomoses,theanesthesiologistshould
monitortheappropriateECGleadshighlightingthe
targetarea,theTEEfornewRWMA,continuous
CO, and mixed venous oxygen saturation. It is
importanttonotethatOPCABproceduresrequire
extensive positioning of the heart, and this posi-
tioningchangestheobservedmonitoring(especially
TEEwindows);nonetheless,followingtrendswill
allowtheclinicianopportunitytointervenewhen
appropriateinthesecomplexprocedures.
OPCAB procedures are associated with hemo-
dynamicinstability.ThesehemodynamicchangesAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch04” — 2007/7/17 — 20:30 — page 115 — #26
AnesthesiaforMyocardialRevascularization 115
may be secondary to the ischemic episodes as
wellasthepositioningrequirementsoftheheart
andresultantpreloadalterations.Ingeneral,main-
taining systemic BP (and, hence, CPP) is essen-
tial.TechniquestomaintainBPincludeadequate
volume loading prior to ischemia, Trendelenburg
position, norepinephrine or phenylephrine infu-
sions, and atrial pacing if bradycardia occurs.
Placement of a coronary stent allows blood ﬂow
duringmuchoftheanastomosesandishelpfulin
reducing ischemic time. Occasionally, the patient
mayrequireinotropicsupportduringtheOPCAB
procedure.Insomepatients,ischemicmitralregur-
gitationdevelopsofworsenswithheartmanipula-
tion,positioningandischemia.Inadditiontothe
steps outlined above to support the systemic BP,
milrinone may be effective in this circumstance.
Obviously,thequickertheoperativeprocedureand
thelesstimetheheartisischemic,thebetterthe
patientwilltoleratetheprocedure.Onelastcau-
tioninvolvestheoccurrenceofsudden,signiﬁcant
dysrhythmias during OPCAB. Occasionally, upon
reperfusion, the heart may respond with multi-
focal premature contractions, ventricular tachy-
cardia,orevenventricularﬁbrillation.Awareness
ofthispotentialandpromptinterventionforﬁb-
rillationisessential.Inmostcases,theventricular
dysrhythmiasareself-limiting.
There are many potential methods to reduce
theimpactoftheobligateischemicinsult.Main-
taininganormalacid-basebalanceandelectrolyte
proﬁle are important. In addition, pharmacologic
interventions may include nitroglycerin infusion,
magnesiumsupplementation,useofcalciumantag-
onists (with the anticipated ischemic-reperfusion
injury and possible calcium overload), tight glu-
cosecontrol,andchoiceofanestheticandischemic
preconditioning.
Ischemic preconditioning and
anesthetic preconditioning
Ischemicpreconditioningisprocesswherebyshort,
transientperiodsoftissueischemiarenderthetissue
resistant to subsequent usually lethal periods of
ischemia.Thisprocessexistsinmanyorgansystems
in the body including the heart, kidneys, lungs,
brainandspinalcord.Inthemyocardium,ischemia
results in an immediate reduction in contractile
effort, with cellular death ensuing after approxi-
mately15minutes.Iftheischemicepisodeispre-
cededbyoneormoresub-lethalischemicepisodes,
themyocardiumisalteredinsuchawayastolimit
tissueinjuryandprolongtheintervalofischemic
tolerance. In experimental models, infarct size is
measuredwithandwithoutischemicprecondition-
ing.Withischemicpreconditioning,theinfarctsize
isapproximately25%smaller.Thisprotectiveben-
eﬁtisseenimmediatelyafterthepreconditioning
event,andagainat24hours(a“secondwindow”
ofprotection).Thereareseveralproposedmecha-
nismsforbothacuteandlatepreconditioning.Inthe
acutephase,thepreconditioninginvolvesanalter-
ationoftheK atpchannel.Lateprotectioninvolves
heatshockproteinsynthesis.
Severalpharmacologicagentscaninduceischemic
preconditioning like effects. Recent work sug-
gests that some anesthetic agents may possess
pharmacologicischemicpreconditioningproperties.
Anestheticpreconditioning(APC)isdeﬁnedasthe
administration of a volatile anesthetic before the
periodofmyocardialischemia.Inanimalstudies,
contractilityispreservedandinfarctsizeisreduced
approximately 40%. The mechanism of the APC
effect is likely multifactorial and includes preser-
vationofadenosinetriphosphate(ATP)andhigh
energyphosphates,decreasedpolymorphonuclear
neutrophil (PMN) adhesion during reperfusion,
reducedcalciumloadingandalterationoftheK atp
channel(Fig.4.15).
There are compelling animal data in multiple
studies afﬁrming the anesthetic preconditioning
effectsofthevolatileanesthetics.Inclinicalprac-
tice,thedataremainsindirectandthereiscurrently
no clear translated therapeutic approach utiliz-
ing APC. Anesthetic preconditioning is difﬁcult
to demonstrate clinically because of the compli-
cated patient scenario, the hemodynamic alter-
ationsduringsurgery,andtheuncontrolledmixof
anesthetic, analgesics and vasoactive medications
used during surgery.In vitro, isoﬂurane, sevoﬂu-
rane, and desﬂurane all enhance muscle recov-
ery in atrial tissue after an ischemic-reperfusion
event.Isoﬂuraneimmediatelybeforeaorticcross-
clampinginpatientsundergoingCABGdecreases
the troponin I and creatine kinase-MB release
postoperatively. There is reduced ST segmentAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch04” — 2007/7/17 — 20:30 — page 116 — #27
116 Chapter4
G-protein-coupled
receptors
Volatile
anesthetics
Volatile
anesthetics
Extracellular
G
PKC
ROS
K+
K+
Fig. 4.15 Multipleendogenoussignalingpathways
mediatevolatileanesthetic-inducedmyocardial
protection.Atriggerinitiatesacascadeofsignal
transductionevents,resultingintheactivationofan
end-effectorthatpromotesresistanceagainstischemic
injury.Mitochondrialadenosinetriphosphate-sensitive
potassium(KATP)channelshavebeenimplicatedasthe
end-effectorinthisprotectivescheme,butsarcolemmal
KATPchannelsmayalsoplayarole.Volatileanesthetics
signalthroughadenosineandopioidreceptors,modulate
Gproteins,stimulateproteinkinaseC(PKC)andother
intracellularkinases,orhavedirecteffectson
mitochondriatogeneratereactiveoxygenspecies(ROS)
thatultimatelyenhanceK ATPchannelactivity.Volatile
anestheticsmayalsodirectlyfacilitateK ATPchannel
opening.Dashedarrows delineatetheintracellulartargets
thatmayberegulatedbyvolatileanesthetics; solidarrows
representpotentialsignalingcascades.(FromTanakaK,
LudwigLM,KerstenJR etal.Mechanismsof
cardioprotectionbyvolatileanesthetics. Anesthesiology
2004;100:707–21,withpermission.)
changes and preservation of cardiac index com-
pared to inpatients who did not receive pre-
treatmentwithavolatileanesthetic.Inoff-pump
CABG,patientsrandomizedtosevoﬂuranehadless
troponinIreleasecomparedtothoserandomizedto
propofol.
Insummary,ischemicpreconditioningandanes-
theticpreconditioningarenewandexcitingareasof
investigation.Thefullclinicalimpactofthesephys-
iologicandpharmacologicmechanismsremainsto
bedetermined.
Intrathecal and epidural anesthesia and
analgesia for cardiac surgery
Painaftercardiacsurgerymaybesevereandlimit
patient recovery. Traditionally, pain treatment is
withIVopioids;however,thereisrecentinterest
inadvancedtechniquesofpaincontrolincluding
intrathecal and epidural analgesia. In the acute
setting,painislargelysurgicalinorigin;persistent
painmaybeduetotissuedestruction,intercostal
nervetrauma,ribfractures,woundinfection,the
sternal wires, or nonunion of the sternum. The
techniques for postoperative analgesia are many
includinglocalanestheticinﬁltration,nerveblocks,
opioids, nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory agents,
α-adrenergic drugs, and intrathecal and epidural
techniques.Eachtechniquehasuniqueadvantages
anddisadvantages.
Intrathecalanalgesiahasbeenwidelyinvestigated
sincethe1980s.Intrathecalopioids(morphine,fen-
tanyl, sufentanil) reliably extend the duration of
analgesiawithoutsigniﬁcantimpactonextubation
times.TheadditionofclonidinetotheopioidfurtherAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch04” — 2007/7/17 — 20:30 — page 117 — #28
AnesthesiaforMyocardialRevascularization 117
enhances the opioid effect. Some authors have
administered hyperbaric bupivacaine (20–30mg),
hyperbariclidocaine(150mg),orbothwithmor-
phine to induce a “total spinal” and complete
thoracic cardiac sympathectomy. This technique
reduces β-receptordysfunctionandlowersthestress
response(asmeasuredbycirculatingepinephrine,
norepinephrineandcortisollevels)duringCABG
surgery. As predicted, the fall in HR and BP in
themajorityofthesepatientsrequiredpharmaco-
logicintervention.Theroleoftotalspinalanesthesia
forCABGiscontroversialandremainsundeﬁned
at this time. In summary, although safe, intra-
thecaladministrationofanalgesicsreliablyproduces
analgesia,however,thereisnoadditionalclinical
beneﬁt.
Thesameistrueofepiduralanalgesia.Multiple
clinicalreportsdemonstratethatthoracicepidural
analgesiaisassociatedwithgoodpaincontrol,but
thereislimitedbeneﬁtbeyondthissinglemeasure.
Forbothintrathecalandepiduraltechniques,there
isnoevidenceofimprovedoutcomeinmortality
orMI.
Bothtechniquescarryrisk.Hypotensioniscom-
mon and can be signiﬁcant. Administration of
local anesthetics always carries the risk of IV
absorptionandmyocardialdepression.Denseanal-
gesiamaymaskpostoperativemyocardialischemia.
Neuroaxial opioids are associated with pruritus,
nauseaandvomiting,urinaryretention,andres-
piratory depression. Finally, and perhaps most
concerning, is the risk of spinal hematoma for-
mation.Theincidenceofhematomaformationis
approximately1:220000forintrathecalinstrumen-
tationand1:150000forepiduralinstrumentation.
This risk increases in the cardiac surgical patient
becauseofthesystemicheparinization;however,
itisdifﬁculttoquantifythisrisk.
Insummary,intrathecalandepiduraltechniques
arepracticedinsomehospitalswithgoodresults.
Thedataafﬁrmreliableanalgesia,butthereisno
improvement in mortality or MI. Other parame-
ters,suchasdysrhythmias,respiratoryfailureand
early extubation may be improved with regional
techniques (Table 4.3). There remains signiﬁcant
controversyregardingtheroleofthesetechniques
inadultcardiacsurgicalpractice.
Glucose management during
coronary artery bypass surgery
Recentdatasuggestthattightperioperativecontrol
of blood glucose in diabetic patients improves
outcomeaftercardiacsurgery(Fig.4.16).Hyper-
glycemiahasseveraladverseeffectsontheheart
after an ischemic-reperfusion injury. In animal
models,bloodglucosecorrelateswithinfarctsize
and the beneﬁcial effects of ischemic precondi-
tioningareabolishedwithhyperglycemia.Further,
hyperglycemia reduces coronary collateral blood
ﬂowthroughanitric-oxide-mediatedmechanism.
Effective treatment with insulin during the peri-
operative period is enhanced with a continuous
infusion of insulin as compared to intermittent
bolusinsulin.Mostagreethatmaintainingaglucose
level <200mg/dL is appropriate. Some evidence
suggests that insulin therapy should be initiated
whentheglucoselevelis >110–150mg/dL.
Emergency coronary artery
bypass surgery
Anesthesiaforemergencycoronaryarterybypass
surgery provides some unique challenges. These
patientstypicallyarethosesufferingfromcomplica-
tionsofcardiaccatheterizationorofcatheter-based
interventionaltechniquestotreatcoronarystenosis.
Patientspresentingwithfailedcoronaryangioplasty
proceduresfallintothreecategories:
1 Hemodynamicallystable,nonischemicpatients.
Some of these patients will have sustained no
endothelialdamageandcanbemanagedaselective
coronaryrevascularizationpatients.Somepatients
willhavesustainedendothelialdamageandareat
riskforsubsequentthrombusformationandvessel
closure.Thesepatientsmayrequiresurgicalrevas-
cularizationbutcanaffordtowaitseveralhours.
Thisistimeenoughtocompleteacomprehensive
anestheticevaluationandtoallowfurthergastric
emptyingifnecessary.
2 Hemodynamicallystable,ischemicpatients.These
patients require urgent revascularization. The
ischemic interval should be limited to<3hours
toavoidinfarction.Anintra-aorticballoonpump
maybeinplacetotemporizethiscondition.Anes-
thetic evaluation should be concise and focused.
CommunicationwiththecardiologistisessentialtoAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch04” — 2007/7/17 — 20:30 — page 118 — #29
118 Chapter4
Table 4.3Outcomesforthoracicepiduralanalgesia(TEA)andintrathecalanalgesia(IT)versusgeneralanesthesia
(GA)forcardiacsurgery.Ameta-analysisof15trialsenrolling1178patientshavingneuroaxialanalgesiaafter
cardiacsurgerydemonstratesnodifferencesintheratesofmortalityormyocardialinfarctionaftercoronaryartery
bypassgraftingwithcentralneuroaxialanalgesia.Therewereassociatedimprovementsinfastertimeuntiltracheal
extubation,decreasedpulmonarycomplicationsandcardiacdysrhythmiasinreducedpainscores.Themajorityof
thesebeneﬁts,however,maybereducedoreliminatedwithchangingcardiacpracticeusingfasttracktechniques,
useofbeta-blockingagents,amiodarone,ornonsteroidalanti-inﬂammatorydrugsforpostoperativeanalgesia.
(FromLiuSS,BlockBM,WuCL.Effectsofperioperativecentralneuraxialanalgesiaonoutcomeaftercoronary
arterybypasssurgery. Anesthesiology2004;101:155–61.)
Outcome No. TEA GA OR or WMD
(95% conﬁdence interval)
P-value
Death 1178 0.7%0.3% 1.56(0.35–6.91) 0.56
Myocardialinfarction 1026 2.3%3.4% 0.74(0.34–1.59) 0.44
Dysryhthmias 913 17.8%30% 0.52(0.29–0.93) 0.03
Pulmonarycomplications 644 17.2%30.3%0.41(0.27–0.60) <0.00001
Timetotrachealextubation(h) 905 6.9 ∗ 10.4∗ −4.5( −7to −2) 0.0005
VASpainscoreatrest(mm) 392 12.4 ∗ 19.6∗ −7.8( −15to −0.6) 0.03
VASpainscorewithactivity(mm) 222 14 ∗ 27.6∗ −11.6( −19.7to −3.5) 0.005
Death 668 0.3%0.6% 0.88(0.13–5.72) 0.89
Myocardialinfarction 290 3.9%5.7% 0.75(0.24–2.31) 0.61
Dysryhthmias 204 24.8%29.1%0.81(0.42–1.53) 0.51
Timetotrachealextubation(h) 588 10.4 ∗ 10.9∗ −0.85( −1.83to0.12) 0.09
Timetotrachealextubationfor
small-doseIT(h)
189 7.1 ∗ 9.3∗ −1.2( −1.8to −0.7) <0.0001
Morphineuseperday(mg) 816 14 ∗ 22∗ −11( −15to −7) <0.00001
VASpainscore(mm) 315 13.4 ∗ 23.4∗ −16( −27to −4.9) 0.005
Pruritus 506 10.1%2.5% 2.9(1.2–6.7) 0.01
Nausea/vomiting 490 31.3%28.5%1.27(0.81–2.0) 0.3
Randomeffectsmodelusedforallanalyses.
∗Weightedbynumberofsubjects.
GA,generalanesthesia;IT,intrathecalanalgesia;OR,oddsratio;TEA,thoracicepiduralanalgesia;VAS,visualanalog
scale;WMD,weightedmeandifference(inversevariancemethod).
determinetheextentofjeopardizedmyocardium,
currentvasoactiveagents,anticoagulationmethods
(heparin,streptokinase,tissueplasminogenactiva-
tor(tPA),clopidogrel,andabciximab),NPOstatus,
currentlaboratoryvalues,andvascularaccess.The
arterialaccessusedforthecatheterizationproce-
dure(femoralartery)shouldbeleftinplaceand
usedformonitoringintheoperatingroom.Femoral
veinsheathscanbeusedforvenousaccess.APAC
iscommonlyplacedviathefemoralveinandcanbe
usedaswell.Inductioncanbeaccomplishedeas-
ily and safely using the high-dose narcotic tech-
niquedescribedpreviously.Forpatientsdeemedat
highriskforaspiration,anonparticulateantacidand
metoclopramide10–20mgIVcanbeadministered.
Arapidsequenceinductioncanbeaccomplished
with etomidate 0.15–0.30mg/kg and succinyl-
choline 1.0–1.5mg/kg, in conjunction with fen-
tanyl(10 µg/kg)orsufentanil(1 µg/kg).Etomidate
produces minimal cardiovascular effects at this
dosage when administered in conjunction with
narcotics.Alternatively,sufentanil5 µg/kgandsuc-
cinylcholine1.0–1.5mg/kgcanbeusedinarapid-
sequence technique. Hypotension and ischemia
mustbeaggressivelytreated.Afterinduction,place-
mentofadditionalintravascularcatheterscanbeAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch04” — 2007/7/17 — 20:30 — page 119 — #30
AnesthesiaforMyocardialRevascularization 119
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Total CV Resp.
Poor intraoperative glycemic control
Tight intraoperative glycemic control
% of patients with morbidity
Inf. Renal Neuro. Others
∗
∗
∗
∗ ∗ ∗
Fig. 4.16 Incidenceofseverein-hospitalmorbidity
betweenpatientsinwhomintraoperativeglycemic
controlwaspoorortight.Twohundredconsecutive
diabeticpatientsundergoingon-pumpheartsurgery
wereenrolled.Astandardinsulinprotocolbasedon
subcutaneousintermediaryinsulinwasgiventhe
morningofthesurgery.Intravenousinsulintherapywas
initiatedintraoperativelyfrombloodglucose
concentrationsof180mg/dLorgreaterandtitrated
accordingtoapredeﬁnedprotocol.Poorintraoperative
glycemiccontrolwasdeﬁnedasfourconsecutiveblood
glucoseconcentrations >200mg/dLwithoutanydecrease
indespiteinsulintherapy.Postoperativebloodglucose
concentrationsweremaintainedbelow140mg/dLby
usingaggressiveinsulintherapy.Themainendpoints
wereseverecardiovascular,respiratory,infectious,
neurologic,andrenalin-hospitalmorbidity.Insulin
therapywasrequiredintraoperativelyin36%ofpatients,
andpoorintraoperativeglycemiccontrolwasobservedin
18%ofpatients.Poorintraoperativeglycemiccontrol
wassigniﬁcantlymorefrequentinpatientswithsevere
postoperativemorbidity(37vs.10%; P <0.001).The
adjustedoddsratioforseverepostoperativemorbidity
amongpatientswithapoorintraoperativeglycemic
controlascomparedwithpatientswithoutwas7.2
(95%conﬁdenceinterval,2.7–19.0).CV,cardiovascular
morbidity;Inf.,infectiousmorbidity;Neuro.,neurologic
morbidity;Resp.,respiratorymorbidity(seetextfor
deﬁnitionsofdifferentmorbidities). ∗P <0.05vs.tight
control.(FromOuattaraA,LecomteP,LeManachY etal.
Poorintraoperativebloodglucosecontrolisassociated
withaworsenedhospitaloutcomeaftercardiacsurgery
indiabeticpatients. Anesthesiology2005;103:677–94,
withpermission.)
accomplishedinparallelwiththesurgicalprepara-
tion.Inparticular,aPACcanbeplacedviatheright
internal jugular vein. This substantially improves
the ability to manipulate and position the PAC
andtoinfusevasoactiveagentsataproximalsite.
The femoral vein PAC often is not in a sterile
sheathandisdistantfromtheheadofthebed.If
peripheralvenousaccessispoor,alarge-boredou-
ble lumen (16- or 14-gauge) central venous line
canbeplacedatthesametimeasthePAC.Because
these patients usually are anticoagulated with at
least heparin, placement of these catheters using
ultrasonicguidanceshouldbeconsidered.
3 Hemodynamically unstable, ischemic patients.
Thesepatientsrequireemergentrevascularization.
Evaluationmustoftenbeperformedinthehallway
onthewaytotheoperatingroom.Communication
withthecardiaccatheterizationteamisessential.
Some of these patients are mildly hypotensive,
requiring minimal cardiovascular pharmacologic
support; whereas, others may be intubated and
receivingcardiopulmonaryresuscitation(CPR).The
goalistoestablishCPBasexpeditiouslyaspossible.
Vascularaccessformonitoringandvolumeinfusion
canbeobtainedonthesurgicalﬁeldifnecessary.
All existing intravascular access should be used.
Formorestablepatients,theinductiontechniques
describedaboveareapplicable.Forpatientsreceiv-
ingCPR,scopolamine0.005mg/kgormidazolam
0.05–0.1mg/kginconjunctionwithanondepolar-
izingmusclerelaxantmaybeallthatisnecessary.
Althoughthein-hospitalmortalityishigh(approxi-
mately50%),therearegooddatademonstratinga
beneﬁttoemergencysurgicalintervention(surgery
orangioplasty)versusinitialmedicalstabilizationin
patientspresentingincardiogenicshockafteraMI
(Fig.4.17).
Post-CPB management
Theassumptionthatcoronaryrevascularizationwill
produce a patient with normal myocardial func-
tionafterCPBiserroneous.Immediateimprove-
ments in LV systolic and diastolic function may
occurwithintheﬁrst10minutesaftertermination
ofCPB;however,manypatientsrequireinotropic
andvasoactivesupport.Theremaybedepressionof
bothRVandLVsystolicfunction(reducedEF,LV
strokeworkindex(SWI),cardiacindex(CI))with
the nadir occurring approximately 4hours after
terminationofCPB.
Coronary revascularization may be less than
completefortechnicalreasons,suchasoccurswithAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch04” — 2007/7/17 — 20:30 — page 120 — #31
120 Chapter4
100
80
60Percentage40
20
0
IMS ERV
2 weeks
post-discharge
6 months
post-MI
1 year
post-MI
IMS ERV IMS ERV
Fig. 4.17 Outcomeof126SHOCKtrialhospital
survivorswithatleastoneinterview,69assignedtothe
emergencyrevascularization(ERV)groupand57
assignedtotheinitialmedicalstabilization(IMS)group.
Thereweresigniﬁcantdifferencesbetweentreatment
groupsat6months( P =0.035)and1year( P =0.014).
Whitebars =NewYorkHeartAssociation(NYHA)
functionalclassI/II; ruledbars =NYHAfunctionalclass
III/IV;blackbars =deceased.MI,myocardialinfarction.
(FromSleeperLA,RamanathanK,PicardMH etal.
Functionalstatusandqualityoflifeafteremergency
revascularizationforcardiogenicshockcomplicating
acutemyocardialinfarction. JAmCollCardiol
2005;46:266–73,withpermission.)
smalldistalvessels.Communicationwiththesur-
geonisnecessarytodeterminethesuccessofthe
operative procedure. The sense of security that
accompanies a “successful” operative procedure
mustbetemperedwiththeknowledgethatasigniﬁ-
cantnumberofpatients(35–50%)continuetohave
evidenceofmyocardialischemiainthepost-bypass
periodafterapparentlysuccessfulrevascularization.
Mostepisodesoccurintheimmediate(0–8hours)
postoperative period. The development of post-
CPBRWMAandthedevelopmentofECG-detected
ischemiaintheimmediatepostoperativeperiodare
bothassociatedwithadverseclinicaloutcome.
There may be alterations in the vascular tone
ofthenativecoronarycirculationduringthepost-
CPBperiod.Coronaryvasospasmmayoccurdistal
tobypassgraftsorinsegmentsofarterythathave
notbeenbypassed.Thisusuallyisheraldedbythe
presence of elevated ST segments in the absence
of a precipitating hemodynamic event. Spasm is
effectivelytreatedwithIVnitroglycerin.
Vasoactivesubstancesusedduringthepost-CPB
period may affect ﬂow through the IMA and
saphenous vein grafts. In humans, infusion of
epinephrine to increase systemic BP during the
post-CPB period increases IMA graft ﬂow, nore-
pinephrine infusion does not change IMA graft
ﬂow, and phenylephrine infusion reduces IMA
graftﬂow.Someanimalmodelssuggestthatsuch
changesareduetotheeffectsofvasoactivesub-
stancesonIMAvasculartone,whereasothersimpli-
catechangesinsystemicBP.Inhumans,vasopressor
associatedincreasesinsystemicBPareaccompa-
nied by increases in saphenous vein graft ﬂows.
Additional work is required to determine more
preciselyhowchangesingraftvascularresistance,
systemicBP,andmyocardialoxygenconsumption
contributetotheseﬂowvariations.Nonetheless,it
shouldbekeptinmindthatthechoiceofvasopres-
sormayaffectﬂowthroughengraftedarteriesand
veins.
Inadequate myocardial protection during the
procedurewilladverselyaffectLVsystolicfunction.
Thisisparticularlylikelyifthepatienthassuffered
apreoperativeischemiceventorhaspoorpreop-
erativeventricularfunction.Inthesepatients,opti-
mizationofpreloadandHRarenecessaryﬁrststeps
inobtaininghemodynamicstability.Patientswith
compromisedsystolicfunctionareoftendependent
onHRforincreasesinCO.Inaddition,patientswith
reduced ventricular compliance and distensibility
willbedependentonatrialsystoletoprovideanade-
quateLVEDVwithoutahighmeanPCWP.Forthese
reasons,pacingoftheatrium(withintrinsiccon-
ductionviatheatrioventricular(AVnode)orofthe
atriumandventricle(whenAVnodaldysfunction
exists)maybenecessary.
Attention to the metabolic condition of the
patient is required in the postoperative period.
Thesepatientsoftenrequireelectrolytesupplemen-
tation(potassiumandmagnesium),aswellasstrict
ventilatorymanagementtocontrolacid-basebal-
ance in the immediate hours after CABG. There
are signiﬁcant issues regarding continued ther-
malregulation,coagulationandglycemiccontrol.
There is a growing body of research in the area
of strict glycemic control. Several authors have
publisheddatasuggestingthattightcontrolofglu-
cose (110–150mg/dL) is associated with superior
outcome in both critically ill patients and thoseAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch04” — 2007/7/17 — 20:30 — page 121 — #32
AnesthesiaforMyocardialRevascularization 121
afterCABG.Aregularinsulininfusion(2–8units/h)
isindicatedwhentheglucoseis >150mg/dL.
OptimizationofpreloadafterterminationofCPB
requirescarefulattentionandisfacilitatedbyuse
of TEE and the PCWP and CVP. Preload reserve
(preloadrecruitablestrokework)canbeassessed
byinfusionofbloodfromtheCPBcircuitinincre-
ments of 10–15mL/kg (“give a hundred”). One
of three distinct hemodynamic responses will be
observed:
• Intactpreloadreserve.Infusionofvolumeproduces
an increase in MAP with little or no change in
PCWPorCVP.TEEdemonstratesnormalLVand
RVchambervolume.COincreases.Forthissubset
ofpatients,furtherinfusionofvolumetoimprove
hemodynamicsiswarranted.
• Optimizedpreload.Infusionofvolumeproduceslit-
tleornochangeinMAPwithnochangeorasmall
increaseinPCWPorCVP.TEEdemonstratesaLV
orRVattheupperlimitsofsizefortheparticular
patient.Obviously,pre-CPBassessmentofLVand
RVdimensionsisnecessarytotakefulladvantageof
thismodality.COmayincreaseslightlyorremain
unchanged.Forthissubsetofpatients,nofurther
infusion of volume to improve hemodynamics is
warranted.
• Exhausted preload reserve.Infusionofvolumewill
producenochangeorafallinMAPwithasubstan-
tialincreaseinPCWPorCVP.TEEwilldemonstrate
a distended LV or RV. CO may decrease slightly
or should remain unchanged. For this subset of
patients,nofurtherinfusionofvolumetoimprove
hemodynamicsiswarranted.Initiationofinotropic
support will improve hemodynamics and reduce
ventriculardimensions.
Several risk factors are associated with an
increased incidence of inotropic agent use after
CPB. Factors related to inotrope use include low
EF <55%,olderage,cardiacenlargement,female
sex,andhigherbaselineandpost-contrastLVEDP.
For patients with an EF>55%, the presence of
preoperative wall motion abnormalities and an
increase of >10mmHg in LVEDP with contrast
injectionisassociatedwiththeneedforinotropes.
Inaddition,forpatientswithanEF >45%,pro-
longeddurationofCPBisassociatedwiththeneed
forinotropes.
The most commonly used inotropic agents are
describedbelow.Useofinotropicagentspost-CPB
shouldbeusedwiththeknowledgethatbothadults
andchildrenexhibituncouplingof β-adrenoceptors
from the Gs-protein-adenylate cyclase complex
afterCPB.Thisdesensitizationmaycontributetoa
relativecatecholamineresistanceinthepost-CPB
period.
Dopamine
Dopaminepossesses β1-adrenergic, α1-adrenergic,
anddopaminergicactivities.Someofthe αactiv-
ityisduetoreleaseofendogenousnorepinephrine.
Atdosesof2–3 µg/kg/min,thedopaminergicactiv-
ity is maximal, resulting in preferential dilation
of renal, mesenteric, and coronary vasculature.
Alpha-agonistsdonotantagonizethisdopaminer-
gic activity. This makes dopamine a useful agent
for preservation of renal blood ﬂow in the pres-
enceof α-agonists. β1-Inducedenhancedinotropy
occursatdosesbetween1and10 µg/kg/min;how-
ever, at doses above 4–6µg/kg/min dopamine’s
α-adrenergicactivityincreasessuchthatSVR,PVR,
andPCWPincreasewithlittleconcomitantincrease
in CO. This combination of increased ventricular
wall radius and afterload may cause detrimen-
tal increases in myocardial oxygen consumption.
At doses>10 µg/kg/min, theα-adrenergic effects
ofdopaminepredominate,producingvasoconstric-
tion. Dopamine’s chronotropic and dysrhythmic
effectsincreaseasthedoseincreases.
Dobutamine
Dobutaminepossesses β1-, β2-,and α1-adrenergic
activities. The predominant effect is enhanced
inotropy throughβl stimulation. The β2 and α1
activities are balanced such that mild vasodi-
lation occurs at the commonly used doses
from5–20 µg/kg/min.DobutaminedecreasesPVR,
blunts hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction, and
increases coronary blood ﬂow. Dobutamine may
actuallyreducemyocardialoxygenconsumptionin
the failing heart. Although dobutamine increases
contractility,itreducesLVradiusandend-diastolic
pressure while increasing arterial pressure and
maintainingHR.Dobutamineislesslikelytocause
tachycardiathandopamine.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch04” — 2007/7/17 — 20:30 — page 122 — #33
122 Chapter4
Epinephrine
Epinephrinepossesses β1-, β2-,and α1-adrenergic
activities.Atdosesof1–3 µg/min,epinephrinehas
apotentinotropiceffectmediatedthrough β1stim-
ulation,withlittleeffectonvasomotortonedueto
the balance of β2 and α1 stimulation. As the
doseincreasesabove3 µg/min,progressivelymore
α1 activityoccurs,withresultantmixedinotropic
andvasoconstrictiveeffects.Dosesabove3 µg/min
alsocauseprogressivedecreasesinrenalbloodﬂow.
Above10 µg/min,epinephrineisprimarilyavaso-
constrictor. Epinephrine’s vasoconstrictive effects
alsoreducevenouscapacitance.Althoughcoronary
bloodﬂowismaintained,epinephrinemaynotbe
favorabletomyocardialoxygenbalance,becausein
additiontoincreasingcontractility,itincreasessys-
tolicBP,increasesLVEDVandpressure,andreduces
diastolicBPwhileincreasingHR.
Epinephrineisoftentheagentofchoicetoter-
minate CPB. The potent inotropic and balanced
peripheral vascular effects allow prompt, reliable
terminationofCPBwhileavoidingtheventricular
distensionandsystemichypotensionthatcompro-
mise subendocardial perfusion. Critics point out
that the potent inotropic effects of epinephrine
maynotbenecessaryineveryinstance,andthus,
epinephrine’spotentiallydeleteriouseffectsonthe
myocardialandrenalbloodﬂowcanbeavoidedif
anotheragentisselected.
Norepinephrine
Norepinephrine possesses βl- and α1-adrenergic
activity.The α1effectsofnorepinephrineareman-
ifestatlowdoses(1–2 µg/min)andpredominateas
thedoseincreases.Norepinephrinereducesrenal
blood ﬂow, elevates both systolic and diastolic
BP, reduces venous capacitance, and generally
causes a reﬂex decrease in HR. Although coro-
narybloodﬂowismaintained,norepinephrinemay
notbefavorabletomyocardialoxygenconsump-
tion, because there is increased contractility and
afterload.
Milrinone
Milrinoneisapotentinotropicagentthatactsby
inhibitingphosphodiesteraseIII(PDEIII)toincrease
intracellular cyclic adenosine monophosphate
(cAMP).Inaddition,milrinonepossessesvasodila-
toractivitybyvirtueofPDEIIIinhibitioninvascular
smoothmusc1e.Milrinoneincreasescardiacindex,
reduces LVEDP and LVEDV, reduces systolic BP,
andhaslittleeffectonHR.Likedobutamineinthe
failingheart,thisincreaseincardiacindexmaybe
associated with a decrease in myocardial oxygen
consumptionduetotheconcomitantreductionin
wallstress.MilrinonereducesPVR.
Milrinone does not act viaβl-receptors, and is
synergisticwith βl-agentsinaugmentinginotropy.
EvidencedemonstratesthatPDEIIIinhibitorsare
at least as effective as epinephrine in improving
post-CPBfunctionandthatthecombinationofthe
twoagentsproduceseffectsatleastaslargeasthe
sumofthetwoagentsindividually.Thebeneﬁtof
thetwoagentstogetherisparticularlymarkedfor
theRV.
Milrinonerequiresa50 µg/kgloadingdosefol-
lowed by an infusion of 0.375–0.500µg/kg/min.
Loading milrinone while on CPB just before
termination attenuates the effects of the acute
vasodilation.
Levosimendan
The catecholamines and PDE III inhibiting drugs
actthroughdifferentpathwaystoincreaseinotropy
byultimatelyincreasingintracellularcalciumcon-
centration (Fig. 4.18). Levosimendan is a new
inotropicagentthatactswithoutincreasingintra-
cellularcalciumconcentration.Thereisincreased
inotropywithoutimpairmentofdiastolicfunction.
Levosimendanisamyoﬁlamentcalciumsensitizer
thatincreasesmyocardialcontractilitybystabiliz-
ingthecalciumboundconformationoftroponinC.
Thesystolicinteractionofactinandmyosinispro-
longed.Theenhancedcalciumbindingisdependent
on the intracellular calcium concentration, with
augmentationoccurringinthepresenceofhigher
systoliccalciumconcentrations;however,theaug-
mentationisunaffectedbythelowercalciumcon-
centrations during diastole. This selective action
preservesdiastolicrelaxationanddiastolicfunction.
Inadditiontotheinotropiceffects,levosimendan
inhibitsPDEIIIinhigherconcentrations.Thedrug
causesvasodilationandanincreaseinHR.Finally,
levosimendan stimulates ATP-sensitive potassiumAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch04” — 2007/7/17 — 20:30 — page 123 — #34
AnesthesiaforMyocardialRevascularization 123
β-AR
Catecholamines voltage-gated
L-type Ca2+-channel
Calcium-induced
Ca2+ release
Ca2+
Ca2+
K+
Ca2+Na+
Na+
SR
PKA
Ca2+Ca2+
Ca2+
Ca2+
P
PL
ATP
SERCA2
RyR2
Levosimendan
Myosin
TnC
Actin
P Tnl
ATP cAMP
PDE III
PDE III-inhibitors P Digoxin
ATP
A
C
Gs
Fig. 4.18 Schematicillustrationmechanismofactionof
positiveinotropicdrugs. β-adrenergicstimulation
(catecholamines)andphosphodiesterase(PDE)III
inhibitionincreasecyclicadenosinemonophosphate
(cAMP),whichacts viaproteinkinaseA(PKA)to
phosphorylatecalciumchannelprotein,phospholamban
(PL),andtroponinI(TnI).Phosphorylation(P)of
calciumchannelproteinenhancessarcolemmalinward
movementofCa 2+,whichsubsequentlyincreasesCa 2+
movementfromthesarcoplasmicreticulum(SR)
throughthecalciumreleasechannel(ryanodinereceptor
type2,RyR2)tothecytosol(calcium-inducedCa 2+
release).DigoxinincreasescytosolicCa 2+byinhibition
ofsarcolemmalNa +–K+–adenosinetriphosphataseand
Na+–Ca2+exchange.CytosolicCa 2+bindsto
troponinC(TnC)andinitiatescontraction(inotropic
effect).PhosphorylationofPLenhancesrelaxationby
increasedreuptakeofCa 2+backintotheSRbytheSR
Ca2+adenosinetriphosphataseisoform2(SERCA2)
(lusitropiceffect).PhosphorylationofTnIenhancesthe
rateofrelaxationbydecreasingthesensitivityof
myoﬁlamentstoCa 2+.LevosimendanbindstoTnC
duringsystoleandtherebyincreasesthesensitivityof
myoﬁlamentstoCa 2+withoutalterationofCa 2+levels.
AC,adenylatecyclase;ATP,adenosinetriphosphate;
β-AR, β-adrenoceptor;Gs,stimulatoryguanine
nucleotidebindingproteins.(FromTollerWG,StranzC.
Levosimendan,anewinotropicandvasodilatoragent.
Anesthesiology2006;104:556–69,withpermission.)
channels, which improves coronary blood ﬂow,
reducespreloadandafterload,andmayhaverel-
evantanti-ischemicactions.
At the time of this writing, levosimendan is
approvedforuseinover30countriesworld-wide,
andthereareongoingtrialsintheUnitedStatesand
Europe.Indicationsforthedrugincludetreatment
for the acute decompensation of CHF, inotropic
support during myocardial ischemia, cardiogenic
shock,anduseintheperioperativeperiodincardiac
surgical patients. Currently the drug is approved
for24-houradministrationduetoitsmetabolism
yieldingbiologicallyactivemetabolites(OR-1896,a
weakcalciumsensitizingagentandPDEIIIinhibitor
with an elimination half life of 96hours). In
placebo-controlledtrialsofcardiacsurgicalpatients,
levosimendaneffectivelyincreasedHR,MAP,and
CO. There were decreases in SVR, SV, and PVR.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch04” — 2007/7/17 — 20:30 — page 124 — #35
124 Chapter4
Levosimendanwasadministeredineitheran18or
36 µg/kgbolusand0.2–0.3 µg/kg/hinfusion.
Calcium
Calcium chloride 5–10mg/kg is a commonly
usedadjuvantduringterminationofCPB.Recent
evidence,however,suggeststhatcalciumadmin-
istration may be no better than placebo in aug-
menting LV function, RV function, and CI after
emergencefromCPB.Calciumadministrationdoes
increaseMAP,however.
The higher doses of calcium (10mg/kg) can
attenuate the effects of inotropic agents that are
β-adrenergicreceptoragonists,suchasdobutamine
andepinephrine.Nosucheffectsareseenwithmil-
rinone.Arecentinvestigationsuggeststhatentry
of calcium ions through calcium channels atten-
uates adenylyl cyclase, which may explain the
observation.
IonizedcalciumlevelsdecreaseduringCPBbut
approach normal before separation from CPB.
Hypocalcemiaisrarelypresentasanindicationfor
calciumadministration,exceptperhapsinneonates
andinfants,whoaremorepronetohypocalcemia.
Inaddition,becauselossofcalciumhomeostasisis
oneofthehallmarksofischemia,theadministration
of calcium in the vulnerable reperfusion interval
afteraorticcross-clampremovalmayexacerbatecell
injuryanddeath.
For routine termination of CPB in which
SVR is in the normal range and inotropic sup-
portisneeded,epinephrine,0.015–0.05 µg/kg/min,
dopamine, 1–5 µg/kg/min, or dobutamine,
5–10 µg/kg/min, are reasonable choices because
theyprovideinotropicsupportwithlittleconcomi-
tant vasoconstriction and afterload increase. For
situationsinwhichcardiacindexislowandSVRis
elevated,therapywithavasodilatorsuchasnitro-
prusside may be all that is necessary to relieve
afterloadmismatch.Ifaninotropeisnecessaryin
thissituation,dobutamineisagoodchoicebecause
itpossessessomevasodilatoryactivity.
WhentheCIremainslow( <2.0L/min/m2),itis
appropriate to increase the inotrope dose or add
a second agent. Dobutamine may be increased
to 15–20µg/kg/min; however, the progressive
decrease in SVR may require the addition of
a small dose (0.5–1.0µg/min) of norepinephrine
to normalize SVR. As the doses of epinephrine
and dopamine are increased, SVR may increase,
andtheadditionofnitroprussidetotheinotropic
maybenecessarytoreduceafterloadandimprove
systolic performance. Epinephrine in combina-
tion with nitroprusside is a reliable approach to
severe ventricular failure. Elevations of PCWP
above15–18mmHgshouldbetreatedwithnitro-
glycerintopreventventriculardilatationandpul-
monarycongestionandtoimprovesubendocardial
bloodﬂow.
Theadditionofmilrinoneisusefulwhenthese
measuresfailtoproduceacceptablehemodynam-
ics (CI>2L/min/m2, PCWP<18mmHg, CVP <
15mmHg, systolic BP>90mmHg, or MAP >
50mmHg).Morespeciﬁcguidelinesfortreatment
of RV dysfunction are addressed in Chapter 7.
ContinuedLVandRVdysfunctioninthesettingof
aggressiveinotropicandvasodilatorsupportisan
indicationforplacementofamechanicalcirculatory
assistdevice,asdiscussedinChapter11.
Long-term outcome after CABG
Morethan800000patientsundergoCABGsurgery
eachyeararoundtheworld.Thepatientpopulation
is changing (older patients with more signiﬁcant
morbidities), and the pharmacologic and surgical
interventionsareeverevolving.Nonetheless,CABG
remainsamainstaytherapy.Thelong-termadverse
eventsafterCABGaremanyandreﬂectthemor-
bidities and insult seen in this population. In a
recent review of 176 studies (205717 patients)
thein-hospitaladverseeventsweredeath(1.7%);
nonfatalMI(2.4%);nonfatalstroke(1.3%);gastro-
intestinalbleeding(1.5%);andrenalfailure(0.8%).
The 30-day mortality was 2.1%. Meta-analyses
showthatagegreaterthan70years,femalesex,low
EF,historyofstroke,MI,orheartsurgery,andthe
presenceofdiabetesorhypertensionareallasso-
ciatedwithincreased30-daymortalityafterCABG
(Table4.4).
Longer-termoutcomeisalsoasubjectofgreat
interest.Recentworkinpatientswithmultivessel
diseasedemonstratesthatthereisnodifferencein
mortalitybetweenstentingandsurgery(Fig.4.19).
ThereisnodifferenceinstrokeorMIbetweentheseAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch04” — 2007/7/17 — 20:30 — page 125 — #36
AnesthesiaforMyocardialRevascularization 125
Table 4.4 Post-coronaryarterybypassgraftsurgery(CABG)adverseeventincidenceandmortalityin205717patients.
In-hospital adverse event incidence
MI Non-fatal MI Stroke Non-fatal
stroke
GI bleeding Renal
failure
Mortality 30-day
mortality
AllCABG
Mean%(SE) 3.89(0.66) 2.44(0.28) 2.24(0.27) 1.32(0.15) 1.46(0.29) 0.79(0.15) 1.65(0.14) 2.06(0.16)
Median%2.94 2.44 1.8 1.29 1.23 0.67 1.54 1.99
n(k) 69487(52) 11973(52) 26750(21) 31132(52) 12897(8) 22798(23) 75933(105) 81136(70)
NorthAmerica
Mean%(SE) 3.56(0.59) 2.82(0.58) 2.29(0.39) 1.25(0.19) 1.11(0.14) 0.88(0.16) 1.96(0.20) 2.00(0.19)
Median%3.30 2.83 1.71 1.06 1.01 0.86 2.00 1.98
n(k) 49969(32) 2454(18) 13777(12) 25555(28) 7332(3) 21410(14) 59014(49) 47158(39)
Europe
Mean%(SE) 2.59(0.33) 2.55(0.36) 2.42(1.18) 1.30(0.27) 1.33(0.91) 0.99(0.74) 1.30(0.22) 2.21(0.40)
Median%2.53 2.52 1.66 0.67 1.66 0.49 1.00 2.08
n(k) 13418(15) 8389(24) 6515(4) 4256(13) 220(2) 625(5) 12893(33) 21156(21)
Multinational/other
Mean%(SE) 9.81(5.54) 1.94(0.51) 2.43(0.22) 1.27(0.31) 1.93(0.62) 0.06(0.16) 1.38(0.33) 1.72(0.38)
Median%3.92 1.66 2.18 1.96 1.32 0.00 1.52 1.61
n(k) 6100(5) 1130(10) 6458(5) 1321(11) 5345(3) 763(4) 4026(23) 13240(10)
ElectiveCABG
Mean%(SE) 2.84(0.81) 2.32(0.40) 2.35(0.60) 1.01(0.21) 1.18(0.48) 0.45(0.18) 1.48(0.19) ∗ 1.50(0.29) ∗
Median%2.17 2.00 1.59 0.64 1.23 0.22 1.00 1.23
n(k) 3313(17) 3371(32) 1680(7) 9170(24) 510(2) 1333(6) 7912(47) 7764(21)
MixedCABG
Mean%(SE) 4.32(0.89) 2.64(0.36) 2.21(0.31) 1.51(0.20) 1.50(0.35) 0.89(0.18) 1.81(0.18) ∗ 2.23(0.19) ∗
Median%3.22 2.59 1.86 1.56 1.24 0.89 1.89 2.07
n(k) 66174(35) 8602(20) 25070(14) 21962(28) 12387(6) 21465(17) 68021(58) 73372(49)
RCTs
Mean%(SE) 6.26(1.66) ∗ 2.64(0.42) 2.73(0.98) 1.00(0.16) ∗∗ 1.23(0.41) 0.39(0.23) ∗ 1.51(0.21) ∗ 1.57(0.28)
Median%4.21 2.94 1.86 1.78 1.23 0.05 0.98 1.69
n(k) 3449(22) 2604(34) 1111(5) 3790(19) 730(4) 2189(10) 4949(48) 4913(23)
Cohortstudies
Mean%(SE) 2.70(0.22) ∗ 2.21(0.38) 2.15(0.27) 1.52(0.18) ∗∗ 1.53(0.40) 0.98(0.14) ∗ 1.80(0.18) ∗ 2.21(0.19)
Median%2.51 1.75 1.67 0.61 1.24 0.89 1.83 2.03
n(k) 66038(30) 9369(18) 25639(16) 27342(33) 12167(4) 20609(13) 70984(57) 76223(47)
Continuedp.126AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch04” — 2007/7/17 — 20:30 — page 126 — #37
126 Chapter4
Table 4.4 (Continued).
In-hospital adverse event incidence
MI Non-fatal MI Stroke Non-fatal
stroke
GI bleeding Renal
failure
Mortality 30-day
mortality
Singlecentre
Mean%(SE) 2.77(0.26) ∗∗ 2.34(0.28) 2.17(0.37) 1.29(0.16) 1.06(0.23) 0.97(0.19) 1.47(0.15) ∗ 1.87(0.16) ∗
Median%2.55 2.37 1.60 1.40 1.16 0.84 1.30 1.83
n(k) 48655(40) 11742(49) 11728(16) 26977(47) 1977(4) 6472(15) 45572(93) 54218(54)
Multicentre
Mean%(SE) 7.87(2.66) ∗∗ 6.10(3.50) 2.43(0.30) 1.43(0.41) 1.60(0.40) 0.62(0.22) 2.52(0.26) ∗ 2.68(0.38) ∗
Median%4.04 6.45 2.59 1.18 1.31 0.51 2.63 2.65
n(k) 20832(12) 231(3) 15022(5) 4155(5) 10920(4) 16326(8) 30361(12) 26918(16)
MeanEF <50%
Mean%(SE) 2.79(0.92) 1.82(0.58) 3.81(3.02) 0.82(0.48) 1.47(0.29) 1.09(0.41) 1.45(0.38) 1.56(0.42)
Median%2.20 1.82 4.03 0.00 1.42 0.89 2.00 1.92
n(k) 4722(8) 698(5) 256(2) 2824(7) 1697(1) 2758(5) 7622(15) 5338(9)
MeanEF >50%
Mean%(SE) 5.99(1.85) 2.37(0.46) 1.69(0.26) 1.21(0.24) 1.02(0.24) 0.48(0.17) 1.68(0.25) 1.61(0.35)
Median%3.07 2.41 1.67 1.18 1.16 0.49 1.51 1.23
n(k) 22213(18) 8100(18) 10186(9) 7973(15) 1757(2) 6567(7) 29121(40) 8535(17)
Meanage ≤60yrs
Mean%(SE) 3.19(0.94) 2.49(0.54) 2.75(0.82) 1.41(0.42) N/A 0.00(2.80) 1.21(0.27) 1.15(0.44) ∗∗
Median%2.37 2.68 2.33 0.80 N/A 0.00 1.00 0.78
n(k) 4303(12) 2540(13) 1613(5) 1273(6) N/A 25(1) 5885(25) 3260(12)
Meanage >60yrs
Mean%(SE) 4.14(0.84) 2.44(0.36) 1.94(0.23) 1.28(0.16) 1.46(0.29) 0.75(0.16) 1.77(0.16) 2.26(0.17) ∗∗
Median%3.18 2.51 1.67 1.45 1.23 0.6 1.59 2.07
n(k) 63035(39) 9219(37) 24681(15) 26524(44) 12897(8) 13926(20) 45921(76) 74288(54)
NopriorCABG
Mean%(SE) 2.73(0.72) 1.99(0.46) 1.82(0.40) 0.99(0.31) 2.63(1.84) 1.23(1.10) 1.18(0.28) 1.66(0.35)
Median%3.33 1.83 1.27 0.66 2.63 1.00 1.00 1.81
n(k) 2606(11) 2115(18) 1097(4) 3240(10) 76(1) 270(4) 27625(25) 8390(14)
Somepatientswith
priorCABG
Mean%(SE) 6.47(1.83) 2.57(0.88) 2.19(0.34) 1.80(0.15) 1.53(0.40) 0.86(0.22) 1.92(0.25) 2.27(0.23)
Median%3.32 1.86 1.8 1.74 1.24 0.9 2.01 2.52
n(k) 45306(18) 6986(6) 19252(12) 17619(15) 12167(4) 16263(9) 32177(30) 48599(28)
∗ P <0.05. ∗∗ P <0.01.
CABG,coronaryarterybypassgraftsurgery;EF,ejectionfraction;GI,gastrointestinal;MI,myocardialinfarction;N/A,notavailable;RCT,rand omizedcontrolledtrial;SE,standarderror.
(FromNalysnykL,FahrbachK,ReynoldsMW etal.Adverseeventsincoronaryarterybypassgraft(CABG)trials:asystematicreviewandanalysis. Heart2003;89:767–72.)AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch04” — 2007/7/17 — 20:30 — page 127 — #38
AnesthesiaforMyocardialRevascularization 127
100%
90%
80%
Survlval for death
0%
p(log-rank)=0.810
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
0 150 300 450 600 750 900 105012001350
Days since randomization
Pat. At risk
CABG
Stent
1 year
588
585
2 years
583
582
3 years
577
576
4 years
568
567
5 years
559
552
1500165018001950
Bypass surgery
Stented angioplasty
Pat. At risk
CABG
Stent
1 year
553
543
2 years
544
536
3 years
535 
521
4 years
523
507
5 years
515 
491
100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
Event free survival
0%
p(log-rank)=0.810
0 150 300 450 600 750 900 105012001350
Days since randomization
1500165018001950
Bypass surgery
Stented angioplasty
Pat. At risk
CABG
Stent
1 year
532
441
2 years
515 
417
3 years
502
393
4 years
483
375
5 years
473
350
100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
Event free survival
0%
0 150 300 450 600 750 900 105012001350
Days since randomization
1500165018001950
Bypass surgery
Stented angioplasty p(log-rank) = 0.0001
Pat. At risk
CABG
Stent
1 year
566 
464
2 years
552 
441
3 years
541 
422
4 years
523 
408
5 years
511 
382
100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
Event free survival
0%
0 150 300 450 600 750 900 105012001350
Days since randomization
1500165018001950
Bypass surgery
Stented angioplasty
Fig. 4.19 (a)Kaplan–Meiercurvesshowingfreedom
fromdeath.(b)Kaplan–Meiercurvesshowingfreedom
fromdeath/cerebrovascularaccident/myocardial
infarctionorrevascularization.(c)Kaplan–Meiercurves
showingfreedomfromdeath/cerebrovascular
accident/myocardialinfarctionorrevascularization.
(d)Kaplan–Meiercurvesshowingfreedomfrom
revascularization.Atotalof1205patientswiththe
potentialforequivalentrevascularizationwererandomly
assignedtocoronaryarterybypassgraft(CABG)surgery
(n =605)orstentimplantation( n =600).Theprimary
clinicalendpointwasfreedomfrommajoradverse
cardiacandcerebrovascularevents(MACCE)at1year;
MACCEat5-yearfollow-upconstitutedtheﬁnal
secondaryendpoint.At5years,therewere48and46
deathsinthestentandCABGgroups,respectively(8.0
vs.7.6%; P =0.83;relativerisk(RR),1.05;95%
conﬁdenceinterval(CI),0.71–1.55).Among208diabetic
patients,mortalitywas13.4%inthestentgroupand
8.3%intheCABGgroup( P =0.27;RR,1.61;95%CI,
0.71–3.63).Overallfreedomfromdeath,stroke,or
myocardialinfarctionwasnotsigniﬁcantlydifferent
betweengroups(18.2%inthestentgroupvs.14.9%in
thesurgicalgroup; P=0.14;RR,1.22;95%CI,
0.95–1.58).Theincidenceofrepeatrevascularizationwas
signiﬁcantlyhigherinthestentgroup(30.3%)thanin
theCABGgroup(8.8%; P <0.001;RR,3.46;95%CI,
2.61–4.60).Thecompositeevent-freesurvivalratewas
58.3%inthestentgroupand78.2%intheCABGgroup
(P <0.0001;RR,1.91;95%CI,1.60–2.28).(From
SerruysPW,OngAT,vanHerwerdenLA etal.Five-year
outcomesaftercoronarystentingversusbypasssurgery
forthetreatmentofmultivesseldisease:theﬁnalanalysis
oftheArterialRevascularizationTherapiesStudy(ARTS)
randomizedtrial. JAmCollCardiol 2005;46:575–81,with
permission.)AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch04” — 2007/7/17 — 20:30 — page 128 — #39
128 Chapter4
twogroups.Thestentinggrouphadasigniﬁcantly
higherincidenceofrepeatrevascularization.
Suggested reading
Chaney MA. Intrathecal and epidural anesthesia and
analgesia for cardiac surgery.Anesth Analg2006;102:
45–64.
EagleKA,GuytonRA,DavidoffR et al.ACC/AHA2004
Guideline update for coronary artery bypass graft
surgery:summaryarticle. Circulation2004;110:1–9.
Groban L, Dolinski SY. Transesophageal echocardio-
graphicevaluationofdiastolicfunction. Chest2005;128:
3652–63.
LanKwakY.Reductionofischemiaduringoff-pumpcoro-
nary artery bypass graft surgery.J Cardiothorac Vasc
Anesth2005;19:667–77.
Nalysnyk L, Fahrbach K, Reynolds MWet al. Adverse
eventsincoronaryarterybypassgraft(CABG)trials:
asystematicreviewandanalysis. Heart2003;89:767–72.
TanakaK,LudwigLM,KerstenJR et al.Mechanismsof
cardioprotectionbyvolatileanesthetics. Anesthesiology
2004;100:707–21.
VanMastrigtGA,MaessenJG,HeijmansJ etal.Doesfast
tracktreatmentleadtoadecreaseofintensivecareunit
andhospitallengthofstayincoronaryarterybypass
patients? A meta-regression of randomized clinical
trials.CritCareMed 2006;34:1624–34.Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch05” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 129 — #1
CHAPTER5
Anesthesia for Valvular Heart Disease
While the number ofcardiac procedures f or
coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) is falling in
the USA, the number operations for heart valve dis-
ease is increasing. Over 5 million persons have mod-
erate to severe valvular regurgitation in the USA
alone. The aging population, expanding indications
for surgery, improvements in valve construction,
and improvements in patient morbidity and mortal-
ity after surgical intervention all suggest that valve
surgery is likely to increase in coming years. This
chapter will review anesthesia for patients with a
variety ofvalvular heart conditions. There will be
special emphasis on the more common lesions of
the aortic and mitral valves.
Generalconsiderations
Preoperativeevaluation
In valvular heart disease, there are a number ofhis-
tory and physical ﬁndings that directly inﬂuence
anesthetic management. Posting a case as “aortic
valve replacement” or “mitral valve replacement”
provides no information on whether this is for aor-
tic stenosis (AS), aortic regurgitation (AR), or both;
mitral stenosis (MS), mitral regurgitation (MR), or
both. The anesthesiologist must dig further and ﬁnd
out the speciﬁc valvular pathology. This knowledge
is essential in preparing hemodynamic goals for the
induction, maintenance, and postoperative care of
these patients.
Additional information is required unrelated to
the valve pathology. For example, will there be
other procedures during this repair (i.e. carotid
endarterectomy, CABG, septal myomectomy,
a Maze procedure (a series ofsurgical incisions
in the atrium intended to interrupt the circular
pattern ofelectrical activity associated with atrial
ﬁbrillation), or other intervention)? What is the
clinical condition ofthe patient? Is the patient in
a compensated or uncompensated state? With AS
the timing ofsurgery will have a great impact
on outcome depending on the patient’s condition.
For example, a patient in the early to mid-stages
ofAS will have a hyperdynamic, hypertrophied
heart that will likely perform well after cardiopul-
monary bypass (CPB). In contrast, a patient in the
late stages ofAS will be in congestive heart f ail-
ure (CHF), have a reduced ejection fraction (EF),
and will likely require extensive inotropic support
after CPB.
Review ofimaging and laboratory studies is
essential prior to moving the patient to the oper-
ating room. Imaging ofthe heart will give the
diagnosis and degree ofthe structural abnormality.
Preoperative echocardiography will establish the
type oflesion (stenotic versus regurgitant), the heart
function, and the valve gradients. The valve area is
ofcritical importance in assessing any stenosis. In
patients with normal left ventricular (LV) function,
aortic valve gradients in severely stenotic lesions
may be very high (Fig. 5.1). In patients with poor
ventricular performance, there may be anatomically
critical lesions (aortic valve area <0.7 cm2) and a
low gradient. These patients are especially prone to
129Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch05” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 130 — #2
130 Chapter 5
Fig.5.1 Deep transgastric long-axis transesophageal
echocardiographic image in a patient with severe aortic
stenosis. The velocity ofﬂow is very high at 5 m/s with
a peak gradient of101 mmHg and a mean gradient of
67 mmHg. This is clearly severe aortic stenosis.
intraoperative instability with the induction ofgen-
eral anesthesia and may require signiﬁcant inotropic
support post-CPB. Other important imaging studies
include coronary angiography to rule out concur-
rent coronary artery disease, a chest radiograph, and
perhaps, thoracic computed tomography (CT) or
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to evaluate tho-
racic anatomy. A chest X-ray is essential in “redo”
operations involving the heart and mediastinum.
The heart may be adhered to the posterior margin of
the sternum rendering sternotomy quite hazardous.
All precautions including adequate venous access,
immediate availability ofblood products, and intra-
operative awareness and vigilance are required in
these situations.
Atrial natriuretic peptides are useful markers
when following patients with heart failure due
to valvular pathology. In severe AS, natriuretic
peptides increase with increasing New York Heart
Association (NYHA) functional classes and decreas-
ing LV EF. Natriuretic peptide levels fall after
successful aortic valve surgery.
Monitoring
Monitoring during valvular surgery varies little
from monitoring required during other types of
heart surgery. In addition to the American Society
ofAnesthesiologists (ASA) standard monitors, a uri-
nary Foley catheter, and arterial and central lines
are essential. Many institutions routinely use pul-
monary artery catheters to monitor cardiac out-
put (CO), mixed venous oxygenation, pulmonary
artery pressures, and pulmonary capillary wedge
pressures (PCWPs). Although this is standard prac-
tice by many clinicians, outcome data supporting
pulmonary artery catheterization are lacking.
Intraoperative transesophageal echocardiogra-
phy (TEE) is rapidly becoming an essential compo-
nent ofanesthesia f or all heart valve procedures.
Extensive preoperative evaluation by TEE often
reveals previously unknown structural or func-
tional defects. In addition, TEE can provide instant
assessment ofthe status ofa valve repair proce-
dure. TEE may also diagnose perivalvular leaks
after valvular replacement requiring prompt inter-
vention. The assessment ofair in the lef t side of
the heart is important after an open-heart proce-
dure. TEE may assist in locating the air thereby
facilitating direct venting procedures. TEE is help-
ful in guiding post-CPB hemodynamic intervention
and treatment. In recognition ofthis tool’s util-
ity in cardiac surgical procedures, the American
Society ofEchocardiography and the American
Heart Association provide a class 1 recommendation
for TEE use in all heart valve surgical procedures
(Table 5.1).
Other special monitoring devices in heart valve
surgery may include processed electroencephalo-
gram (EEG) monitoring for either patient awareness
or for EEG activity during procedures in which it is
desirable that all electrical activity stop (i.e. deep
hypothermic circulatory arrest). Cerebral oximetry
has no special application in surgery for heart valve
disease.
Premedication
Great caution is advised when prescribing pre-
medication in patients with valvular heart disease.
In patients with preserved LV function, morphine
sulfate 0.1 mg/kg intramuscularly (IM) and oral
lorazepam 1.5 hours before scheduled incision time
are appropriate. Supplemental oxygen should be
instituted at the time ofpremedication. Reducing
dosing, or no premedication at all, is indicated forAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch05” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 131 — #3
Anesthesia for Valvular Heart Disease 131
Table5.1 Recommendations for intraoperative echocardiography. (Reprinted from Cheitlin MD, Armstrong WF,
Aurigemma GP et al. ACC/AHA/ASE 2003 guideline update for the clinical application of echocardiography–summary
article: a report ofthe American College ofCardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines
(ACC/AHA/ASE Committee to Update the 1997 Guidelines for the Clinical Application of Echocardiography).J Am Coll
Cardiol 2003;42:954–70.)
Class I
1 Evaluation of acute, persistent, and life-threatening hemodynamic disturbances in which ventricular function and its
determinants are uncertain and have not responded to treatment
2 Surgical repair of valvular lesions, hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy, and aortic dissection with possible aortic
valve involvement
3 Evaluation of complex valve replacements requiring homografts or coronary re-implantation, such as the Ross procedure
4 Surgical repair of most congenital heart lesions that require cardiopulmonary bypass
5 Surgical intervention for endocarditis when preoperative testing was inadequate or extension to perivalvular tissue is
suspected
6 Placement of intracardiac devices and monitoring of their position during port-access and other cardiac surgical
interventions
7 Evaluation of pericardial window procedures in patients with posterior or loculated pericardial effusions
Class IIa
1 Surgical procedures in patients at increased risk of myocardial ischemia, myocardial infarction, or hemodynamic
disturbances
2 Evaluation of valve replacement, aortic atheromatous disease, the Maze procedure, cardiac aneurysm repair, removal of
cardiac tumors, intracardiac thrombectomy, and pulmonary embolectomy
3 Detection of air emboli during cardiotomy, heart-transplant operations, and upright neurosurgical procedures
Class IIb
1 Evaluation of suspected cardiac trauma, repair of acute thoracic aortic dissection without valvular involvement, and
anastomotic sites during heart and/or lung transplantation
2 Evaluation of regional myocardial function during and after off-pump coronary artery bypass graft procedures
3 Evaluation of pericardiectomy, pericardial effusions, and pericardial surgery
4 Evaluation of myocardial perfusion, coronary anatomy, or graft patency
5 Dobutamine stress testing to detect inducible demand ischemia or to predict functional changes after myocardial
revascularization
6 Assessment of residual duct ﬂow after interruption of patent ductus arteriosus
Class III
1 Surgical repair of uncomplicated secundum atrial septal defect
elderly or debilitated patients, patients with poor
ventricular function, or patients with poor pul-
monary function. Most prudently, premedication
can wait until the patient arrives in the preopera-
tive holding area. At this time, the anesthesiologist
may administer intravenous (IV) midazolam and/or
fentanyl while directly observing and monitoring
the patient.
All cardiac medications may be continued until
the time ofsurgery. There is debate on holding
angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors (ACE-I)
prior to surgery. These medications are associated
with signiﬁcant hypotension during and after CPB
in some patients. Data on the harmful effects of
withholding ACE-I medications are undetermined.
Consultation with the cardiologist and surgeon is
required before stopping any antiplatelet agents
prior to surgery. In many centers, patients with
stable symptoms will wait 3–5 days after stopping
clopidogrel. It is common for patients with valvular
heart disease to present with atrial ﬁbrillation or a
mechanical valve, and thus require anticoagulation.Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch05” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 132 — #4
132 Chapter 5
Coordination regarding the administration ofthese
medications during the perioperative period is
essential.
Inductionandmaintenanceof
anesthesia
No speciﬁc agents or techniques are indicated for
either induction or maintenance ofanesthesia in
any speciﬁc valvular condition. Rather, adherence
to preset hemodynamic goals will provide appro-
priate guidance when choosing anesthetic agents.
There are a number ofways to achieve these
goals safely in the patient presenting for valve
surgery.
Patient awareness during cardiac surgical proce-
dures requires special attention. Awareness occurs
in approximately 0.13% ofsurgical patients. Multi-
variate logistic regression identiﬁed increasing ASA
status, and type of procedure as risk factors for
recall. For cardiac surgical procedures, the odds ratio
for recall is 3.58 with a 95% conﬁdence interval
of0.72–17.9. As with any procedure, attention to
hemodynamic signs, depth ofanesthesia, the use of
benzodiazepines, and inhalational agents will likely
reduce the risk ofoperative recall.
There are good data to support the concept of
“fast-track” or early extubation protocols in the
care ofpatients presenting f or CABG surgery. These
beneﬁts include reduced hospital stay, intensive
care unit stay, and reduced cost ofcare. Data on
early extubation protocols in valve surgery are less
common, although one might expect similar ben-
eﬁt as observed in CABG surgery. One should be
aware, however, that many valvular procedures are
complex in nature, requiring extended CPB time,
potential deep hypothermic circulatory arrest, and
increased requirements for blood and blood prod-
uct transfusion. All of these factors may limit the
opportunity for early extubation.
There are limited reports ofregional anesthesia
for valvular heart surgery. Most reports provide
data on combined general anesthesia and thoracic
epidural anesthesia. When applied, upwards of65%
ofthese patients may be extubated in the operat-
ing room. Typically, an epidural catheter is placed
at T1–3 on the day ofsurgery. A rigid anticoagu-
lation protocol must be followed both before and
after surgery. There are case reports of aortic valve
replacement in conscious patients under regional
anesthesia without intubation. Given the signiﬁ-
cant issues with anticoagulation, it is unlikely that
regional anesthesia will replace traditional general
anesthesia for valvular surgery.
Weaningfrombypassand
thepost-bypassperiod
Repairing or replacing the valve may fundamentally
change the hemodynamic goals ofthe patient f rom
the pre-bypass period. A normal valvular proﬁle
may be observed immediately after CPB (Fig. 5.2).
The anticipation is that the heart will now per-
form normally; however, that does not necessarily
follow. The heart suffers an acute insult with the
surgical intervention, aortic cross-clamping, and the
myocardial depressant effects of the various anes-
thetic agents. As with any cardiac surgical proce-
dure, there may be evidence ofnew regional wall
motion abnormalities, global cardiac dysfunction,
and peripheral vascular dysfunction. In valvular
heart surgery, the heart requires time to remodel
before signiﬁcant improvement is observed.
In some patients, however, hemodynamics may
be greatly improved post-bypass. In simple, com-
pensated AS, the patient may be hyperdynamic
Fig.5.2 This is the same patient as seen in Fig. 5.1 after
aortic valve replacement with a stentless freestyle aortic
valve. The deep transgastric long axis view through the
aortic valve now shows a peak gradient of9 mmHg and
a mean gradient of4 mmHg. Both ofthese gradients are
now normal.Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch05” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 133 — #5
Anesthesia for Valvular Heart Disease 133
and hypertensive after weaning from bypass. It
may also be possible, however, that due to the LV
hypertrophy, cardioplegia may have been incom-
plete for total myocardial protection, and the patient
may emerge from bypass with transient myocar-
dial dysfunction. In complex repairs, or multiple
valve surgery, an extended bypass run may be
required, thereby increasing the risk ofimmediate
postoperative cardiac dysfunction and the require-
ment ofinotropic support. EF and LV f unction
may decline after surgery to repair MR; this is
commonly thought to be due to the new load-
ing conditions ofthe heart af ter removal ofthe
“pop-off” mitral regurgitant outﬂow. This is likely
untrue, as emerging data on mitral valve repair pro-
cedures, in which there is sparing ofthe mitral valve
apparatus, show little alteration in EF. This preser-
vation ofmitral annular integrity stabilizes LV shape
and contractility, thereby preserving function. The
diminished performance is likely secondary to other
factors including extended cross-clamp time, inade-
quate myocardial protection, and myocardial stun-
ning. Combined CABG and valvular heart surgery
is associated with inotrope use during separation
from CPB.
TEE is especially useful in the immediate post-
bypass period. TEE will facilitate the assessment of
myocardial function and ﬁlling parameters, render-
ing important information affecting decisions about
inotropes and volume management. TEE can also
assess the condition ofthe valve repair or replace-
ment. On every case in which TEE is used, a
complete evaluation ofvalve structure and f unc-
tion is required. In a valve repair, the degree of
residual regurgitation must be documented. Deter-
mination ofthe Doppler gradient across the repaired
valve is required, and images ofthe valve move-
ment are necessary. In a valve replacement, all of
the above are essential, and a further evaluation for
a perivalvular leak is required. After mitral valve
repair, an assessment for systolic anterior motion
(SAM) ofthe mitral valve is required. These images
must be stored as a part ofthe patient record and
a note made in the patient’s chart or anesthetic
record.
The post-bypass period may be a time ofunsta-
ble hemodynamics. The heart is adjusting to a new
conditions ofpreload, af terload, and inotropy. There
is usually ongoing bleeding, which in many patients,
and especially in “re-do” procedures, may be severe.
Constant vigilance regarding hemodynamics, blood
volume, blood gas chemistry, and metabolic state
(i.e. ionized calcium, glucose concentrations, and
urine output) is required. There may be new
rhythm disturbances. Patients with preoperative
atrial ﬁbrillation may now be in sinus rhythm
after mitral valve repair and a Maze procedure.
These patients may be dramatically improved. Other
patients, however, may suffer from third-degree
heart block, bradycardia, tachycardia, or other rate
and rhythm abnormalities making management
difﬁcult.
In the intensive care unit, these patients will
likely remain intubated for some hours. The
usual considerations oftemperature management,
metabolic and hemodynamic management, vigi-
lance for excessive chest tube bleeding and evidence
ofcardiac tamponade must be perf ormed. Elderly
patients and those with additional risk factors may
require additional support.
Specialconsiderationsand
long-termprognosis
Cardiac anesthesia for valvular heart surgery carries
numerous special considerations not found in other
aspects ofcardiothoracic anesthesiology. Among
these considerations is familiarity with the type of
valve used in the operative repair. There are a num-
ber of valve types including allografts, autografts,
xenografts, mechanical, and bioprosthetic valves.
The choice ofvalve is up to the surgeon; how-
ever, the anesthesiologist is frequently consulted
to provide TEE measurements that may guide the
surgeon in valve choice. For example, the measure-
ment ofthe aortic valve annulus size is important
when determining the size ofa prosthetic valve.
In the assessment for a possible Ross procedure
(pulmonary valve moved to the aortic position and
pulmonary allograft placement), the pulmonary
annulus size and the degree ofpulmonary insuf -
ﬁciency are important factors before committing to
the procedure. After the repair, it is important to
assess the new valve function. Bioprosthetic valves
all come with a complete hemodynamic proﬁle inAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch05” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 134 — #6
134 Chapter 5
their packaging and this information is important
when rendering a decision on the function of a new
valve. The expected gradients are sometimes higher,
and the calculated valve area may be less than
one might expect. The impact ofvalve prosthesis-
patient mismatch (VP-PM) on mortality is as high
as 25% in those patients with a severe VP-PM mis-
match. Reference to the packaging insert will guide
the clinician as to whether intraoperative gradi-
ents and calculated valve areas are acceptable. In
valve repair procedures, one must not only look
for the cessation of regurgitation, but one must
ensure that there is no new stenosis. Measurement
ofvalve gradients and oriﬁce areas will help in this
regard.
Valve repair for patients with endocarditis present
all ofthe af orementioned hemodynamic considera-
tions in addition to the frequently septic condition
ofthe patient. Patients with endocarditis usually
have acute regurgitant lesions and present in heart
failure. The in-hospital mortality for acute endo-
carditis is 20%. The early predictors ofin-hospital
mortality include embolic events, diabetes melli-
tus, Staphylococcus aureus, and APACHE II score. The
use ofintraoperative TEE is especially helpf ul in
the diagnosis ofendocarditis and quantiﬁcation of
the valve defect. Valve surgery reduces 6-month
mortality.
There are solid data to support valve repair and
replacement in patients with heart valve disease
over medical management. After surgery for AS
there is initial remodeling ofthe heart, with sub-
sequent LV mass reduction. In MR, there is symp-
tomatic relief, and improvement in LV EF. Although
there is a known early mortality with heart valve
surgery, the long-term beneﬁt remains superior to
medical management. As the population extends
longevity, more patients will present for valve pro-
cedures. Although advancing age is associated with
worse outcome, there is no upper limit ofage
contraindicating valvular surgery.
It is unknown what impact percutaneous valves
and other nonsurgical valve repair procedures will
have on the volume ofvalvular surgery. It is likely,
that anesthesiologists will provide sedation and/or
general anesthesia in patients presenting for per-
cutaneous valve procedures. In such cases, all of
the hemodynamic principles described below apply.
In addition, TEE will be required for percutaneous
mitral annular reduction for MR, and endovascular
mitral valve repair (Alﬁeri procedure).
Theaorticvalve
Aorticvalveanatomy
The aortic valve consists ofthree semilunar valves
named according to their relationship with the
appropriate coronary arteries: the right coronary
cusp, the left coronary cusp, and the noncoronary
cusp. At the center ofthe f ree-edge ofeach cusp is a
tiny, elevated nodule commonly referred to as the
nodule ofArantius. All three nodules coapt at the
center ofa normal, closed aortic valve (Fig. 5.3).
The lunulas are the free-edges of the cusps and span
f rom the nodule ofArantius to the wall ofthe aorta.
When the lunulas ofthe cusps are apposed and the
nodules ofArantius are coapted in a normal aortic
valve, the valve is completely closed.
Figure 5.4 demonstrates normal subvalvular,
valvular, and ascending aortic anatomy in the mid-
esophageal aortic valve long-axis view. In this
image, the left ventricular outﬂow tract (LVOT),
aortic valve annulus, sinuses ofValsalva, sinotubu-
lar junction, and proximal ascending aorta are well
visualized. Measurements ofthese structures are
Fig.5.3 This is a mid-esophageal short axis
transesophageal echocardiographic image ofa normal
aortic valve in the color compare mode. To the left the
trileaﬂet valve is seen during systole. To the right, color
Doppler demonstrates a normal ﬂow pattern.Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch05” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 135 — #7
Anesthesia for Valvular Heart Disease 135
Fig.5.4 This is the same patient as in Fig. 5.3. This is a
mid-esophageal long axis view ofthe aortic valve in the
color compare mode. To the left one can clearly identify
the left ventricular outﬂow tract, aortic valve, sinus of
Valsalva, sinotubular ridge, and the aortic root. To the
right, color Doppler demonstrates a normal ﬂow pattern
with aliasing as the blood accelerates through the aortic
valve.
part ofa complete examination and are integral in
determining annular dilatation and aortic aneurysm
pathology. AR can be quantiﬁed in this view.
The aortic valve complex, including the junction
ofthe aortic valve with the ventricular septum and
the anterior mitral valve leaﬂet, is easily visualized
in this imaging plane.
Aorticstenosis(AS)
AS is the most common valvular lesion in the USA.
The incidence is increasing due to the aging pop-
ulation and the presence ofcalciﬁc degenerative
changes in the aortic valve with time. This pro-
cess was once viewed as simply a byproduct ofthe
ageing process; however, new data suggest that cal-
ciﬁc AS is the result ofan inﬂammatory process.
Isolated AS in adults is more common in males
than females and is usually nonrheumatic in origin.
Most commonly, AS is degenerative with calciﬁca-
tion ofthe valve leaﬂets. Congenital bicuspid valves
develop the same degenerative changes seen in
normal tricuspid aortic valves.
In rheumatic AS, the valve commissures are fused
and aortic valve leaﬂet excursion is limited. The
result is a stenotic valve oriﬁce. This stenosis is
usually accompanied by regurgitation. In rheumatic
heart disease, the mitral valve is usually involved in
addition to the aortic valve.
PathophysiologyandadaptationinAS
AS is a chronic LV pressure overload lesion. The
natural history ofthe lesion involves a gradual
reduction in the aortic valve area from the normal
2.6–3.5 cm2 to <1.0 cm2 occurring over several
years. Replacement is generally considered before
the aortic valve area is<0.7 cm2 or the peak systolic
pressure gradient is >50 mmHg. The relationship
ofvalvular gradient to oriﬁce area is given by the
Gorlin formula: gradient = (CO)2/(aortic valve
area)2. Using this relationship, one can immediately
appreciate that reducing the aortic valve area while
maintaining CO has a huge impact on the valvular
gradient. In a valve with a gradient of60 mmHg, the
LV must generate a systolic pressure of180 mmHg in
order to maintain a normal aortic systolic pressure
of120 mmHg.
As the disease progresses, there is an increasing
pressure load on the left ventricle. This pressure
load is compensated by ventricular hypertrophy.
Under these circumstances, left LV stress (afterload)
is greatly elevated. The law ofLaPlace provides
the relationship between wall stress and pressure:
Load or stress in the myocardium = (ventricular
pressure) (radius)/2 (wall thickness), or T =
Pr/2h where P = peak ventricular pressure,
r = ventricular radius, and h = wall thickness).
Therefore, as the afterload increases (the pres-
sure in the numerator), the myocardial tension is
compensated by increasing wall thickness (in the
denominator). The increased wall stress results in
concentric ventricular hypertrophy. The degree of
thickening parallels the increased ventricular pres-
sure demands. The result is normalization ofven-
tricular wall stress despite greatly elevated peak
ventricular pressure (Fig. 5.5a,b). This normaliza-
tion ofwall stress allows maintenance ofEF despite
the high impedance to ejection found in AS. Even-
tually, the valve oriﬁce narrows to the point at
which stroke volume (SV) and EF fall (Fig. 5.6).
Concentric hypertrophy has several hemody-
namic implications. There is reduced ventricular
compliance which results in diastolic dysfunction
with reduced early diastolic ﬁlling ofthe ventricle.Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch05” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 136 — #8
136 Chapter 5
250
200LV pressure (mmHg)
LV wall stress
150
100
50
0
50 100 150
LV volume (mL)
50 100 150
(a) (b)
B
A B
A
Concentr
ic
Hypertrophy
Control
Fig.5.5 (a) Left ventricular pressure–volume loops
demonstrating adaptation to chronic pressure overload.
Loop A represents a normal ventricle before the
development ofaortic stenosis. Loop B represents the
same ventricle after prolonged exposure to elevated
afterload and development of concentric hypertrophy.
End-systolic and end-diastolic volumes in loop B are
unchanged from those in loop A, but left ventricular
systolic pressure is greatly elevated. (b) The same loops
illustrated in (a) are shown again here, except that wall
stress is plotted against volume. It is obvious that
elevated ventricular systolic pressure seen in loop A does
not result in elevated wall stress compared with loop B.
Development ofconcentric hypertrophy allows
normalization ofwall stress in the f ace ofchronically
elevated left ventricular systolic pressure. LV, left
ventricular. (From Ross J Jr. Afterload mismatch in aortic
and mitral valve disease: implications for surgical therapy.
J Am Coll Cardiol 1985;5:811–26, with permission.)
Normal end-diastolic volumes are maintained with
normal sinus rhythm. In patients with severe AS,
atrial systole contributes nearly 30% ofthe lef t ven-
tricular end-diastolic volume (LVEDV), whereas in
patients without AS, atrial systole contributes 20%.
This late diastolic ﬁlling occurs on the steep portion
ofthe diastolic pressure–volume curve. The well-
timed atrial systole allows late diastolic ﬁlling to
occur with minimal elevation in mean left atrial
pressure (LAP). With loss ofatrial systole (atrial
ﬁbrillation), normal end-diastolic volume is main-
tained by increasing mean LAP to equal or exceed
left ventricular end-diastolic pressure (LVEDP).
When compliance is poor, a normal LVEDV may
occur at a LVEDP in excess of25 mmHg. Acute
increases in mean LAP may result in pulmonary
LV wall stress
LV volume (mL)
50 100 150
Limit of preload
reserve
EFx 33%
EFEFx 60% 60%EFx 60%
Compensate
d
Mild dysfunction
EFx 52%
Post-op.
Fig.5.6 Left ventricular wall stress–volume loops in
progressive aortic stenosis (AS). The dotted loop
represents a ventricle with concentric hypertrophy and
preserved systolic function. As systolic dysfunction
develops, stroke volume (SV) and ejection fraction (EF)
can be maintained by making use ofthe preload reserve
(EF = 60%). Further progression ofsystolic dysf unction
results in exhaustion ofpreload reserve. At this point,
further progression of AS results in afterload mismatch
and reduction in SV and EF (EF= 33%). Surgical
therapy for replacement of the stenotic aortic valve
results in a reduction in afterload, the abolition of
afterload mismatch, and the ability of the ventricle to
deliver nearly normal SV and EF despite the presence of
systolic dysfunction (EF = 52%). Post-op., postoperative.
(From Ross J Jr. Afterload mismatch in aortic and mitral
valve disease: implications for surgical therapy.J Am Coll
Cardiol 1985;5:811–26, with permission.)
congestion. Unfortunately, in AS with atrial ﬁbril-
lation, low mean LAP results in diminished LVEDV
and, therefore, SV and CO.
Diminished ventricular compliance also limits the
use ofpreload reserve. With the ventricle operating
on the steep portion ofits diastolic pressure–volume
curve, incremental increases in end-diastolic vol-
ume result in prohibitive increases in end-diastolic
pressure. Hence, even with preserved atrial systole,
it may be impossible to augment preload unless
mean LAP is above 20–25 mmHg. Again, at theseAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch05” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 137 — #9
Anesthesia for Valvular Heart Disease 137
Table5.2 Myocardial oxygen supply and demand in aortic stenosis.
Myocardial oxygen consumption is increased by:
• The increased mass of myocardium
• The demands of LV pressure work, which is much more energy-consumptive than volume work. A large portion of
the total myocardial workload is devoted to the isovolumic contraction phase because of the high intraventricular
pressures necessary to commence the ejection phase (see Fig. 5.5). Recall that the isovolumic contraction phase is a very
energy consumptive process
• The prolonged ejection phase
Myocardial oxygen delivery is compromised by:
• Elevated LVEDP secondary to diminished ventricular compliance
• An aortic diastolic pressure that is low relative to the elevated LVEDP
• Diminished diastolic coronary perfusion time secondary to the prolonged ejection phase
• Compression of subendocardial vessels by hypertrophied myocardium
• Absence of any systolic coronary perfusion because LV systolic pressure greatly exceeds aortic systolic pressure
LV, left ventricle; LVEDP, left ventricular end-diastolic pressure.
pressures the patient is a risk for pulmonary conges-
tion. In this end-stage disease, increases in preload
only minimally increase SV. Thus, for a given
contractile state, SV is nearly ﬁxed.
Patients with AS are especially susceptible
to ischemia. Several factors are responsible for
the myocardial oxygen supply–demand imbalance
seen in AS (Table 5.2). This combination off actors
explains why 30% ofpatients with AS experience
angina in the absence ofsigniﬁcant coronary artery
disease.
In general, global ventricular function (EF%) is
normal in AS. The mechanism for depressed EF
in patients with severe AS is not entirely clear.
Concentric hypertrophy, inadequate to normalize
wall stress, will result in excessive afterload and
reduced EF. Subendocardial ischemia may also play
a role. In patients without myocardial infarction,
irreversible myocardial damage is relatively uncom-
mon, and there is remarkable improvement in EF
after uncomplicated aortic valve replacement. Many
patients with depressed function preoperatively will
exhibit a normal EF postoperatively. The patient
with a low gradient, low CO and low EF is at highest
risk for surgery. These patients have lost their abil-
ity to compensate for the disease process. Survival
in these patients depends on medical versus surgi-
cal treatment and the presence ofinotropic reserve
(Fig. 5.7).
100
75Patient survival (%)
50
25
0
05 0
Follow-up (months)
Group I, valve replacement
Group II, valve replacement
Group I, medical treatment
Group II, medical treatment
100
Fig.5.7 Survival for aortic stenosis patients with low
gradient and low ejection fraction. Group I patients
demonstrated inotropic reserve and had a better outcome
with aortic valve replacement (AVR) than did similar
patients treated medically, and better than group II
patients who lacked inotropic reserve. (From Monin JL,
Quere JP, Monchi M et al. Low-gradient aortic stenosis:
operative risk stratiﬁcation and predictors for long-term
outcome. A multicenter study using dobutamine stress
hemodynamics. Circulation 2003;108:319–24, with
permission.)
In patients with systolic dysfunction, there is
a progressive increase in LVEDV so that SV and
EF are maintained through use ofpreload reserve
(see Fig. 5.6). Reduced ventricular compliance limits
the increase in end-diastolic volume and the pres-
sure tolerated without pulmonary congestion. With
severe systolic dysfunction, the maximal wall stressAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch05” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 138 — #10
138 Chapter 5
that the ventricle can generate is severely limited. In
this situation, afterload mismatch may limit mainte-
nance ofSV and EF despite use ofpreload reserve. In
these patients, the aortic valve gradient may be low
secondary to the reduced ﬂow across the stenotic
valve. The calculated valve area will give a much
better indication ofthe severity ofthe stenosis.
Severe AS does not directly affect right ventricu-
lar (RV) function until the occurrence of pulmonary
artery hypertension. In patients with severe AS and
an EF <50%, a reduced SV and CO is maintained
at the expense ofelevated lef t atrial and pulmonary
artery pressures. Pulmonary artery pressures begin
to rise through passive pulmonary venous con-
gestion when LAPs exceed 18 mmHg. Ultimately,
pulmonary artery ﬁbrosis develops and pulmonary
arterial hypertension follows. As the mean pul-
monary artery pressure gradually rises to exceed
50 mmHg, the right ventricle, which normally func-
tions with low impedance to ejection, fails. Patients
with AS and an EF < 40% have CO maintained by
a gradual increases in mean LAP to 25–30 mmHg,
with mean pulmonary artery pressure in excess
of50 mmHg. These patients may have clinical evi-
dence ofRV f ailure with peripheral edema and liver
congestion.
Increases in heart rate normally result in a marked
decrease in the time ofdiastole, whereas the length
ofsystole remains largely unchanged (Fig. 5.8a,b).
Over the heart rate range of50–110 b/min, the
length ofsystole decreases f rom 441 to 315 ms;
whereas, the time ofdiastole decreases f rom 759 to
230 ms. Hence, tachycardia in patients with AS is
detrimental because, although there is adequate
time in systole to allow ejection across the stenotic
valve, diastolic time and subendocardial perfusion
are drastically reduced.
Bradycardia in these patients is also detrimen-
tal. Recall that the valve gradient increases as the
square ofthe ﬂow across the valve. Maintaining
CO at a reduced heart rate requires increased SV
(CO = HR × SV). Because SV is ﬂow, the gra-
dient must increase. Figure 5.9(a–c) demonstrates
that for a given CO, progressive decreases in heart
rate result in large increases in the transvalvular
gradient. With aortic valve areas <0.5 cm2, gra-
dients in excess of150 mmHg are possible, even
1000(a)
800 R–R
Total
    diastolic period
        (R–R)−(QS2)
600
400
Time (ms)
200
80(b)
70
60
% Diastole50
40
30
30 50 70 90
Hour
110 130 150
30 40 50 60 70 80 90
Hour
100 110 120 130 140 150
OS2
Fig.5.8 (a) Increases in heart rate cause decreases in
length ofeach cardiac cycle (R–R interval). Decreases in
length ofsystole (OS 2) with increases in heart rate are
far less dramatic than decreases in the length of diastole
(R–R–QS2). (b) Percent ofeach cardiac cycle (R–R
interval) spent in diastole at various heart rates. Small
changes in heart rate cause large decreases in percent of
time spent in diastole. (From Boudoulas H, Rittgers SE,
Lewis RP et al. Changes in diastolic time with various
pharmacologic agents: implication for myocardial
perfusion. Circulation 1979;60:164–9, with permission.)
with low normal SVs. Because the left ventricle is
capable ofgenerating peak pressures in the range
of250–300 mmHg, maximal ventricular pressures
are needed to maintain a systolic blood pressure
>100 mmHg. In this setting, bradycardia with an
increase in the gradient will result in systemic
hypotension. The result is poor subendocardial
perfusion and ischemia. In addition, diminished
diastolic compliance may prohibit the increase in
end-diastolic volume necessary to augment SV inAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch05” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 139 — #11
Anesthesia for Valvular Heart Disease 139
(c) Aortic stenosis
10000
7500Cardiac output (cc/min)
5 000
2500
Assumption: HR= 68 b/min, SEP=0.32 s/beat
0
0 75 150
Mean gradient (mmHg)
225 300
4.0 2.0
1.0
0.7
0.5
0.3
(b) Aortic stenosis
10000
7500Cardiac output (cc/min)
5000
2500
Assumption: HR = 76 b/min, SEP = 0.34 s/beat
0
0 75 150
Mean gradient (mmHg)
225 300
4.04.0
2.0
1.0
0.7
0.5
0.3
Aortic stenosis
10000
(a)
7500Cardiac output (cc/min)
5 000
2500
Assumption: HR = 88 b/min, SEP = 0.32 s/beat
0
0 75 150
Mean gradient (mmHg)
225 300
4.04.0
2.0 1.0
0.7
0.5
0.3
4.0 4.0
Fig.5.9 The relationship ofheart rate (HR), cardiac
output (CO), aortic valve area, and systolic pressure
gradient across the aortic valve is illustrated for patients
with aortic stenosis. CO is plotted against the systolic
pressure gradient for aortic valve areas ranging from
0.3–4.0 cm2. (a) This plot illustrates these relationships
for HR of 88 b/min and systolic ejection period (SEP) of
0.32 s/beat. (b) This plot illustrates these relationships for
HR of76 b/min and SEP of0.34 s/beat. (c) This plot
illustrates these relationships for HR of 68 b/min and SEP
of0.32 s/beat. Clearly, f or a given CO and HR, systolic
pressure gradient increases as aortic valve area decreases.
Furthermore, for a given CO and aortic valve area,
systolic pressure gradient increases as HR decreases.
Increases in HR in the range examined here have little
effect on length of SEP. Therefore, for CO to remain
constant as HR decreases, larger stroke volume (SV) must
be ejected across stenotic aortic valve in relatively
constant time period. This results in larger systolic
pressure gradient. (From Carabello BA, Grossman W.
Calciﬁcation ofstenotic valve oriﬁce areas. In: Baim DS,
Grossman W (eds). Cardiac Catheterization, Angiography
and Intervention, 5th edn. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins,
1996:151–65, with permission.)
bradycardic states without prohibitive increases
in mean LAP.
Contrary to what might be expected, decreasing
afterload by reducing systemic vascular resistance
does not always have a beneﬁcial effect for patients
with AS. A reduction in afterload should enhance
LV ejection and thus increase SV. However, the
impedance to LV ejection is largely due to the
ﬁxed outﬂow obstruction at the aortic valve oriﬁce.
Reductions in systemic vascular resistance (SVR)
are offset by the large increases in the transvalvular
gradient that accompany increased ﬂow across the
stenotic valve oriﬁce. Thus, SVR reduction results
in very little augmentation ofCO in patients with
signiﬁcant AS. Furthermore, agents used to reduce
afterload, such as nitroprusside and hydralazine,Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch05” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 140 — #12
140 Chapter 5
decrease aortic diastolic pressure and compromise
the tenuous subendocardial blood ﬂow in these
patients. In contrast, increases in afterload result in
an elevation ofLVEDV and LVEDP with mainte-
nance ofSV in patients with good ventricular f unc-
tion and some preload reserve. In patients with poor
ventricular function, increasing afterload may result
in a progressive decline in SV and EF secondary to
afterload mismatch (see Fig. 5.6).
The term “critical aortic stenosis” commonly is
used in association with severe aortic valve disease.
This is a poorly deﬁned term, but it is most appropri-
ate when describing a pathophysiologic state rather
than an absolute valve area. Critical AS exists when
preload reserve is exhausted and EF is reduced such
that further reductions in aortic valve area will pro-
duce increased pulmonary vascular congestion or
further reductions in SV. Critical AS can exist with
a larger valve area in patients with severe concomi-
tant diastolic or systolic dysfunction or in patients
with atrial ﬁbrillation.
AnesthetictechniqueinAS
Goals
• Sinus rhythm is essential. Atrial contraction may
contribute up to 40% ofLV ﬁlling.
• Maintain heart rate at 70–90 b/min.
• Maintain a PCWP high enough to ensure
adequate LVEDV; more full rather than less full.
• Maintain afterload. Decreases in diastolic blood
pressure reduce coronary perfusion.
• Maintain contractility.
Preinduction
All patients should have adequate IV and central
access. ECG monitoring should allow assessment
ofleads V 5, I, II, III, aV R,a VL, and aVF. Baseline
recording ofall seven leads should be obtained f or
comparative purposes. Normally, two leads (II and
V5) are monitored simultaneously intraoperatively.
A radial artery catheter is placed with local anes-
thesia and adequate sedation before induction of
anesthesia. A pulmonary artery catheter can be
placed either before or after induction of anesthe-
sia. All ofthe equipment and medications necessary
for treatment of dysrhythmias must be available
before placement of the pulmonary artery catheter.
In particular, a deﬁbrillator with demonstrated con-
sistent synchronization to the patient’s electro-
cardiogram (ECG) signal must be in the room ifloss
ofsinus rhythm requires immediate cardioversion.
Placement ofthe pulmonary artery catheter bef ore
induction allows optimization ofpreload and af ter-
load before induction of anesthesia. Placement after
induction is not associated with poor outcome and
may be better tolerated by the compromised patient.
The presence ofcompensatory LV concentric
hypertrophy will cause LV compliance to be con-
siderably less than RV compliance. This will cause
the right atrial pressure to underestimate the PCWP
and LVEDP. Therefore, the peak A-wave pressure
ofthe PCWP trace is used. The LVEDP measured at
the time ofcardiac catheterization is a usef ul guide
as to the PCWP that will be necessary to obtain
the end-diastolic volume that will optimize SV. In
general, for patients with signiﬁcant AS, a PCWP
A-wave pressure of15–25 mmHg is appropriate. In
the absence ofRV f ailure, the mean right atrial
pressure will be 5–8 mmHg. Ifnecessary, volume
infusion before induction can optimize LVEDV.
Induction and maintenance
There is no one anesthetic technique superior to
another. Induction agents must be chosen based
upon the ability to achieve the anesthetic goals out-
lined above. Etomidate, barbiturates, or high dose
narcotics are appropriate. Propofol may cause a
severe reduction in blood pressure and should be
used with great caution in patients with AS. A high
dose narcotic induction is indicated in some criti-
cally ill patients. Generally, a balanced technique of
narcotics and inhalational agents for maintenance
ofanesthesia is appropriate. Fentanyl (10–25µg/kg)
or sufentanil (2–5 µg/kg) can be used as the pri-
mary anesthetic for maintenance before CPB. These
agents have no effect on myocardial contractility
and cause a reduction in peripheral vascular resis-
tance only through a diminution in central sympa-
thetic tone. Compared with fentanyl, sufentanil is
more likely to cause a fall in mean arterial pressure
secondary to a reduced peripheral vascular resis-
tance in patients with valvular heart disease. OnAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch05” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 141 — #13
Anesthesia for Valvular Heart Disease 141
the other hand, patients with valvular heart dis-
ease receiving sufentanil are less likely to require
supplemental anesthesia or vasodilator therapy for
skin incision, sternotomy, sternal spread, or aortic
manipulation.
After preoxygenation, with the patient breathing
100% oxygen, induction begins with a deliberate
infusion of a hypnotic, midazolam, and fentanyl or
sufentanil. Compared with patients with coronary
artery disease, patients with valvular heart dis-
ease have a lower narcotic requirement to achieve
unconsciousness. This is probably due to a lower CO
with a relative greater distribution ofoutput to the
brain and spinal cord. After loss of consciousness,
the hemodynamic response to insertion ofan oral
airway followed by insertion of a urinary catheter
can gauge the need for additional narcotic to blunt
the hemodynamic response to tracheal intubation.
Laryngoscopy is performed carefully and should not
be prolonged. Ifan upward trend in heart rate
or blood pressure occurs, laryngoscopy should be
terminated and additional narcotic administered.
Ifthere is poor visualization ofthe larynx, laryn-
goscopy should be terminated and intubating con-
ditions improved by changing head position, using
a stylet, or changing blades. This approach will help
prevent long stimulating laryngoscopies that com-
promise hemodynamics. A TEE probe can be placed
after tracheal intubation.
To optimize heart rate, the choice ofmuscle
relaxant is critical. For patients who are poorly
beta-blocked and for those not taking beta-blockers,
fentanyl or sufentanil in combination with vecuro-
nium is a good choice. Vecuronium 0.02 mg/kg
or cisatracurium 0.04 mg/kg can be administered
approximately 1–2 minutes before starting the nar-
cotic infusion. As the patient loses conscious-
ness, the remainder ofthe total dose of0.1 mg/kg
ofvecuronium or 0.2 mg/kg ofcisatracurium
is administered, and controlled ventilation with
100% oxygen initiated. For patients who are well
beta-blocked, fentanyl or sufentanil in combina-
tion with pancuronium works well. Sufentanil in
combination with vecuronium or cisatracurium in
a well beta-blocked patient may result in signif-
icant bradycardia. Pancuronium 0.02 mg/kg can
be administered approximately 1–2 minutes before
starting the narcotic infusion. As the patient loses
consciousness, the remainder ofthe 0.1 mg/kg dose
is administered and controlled ventilation is initi-
ated. Using this “priming dose” ofneuromuscular
blockade minimizes the risk ofnarcotic-induced
rigidity without undue stress to the patient.
Bradycardia with hemodynamic compromise
requires immediate treatment. A small dose ofpan-
curonium (1–3 mg) can be effective if vecuronium
was the neuromuscular blocking agent. Atropine
is not a good choice for two reasons: its effect
on heart rate, even in small doses (0.2 mg), is
unpredictable; and tachycardia may be initiated by
larger doses. Atropine, unlikeβ1-adrenergic agents,
increases heart rate without any reduction in the
duration ofsystole. Thus, f or equal increases in
heart rate, atropine will cause a greater reduction
in the duration ofdiastole and will compromise
subendocardial perfusion to a greater degree than
a β1-adrenergic agent. Ephedrine (a direct- and
indirect-acting β- and α-agonist) is a reliable agent
to increase heart rate without compromising dias-
tole. In addition, the augmentation in diastolic blood
pressure obtained is beneﬁcial when hypotension
accompanies bradycardia.
Tachycardia requires aggressive treatment to
avoid subendocardial ischemia and hemodynamic
compromise. The ﬁrst strategy should be to termi-
nate any noxious stimuli and increase the depth
ofanesthesia ifappropriate. Esmolol is an excel-
lent agent to acutely reduce heart rate in a patient
with AS. Esmolol is a β1 selective agent with an
elimination half-life of 9 minutes. This short half-
life renders esmolol quite useful for patients with
poor ventricular function or bronchospastic disease
because, ifit is not tolerated, therapy is terminated
quickly. Furthermore, unlike longer acting beta-
blockers, esmolol can be used aggressively in the
pre-CPB period without fear that it will compromise
termination ofCPB.
Ifhypotension due to reduced peripheral vascu-
lar resistance occurs during induction, small doses
ofphenylephrine (40–120 µg) and volume infusion
to increase preload to preinduction levels usually
will correct the problem. TEE is very useful at this
point. IfTEE reveals a dilated, hypokinetic LV or if
the patient fails to respond with a prompt increaseAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch05” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 142 — #14
142 Chapter 5
in aortic blood pressure, an inotropic agent may be
indicated. Dobutamine 5–10µg/kg/min is a reason-
able choice because it is unlikely to cause tachy-
cardia. IV nitroglycerin should be started to treat
the elevated PCWP that inevitably accompanies this
downward spiral. The infusion can be started at
0.15–0.30 µg/kg/min and titrated as necessary.
Ifsurgical stimulation (skin incision, sternotomy,
sternal spreading, or aortic manipulation) pro-
duces hypertension, additional doses ofsuf entanil
(1–3 µg/kg) or fentanyl (5–15µg/kg) may be neces-
sary. Ifthis f ails to control the hypertension, the use
ofadditional agents will be necessary. Vasodilation
with increasing inhalational agents may resolve the
issue. Alternatively, sodium nitroprusside can be
titrated easily and terminated quickly. This makes
it an ideal choice for treatment of transient ele-
vations in peripheral vascular resistance. Although
relatively large doses ofnitroglycerin may be needed
to control systemic hypertension, nitroglycerin is a
better choice than nitroprusside for cases in which
myocardial ischemia exists.
Benzodiazepines are an essential component
ofthe anesthetic, and midazolam is the most
commonly used. Doses range from 5 to 15 mg.
Administration in conjunction with fentanyl or
sufentanil may cause decreases in peripheral vascu-
lar resistance with subsequent hypotension. There-
fore, caution is necessary. Midazolam in increments
of1–2 mg or lorazepam in increments of0.5–1.0 mg
are reasonable.
In recent years, there has been movement away
from a pure high-dose narcotic anesthetic. Inhala-
tional anesthetics are now common in all types of
cardiac surgery. Nitrous oxide (N2O) in association
with high-dose opiates causes systolic dysfunction
in patients with coronary artery disease, particularly
those with an LVEDP > 5 mmHg. N2O combined
with high-dose opiates elevates pulmonary vascular
resistance (PVR), particularly in the presence ofpre-
existing pulmonary hypertension. Because ofthe
potential for altered myocardial oxygen balance in
all patients with AS, and the presence ofan elevated
PVR in some patients, N2O must be used with cau-
tion, ifat all. Isoﬂurane is a potent vasodilator that
causes little depression ofsystolic f unction. Sevoﬂu-
rane and desﬂurane have similar effects. However,
care must be taken to avoid decreases in peripheral
vascular resistance and hypotension when they are
used in patients with AS. Controversy exists regard-
ing whether isoﬂurane in the presence ofcoronary
stenosis is responsible for producing a coronary steal
phenomena leading to ischemia. There may be ben-
eﬁcial effects of inhalational anesthetics as pharma-
cologic preconditioning agents. There is a growing
body ofevidence demonstrating that inhalational
agents reduce the markers ofmyocardial injury af ter
an ischemic-reperfusion injury.
Post-CPB management
After aortic valve replacement, the obstruction to
forward ﬂow is eliminated. With allograft replace-
ment, the valve gradients are usually normal, and
with mechanical valves there is a small peak gra-
dient of10–20 mmHg. The reduced transvalvular
gradient allows the hypertrophied LV to signiﬁ-
cantly decrease left ventricular end systolic vol-
ume (LVESV); thus, augmenting SV and EF (see
Fig. 5.6). In addition, the ventricle can now respond
to further reductions in afterload with an increase
in SV.
As with any procedure requiring cardiople-
gia, the LV systolic function may be compro-
mised by inadequate myocardial protection during
CPB. It may, therefore, be necessary to rely
on inotropic agents for augmentation of sys-
tolic function despite the dramatic reduction in
afterload. This is particularly true if there is
coexisting coronary artery disease. Epinephrine
0.015–0.030 µg/kg/min, dopamine 1–5 µg/kg/min,
or dobutamine 5–10 µg/kg/min are reasonable
choices, providing inotropic support with little
concomitant vasoconstriction and afterload increase.
Because there is no signiﬁcant regression ofcon-
centric hypertrophy for 6–12 months after aortic
valve replacement, the compliance characteristics of
the LV will be unchanged in the post-CPB period.
In fact, poor subendocardial myocardial protection
during aortic cross-clamping may result in ischemic
diastolic dysfunction. Sinus rhythm enhances ﬁll-
ing. The peak A-wave pressure must be high enough
to ensure adequate LVEDV. In general, because
LVESV will be lower because ofthe reduction
in impedance to ventricular ejection, LVEDV, andAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch05” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 143 — #15
Anesthesia for Valvular Heart Disease 143
therefore the A-wave pressure, need not be as
high in the post-bypass period. A-wave pressures
of10–20 mmHg are usually adequate. Subendocar-
dial perfusion will remain compromised in diastole
and, therefore, aortic diastolic blood pressure must
remain high enough to ensure perfusion.
Tachycardia remains detrimental because ofits
effects on subendocardial perfusion. Slower heart
rates are now better tolerated because ofthe dra-
matic reduction in the transvalvular gradient with
surgery.
Because the surgical procedure requires an aorto-
tomy with subsequent repair, it is helpful to avoid
hypertension, which places undue stress on the
aortic suture line. The atrioventricular (AV) node
lies proximal to the aortic valve annulus and may
be transiently or permanently damaged after valve
replacement. Ventricular pacing may be necessary.
Aorticregurgitation
Aortic regurgitation (AR) may result from dam-
age to the aortic valve leaﬂets or from dilatation of
the aortic root. Damage to the aortic valve leaﬂets
results in a mechanical valve defect, whereas aor-
tic root dilatation results in functional aortic valve
impairment. AR may be acute or chronic in nature.
Infective endocarditis with destruction of the valve
leaﬂets is a cause ofacute AR. There may be actual
destruction ofthe valve leaﬂet by the inf ective pro-
cess. Alternatively, the infective process may cause
perf oration ofa leaﬂet or the presence ofvegetations
may prevent proper apposition ofthe leaﬂets.
Trauma with cusp rupture or laceration may
result in acute AR. Aortic dissection may cause
AR through a variety ofmechanisms. Dilation of
the proximal aortic root and valve annulus results
in poor apposition ofthe leaﬂets and f unctional
valvular incompetence. Dissection with intramural
hematoma formation may distort the valve. Dissec-
tion can result in mechanical incompetence when
the valvular annulus is involved.
Connective tissue diseases such as Marfan syn-
drome, Ellers–Danlos syndrome, and pseudoxan-
thoma elasticum produce chronic AR. Progressive
aortic root dilation with subsequent dilation ofthe
valve annulus results in functional AR. As time
passes, the poorly apposed valve leaﬂets begin to
bow, thicken, and shorten; resulting in worsening
regurgitation. These patients may also suffer from
mitral valve incompetence. A congenital bicuspid
aortic valve is present in approximately 0.5% ofthe
population. This condition is associated with AR.
Bicuspid aortic valves with a genetic mutation in
the ﬁbrillin gene are seen in Marfan syndrome.
Inﬂammatory diseases ofthe aorta, such as
syphilis, rheumatoid disease, ankylosing spondyli-
tis, and Takayasu’s aortitis, may produce chronic
AR. These diseases cause distortion ofthe aortic
root as well as destruction ofvalve cusps and annu-
lar support structures. MR is common in these
conditions.
Aortic valve leaﬂet damage due to rheumatic
fever is a common cause of chronic mechanical
AR. However, isolated AR-secondary to rheumatic
fever is rare. In rheumatic fever, there is inﬁltra-
tion ofﬁbrous tissue in the valve cusps causing
retraction. This results in poor valve apposition in
diastole with subsequent regurgitation. At the same
time, commissure fusion results in AS. Mitral valve
involvement is common in rheumatic heart disease.
PathophysiologyandadaptationinAR
AR is a volume overload lesion that may be acute
or chronic in nature. The extent ofregurgitation
depends on the diastolic pressure gradient between
the aorta and the left ventricle, the time available
for regurgitation (diastole), and the effective regur-
gitant oriﬁce area. The pressure gradient is deter-
mined by the aortic diastolic pressure, ventricular
early diastolic pressure, and ventricular compliance.
Regurgitation ceases when the ventricular diastolic
and aortic diastolic pressures equalize. The dura-
tion ofdiastole is inversely related to heart rate as
demonstrated in Fig. 5.8.
Chronic volume overloading ofthe lef t ventri-
cle results in eccentric ventricular hypertrophy or
increased ventricular radius. The details ofthis pro-
cess are summarized in Fig. 5.10a. Whereas both
LVESV and LVEDV increase, LVEDV increases to a
greater extent. This results in an enhanced SV with
no need for an increased EF. The slope of the dias-
tolic pressure–volume curve is little changed and
compliance is only slightly increased. The entire
pressure–volume loop is shifted to the right. ThisAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch05” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 144 — #16
144 Chapter 5
Wall stress
(a)
Volume
EFx 60%
EFx 55%
Normal
Eccentr
ic hyper
trophy
(b)
Wall stress
Volume
Pre-op.
EFx 45%Post-op.
Compensated
Mild dysfunctionMild dysfunction
Post opPost op
EFEFx 55% 55%
Post-op.
EFx 55%
Mild dysfunction
Fig.5.10 Left ventricular wall stress–volume loops for
patient with progressive aortic stenosis. (a) Wall
stress–volume loops ofnormal ventricle and ofventricle
having developed eccentric hypertrophy in response to
chronic volume overload ofaortic regurgitation (AR) are
shown. The ventricle with eccentric hypertrophy has a
reduced isovolumic contraction phase and has its entire
wall stress–volume relationship shifted to the right. These
adaptations allow the ventricle to deliver large stroke
volume with nearly normal ejection fraction (EF) despite
elevation ofend-systolic wall stress. (b) Wall
stress–volume relationships in a ventricle with chronic
aortic regurgitation and mild systolic dysfunction.
Progressive systolic dysfunction leads to exhaustion of
preload reserve and elevation ofwall stress due to large
ventricular radius. This, in turn, results in reduced stroke
volume (SV) and EF (EF = 45%). After surgical
replacement ofaortic valve, ventricular radius and wall
stress are reduced and near-normal SV and EF exist
despite the presence ofsystolic dysf unction (EF= 55%).
(From Hurst JW. The Heart, 5th edn. New York:
McGraw–Hill, 1985:818, with permission.)
rightward shift of the diastolic pressure–volume
curve allows low diastolic pressures at very large
end-diastolic volumes. The large increase in ventric-
ular radius that accompanies eccentric hypertrophy
elevates wall stress and stimulates some degree of
concentric hypertrophy. This compensation is not
complete and wall stress remains elevated both in
end systole and end diastole (see Fig. 5.10a).
Unique LV pressure loading exists in AR, as illus-
trated in Fig. 5.10a. The isovolumic phase ofven-
tricular systole is ofvery short duration and limited
pressure generation. This allows a greater portion
ofmyocardial energy expenditure directed toward
ejecting a large volume and less toward overcoming
impedance to begin ejection.
In acute AR, there is not ample time for com-
pensatory eccentric hypertrophy to occur. With-
out increased diastolic compliance and the right
shift of the pressure–volume loop, the regurgitated
volume results in a very high LVEDP. Because
LVEDP rises rapidly to equal aortic end-diastolic
pressure, the gradient for regurgitation is abolished
quickly. As a result, the aortic end-diastolic pressure
generally is higher and the regurgitant volume
generally is smaller in acute versus chronic AR.
Ventricular dilation from acute AR may result in
functional MR. For other patients, the rapid rise
in diastolic pressure may result in early diastolic
equalization oflef t atrial and LV pressures such that
premature mitral valve closure occurs. In this set-
ting, the PCWP or LAP will greatly underestimate
the LVEDP.
In chronic AR, the increased compliance and
the rightward shift of the diastolic pressure–volume
curve allows passive ﬁlling ofthe lef t ventricle
in early and mid-diastole. Therefore, LVEDV is
maintained even without an atrial kick, except
in end-stage AR, in which preload reserve is
exhausted and the ventricle operates on the steep
portion ofits diastolic pressure volume curve
(Fig. 5.10b).
In acute AR, increased ventricular compliance
and a rightward shift of the diastolic pressure–
volume curve are absent. In this setting, an atrial
systole may be necessary to increase the left atrial
to LV pressure gradient enough to allow ﬁlling of
the left ventricle. If premature mitral valve closureAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch05” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 145 — #17
Anesthesia for Valvular Heart Disease 145
occurs due to rapid rise ofLVDP, diastolic ﬁlling
from the left atrium (LA) will be reduced.
Eccentric hypertrophy and the altered pressure–
volume relationship allow large increases in LVEDV
with minimal increases in LVEDP in patients with
chronic AR. This affords a great deal of preload
reserve. Stroke volume can be increased by preload
augmentation without pulmonary congestion. In
contrast, in acute AR preload reserve is nearly
exhausted. Without adequate time for adaptation,
the left ventricle operates on the steep portion of its
diastolic pressure–volume curve.
The alterations in myocardial oxygen consump-
tion in AR are shown in Table 5.3. Patients with
chronic AR may remain symptom-free for many
years despite progressive decreases in systolic func-
tion. The enormous preload reserve available to
these patients allows preservation ofSV by pro-
gressive increases in LVEDV in the face of declin-
ing contractile function. When preload reserve is
exhausted, SV falls. At this point, systolic func-
tion is compromised and symptoms ofreduced CO
manifest (see Fig. 5.10b).
As contractility decreases, LVEDV increases: SV is
maintained, but EF falls. EF will remain in the low
normal range until signiﬁcant systolic dysfunction
occurs. In fact, valve replacement is recommended
for patients with AR without symptoms when
ventricular dilation and a depressed EF are present.
As with AS, RV function is not directly affected
by AR until pulmonary arterial hypertension devel-
ops. In chronic AR, ventricular dilation may lead to
functional MR. This, in turn, may lead to a gradual
elevation in left atrial and pulmonary artery pres-
sures. Ifthis situation persists, pulmonary arterial
hypertension will soon develop. RV failure devel-
ops ifthe pulmonary arterial hypertension becomes
severe.
In acute AR, functional MR from ventricular dila-
tion is tolerated poorly. Acute ventricular dilation
and functional MR leads to an immediate and pro-
found elevation in LAP. Pulmonary vascular con-
gestion with interstitial pulmonary edema rather
than secondary pulmonary artery hypertension and
RV failure ensues.
The relationship between heart rate and CO in
AR is complex. Recall that the regurgitant volume
is in large part determined by the length ofdias-
tole. Figure 5.8 illustrates the inverse relationship
between heart rate and the length ofdiastole.
Bradycardia (heart rate < 60 b/min) is detrimen-
tal in AR for several reasons. It increases the
Table5.3 Myocardial oxygen consumption in aortic regurgitation.
Myocardial oxygen consumption is increased by:
• The large mass of myocardium
• The enormous volume of work done by the left ventricle. Volume work increases oxygen consumption, but to a much
lesser extent than pressure work. The isovolumic contraction phase is highly energy consumptive. Because of the low
aortic diastolic blood pressures present in AR, the isovolumic contraction phase is very brief and represents only a small
portion of the total work done by the ventricle (see Fig. 5.10a). A greater portion of the total workload is devoted to the
generation of volume ejection, which is an energy-efﬁcient process
• Despite the development of eccentric hypertrophy and some degree of concentric hypertrophy, wall stress remains
slightly elevated in both systole and diastole (see Fig. 5.10a). Recall that wall stress determines oxygen consumption in the
ejection phase of ventricular contraction
Myocardial oxygen delivery is compromised by:
• The low diastolic aortic pressure characteristic of AR reduces the gradient for coronary blood ﬂow (coronary perfusion
pressure = aortic diastolic blood pressure−LVEDP). This is particularly true in acute AR, in which precipitous increases in
LVEDP occur. Bradycardia can exacerbate the situation. Bradycardia increases the regurgitant volume and thus increases
LVEDP
• In acute AR due to aortic dissection, one or both of the coronary ostia may be involved in the dissection. This may
acutely and drastically reduce coronary blood ﬂow
AR, aortic regurgitation; LVEDP, left ventricular end-diastolic pressure.Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch05” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 146 — #18
146 Chapter 5
regurgitant volume per beat, which tends to lower
aortic diastolic blood pressure and increase LVEDP.
This decreases the gradient for subendocardial oxy-
gen delivery. Simultaneously, the large SV that
accompanies bradycardia increases wall tension and
oxygen consumption. Forward SV and CO fall
because the regurgitant volume represents a large
portion ofthe total SV (the regurgitant f raction is
high).
With tachycardia, the regurgitant volume per
beat falls, whereas the regurgitant volume per
minute may remain unchanged. The relationship
between regurgitant volume and total SV (the
regurgitant fraction) does not remain constant as
heart rate increases. Therefore, CO may decrease,
remain unchanged, or increase with a heart rate
increase. A change in rate of75–85 b/min increases
CO signiﬁcantly. Further increases in heart rate
from 85–110 b/min show a trend toward a slight
additional increase in CO. Little additional change,
or a slight decrease in CO, occurs when the heart
rate is in excess of110–120 b/min. Theref ore,
extremes of tachycardia offer no advantage over
more moderate rates of75–85 b/min in improving
CO. Furthermore, in patients with coronary dis-
ease, the elevated heart rates increase demand and
decrease oxygen supply.
Increased afterload is detrimental to patients with
both acute and chronic AR because it increases the
regurgitant volume per beat. Recall that one ofthe
determinants ofthe regurgitant volume is the gradi-
ent between the aorta and the left ventricle in early
diastole. It is important, then, to avoid agents and
to blunt stimuli that increase afterload.
Efforts to actively decrease afterload in patients
with AR are not uniformly helpful. In chronic AR,
vasodilators beneﬁt patients who have a depressed
EF, high LVEDP, decreased forward CO, and high
arterial pressure. Patients who do not meet these
criteria may actually experience diminished for-
ward CO with vasodilator therapy due to preload
reduction from venodilation. In acute AR, vasodila-
tor therapy is usually warranted. Recall that the
absence ofadequate ventricular compensation cre-
ates a very high LVEDP and that a low forward
CO exists despite preserved systolic function. After-
load reduction will reduce LVEDP and increase
forward CO. In addition, functional MR due to ven-
tricular dilation improves in these patients with a
reduction in ventricular size by vasodilators.
In properly selected patients, vasodilator ther-
apy enhances ventricular performance in two ways.
Reduced aortic impedance enhances systolic per-
formance and the regurgitant volume is reduced
by a reduction in the diastolic aortic to LV gradi-
ent. It is important to ensure that the reduction
in aortic diastolic blood pressure that accompanies
vasodilator therapy is not so severe as to jeopardize
subendocardial perfusion.
AnesthetictechniqueinAR
Goals
• Maintain sinus rhythm (although this is not as
important as in AS).
• Maintain heart rate at 75–85 b/min; faster better
than slower.
• Avoid afterload increases; pursue afterload reduc-
tion in acute AR and in chronic AR when LVEDP
and arterial blood pressure are elevated, and CO and
EF are depressed.
• Maintain a PCWP high enough to guarantee
adequate LVEDP.
• Maintain contractility.
Preinduction
The preinduction routine and monitoring is the
same as for AS.
In chronic AR, a large LVEDV is necessary to
ensure an adequate forward CO in the face of
regurgitation. Because ofthe increased ventricular
compliance and the right shift of the pressure–
volume relationship, the peak A-wave pressure will
differ little from mean PCWP. Likewise, LVEDV will
be supplemented with only small increases in the
mean PCWP. For patients with preserved LV func-
tion, a mean PCWP in the range of10–15 mmHg
will ensure optimal LVEDV. Serial COs obtained
in conjunction with volume infusion will pro-
vide a Frank–Starling relationship curve to identify
optimal preload.
For patients with depressed ventricular func-
tion who have exhausted preload reserve, optimal
preload will occur with a peak A-wave pressureAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch05” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 147 — #19
Anesthesia for Valvular Heart Disease 147
in the range of20–25 mmHg. For these patients,
afterload reduction is indicated. Sodium nitroprus-
side is the agent ofchoice. It is easy to titrate
owing to its very short half-life. Start the infu-
sion at 0.15–0.30 µg/kg/min and titrated to effect
with careful attention CO, arterial blood pressure,
and LVEDP. Although nitroprusside is primarily an
arterial vasodilator, it has some vasodilatory effects
on the venous system. It is important not to let
reductions in preload offset the beneﬁcial effects of
arterial dilation. Ifnecessary, volume inf usion can
maintain PCWP in the range of10–15 mmHg.
In acute AR in which premature closure ofthe
mitral valve occurs, mean PCWP will underestimate
LVEDP. When mitral incompetence from ventricu-
lar dilation occurs, mean PCWP will overestimate
LVEDP in direct proportion to the amplitude and
duration ofthe regurgitant V wave. These patients
are very ill and may require pharmacologic sta-
bilization before induction. Due to the lack of
compensatory alterations in the pressure–volume
relationship, these patients may have a PCWP in the
range of20–25 mmHg to maintain a low normal car-
diac index. Afterload reduction with nitroprusside is
indicated. Inotropic support should be added ifthe
cardiac index remains depressed ( <2.2 L/min/m2)
or functional MR persists due to a dilated ventricle.
Either dopamine (1–5 µg/kg/min) or dobutamine
(5–10 µg/kg/min) can be used; neither will cause
an elevation ofaf terload.
Use ofan intra-aortic balloon pump is contraindi-
cated in AR because balloon inﬂation and augmen-
tation ofdiastolic blood pressure will worsen the
regurgitation.
Induction and maintenance
Induction ofanesthesia can be accomplished with a
number ofagents as long as the primary hemody-
namic goals are obtained. In stable patients, sodium
thiopental or etomidate are appropriate. Alterna-
tively, a high dose narcotic and benzodiazepine
induction is safe. In the critically ill patient with
acute AR, great caution is advised. Many ofthese
patients require inotropic and vasodilatory support
prior to induction ofanesthesia. The addition of
the anesthetic agents may reduce systemic blood
pressure and inotropy to a critically dangerous level.
Muscle relaxants are chosen with optimization of
heart rate in mind. In the absence ofbeta block-
ade, the vecuronium–fentanyl or vecuronium–
sufentanil combination is a good choice if a small
heart rate decrease is desired. The pancuronium–
fentanyl or pancuronium–sufentanil combination is
more likely to cause a heart rate increase, which is
advantageous for those patients with bradycardia.
Bradycardia with hemodynamic compromise
must be treated promptly. A small dose ofpancuro-
nium (1–3 mg) is often effective if vecuronium or
cisatracurium has been used. Atropine 0.4–0.8 mg
is a reasonable choice despite the risk oftachy-
cardia because tachycardia is well tolerated by
these patients. Ephedrine is a poor choice because
the concomitant increase in afterload may be
detrimental.
Hypotension must not be treated routinely with
vasopressors because these arterial vasoconstrict-
ing agents may increase the regurgitant volume
worsening the situation. Ifheart rate and preload
are optimized, then augmentation ofSV with
an inotropic agent should be initiated. Dopamine
1–5 µg/kg/min or dobutamine 5–10µg/kg/min will
both augment CO without increasing afterload.
When AR occurs in conjunction with an aortic dis-
section, inotropic agents may worsen the dissection
by increasing shear forces on the aortic wall.
In emergency patients deemed at high-risk for
aspiration, the induction sequence can be safely
modiﬁed. Preoxygenation and cricoid pressure
are indicated. Induction agents include etomidate
0.15–0.30 mg/kg, succinylcholine 1.0–1.5 mg/kg,
in conjunction with fentanyl 10 µg/kg or sufen-
tanil 1 µg/kg. Alternatively, sufentanil 5 µg/kg and
succinylcholine 1.0–1.5 mg/kg can be used safely.
Post-CPB management
After aortic valve replacement for chronic AR,
the impedance to ventricular ejection increases.
The ventricle that has undergone compensation
for a volume overload lesion is now faced with
a relative pressure overload. The competent aor-
tic valve causes an elevation ofventricular pres-
sure during the isovolumic contraction phase (see
Fig. 5.10b). The elimination ofregurgitation via
the competent valve greatly reduces the need forAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch05” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 148 — #20
148 Chapter 5
a large total SV. Therefore, a greater proportion of
total myocardial oxygen consumption goes toward
the more energy-consumptive process ofpressure
generation to begin ejection and less toward vol-
ume ejection. Although there is an increase in LV
pressure generation, wall stress does not increase
substantially because ventricular radius is greatly
reduced by elimination ofthe regurgitant vol-
ume. Nonetheless, ifpoor myocardial protection is
obtained during bypass and aortic cross-clamping,
or ifdepressed systolic f unction exists preopera-
tively, inotropic support ofsystolic f unction may
be necessary in the post-bypass period. Epinephrine
0.015–0.030 µg/kg/min, dopamine 1–5 µg/kg/min,
or dobutamine 5–10 µg/kg/min are good choices
because they provide inotropic support with little
vasoconstrictor activity at these doses.
After valve replacement in acute AR, the elimi-
nation ofthe regurgitant f raction allows the ven-
tricle to maintain CO with a much lower LVEDV;
therefore, LVEDP drops precipitously. Wall stress
falls. Inotropic support may be necessary when pre-
operative systolic and diastolic dysfunction exists
due to subendocardial ischemia or where myocar-
dial preservation on bypass is poor. Epinephrine,
dopamine, or dobutamine are good choices.
All LV diastolic ﬁlling occurs via the mitral valve
when regurgitation is abolished. Therefore, atrial
systole becomes more important in ensuring ade-
quate LVEDV. Maintenance ofsinus rhythm or AV
sequential pacing becomes necessary. Bradycardia
will be better tolerated in the post-bypass period.
In chronic AR, there are no signiﬁcant alterations
in the pressure–volume relationship and eccentric
hypertrophy for 6–12 months after valve replace-
ment (see Fig. 5.10b). Therefore, LVEDP will remain
low, even for large LVEDV. This low LVEDP in com-
bination with the elevation in aortic diastolic blood
pressure will greatly improve myocardial oxygen
delivery. The temptation when CO is low will be
to use the large preload reserve available in these
patients. Because ventricular pressure is elevated
during the prolonged isovolumic contraction phase,
wall stress for a given LVEDV will be greater in the
post-bypass period. Efforts to increase preload to
contend with poor systolic function or high after-
load states will result in afterload mismatch and
declining systolic function. A mean PCWP or LAP of
10–15 mmHg usually is adequate. A better approach
would be inotropic support with epinephrine or
afterload reduction with sodium nitroprusside as
described previously.
In acute AR, there is little or no alteration
in the pressure–volume relationship or eccentric
hypertrophy and postoperative preload reserve will
resemble that ofa normal ventricle.
Because the surgical procedure requires an aorto-
tomy with subsequent repair, it is helpful to avoid
hypertension, which places undue stress on the
aortic suture line. The AV node lies proximal to
the aortic valve annulus and may be transiently
or permanently damaged after valve replacement.
Ventricular pacing may be necessary.
Themitralvalve
Anatomy
The mitral valve acquired its name in the sixteenth
century because ofits resemblance to a bishop’s
mitre. In a normal heart, the mitral valve separates
the left ventricle from the LA, pulmonary circula-
tion, and entire right side ofthe heart. The valve
is bicuspid with an anterior and posterior leaﬂet.
The anterior leaﬂet is the larger ofthe two leaﬂets,
accounting for two-thirds of the surface area of the
valve. The anterior leaﬂet base-to-coaptation dis-
tance is longer than that ofthe posterior leaﬂet. The
posterior leaﬂet wraps around the anterior leaﬂet,
accounting for only one-third of the valve’s surface
area and two-thirds ofthe annular circumf erence.
The mitral annulus is a ﬁbrous ring surrounding
the mitral valve. The anterior leaﬂet portion ofthe
annulus is part ofthe heart’s ﬁbrous skeleton. This
skeleton also has a common attachment to the left
coronary and noncoronary cusps ofthe aortic valve.
The coaptation points ofthe anterior and posterior
leaﬂets at the annulus are called the anterolateral
and posteromedial commissures. The leaﬂets them-
selves are attached to the anterolateral and postero-
medial papillary muscles via the chordae tendineae.
During ventricular systole, the contraction ofthe
papillary muscles prevent mitral leaﬂet prolapse.
The American Society ofEchocardiography and the
Society ofCardiovascular Anesthesiologists haveAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch05” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 149 — #21
Anesthesia for Valvular Heart Disease 149
adopted the Carpentier classiﬁcation ofthe mitral
valve. This classiﬁcation divides the three scallops
ofthe posterior leaﬂet into P1, P2, and P3. The
anterior leaﬂet is similarly divided into the three
segments A1, A2, and A3, which oppose the corre-
sponding scallops ofthe posterior valve. The coapta-
tion ofA1/P1 at the annulus f orm the anterolateral
commissure. The coaptation ofA3/P3 at the annulus
form the posteromedial commissure.
Mitralstenosis
Mitral stenosis (MS) is almost always rheumatic
in origin. Rheumatic fever results in fusion of
the mitral valve apparatus in various locations.
The site ofvalve apparatus involvement deter-
mines whether the valve will be primarily stenotic
or incompetent in nature. Fusion ofthe cusps
and commissures results in a stenotic valve oriﬁce
(Fig. 5.11a,b). The valve leaﬂets may become so
rigid that they are incapable ofclosing, in which
case MS and incompetence coexist.
PathophysiologyandadaptationinMS
The left ventricle in MS is typically under ﬁlled. The
natural history ofthe disease is a gradual reduction
in the mitral valve area from a normal of 4–6 cm2
to <1c m2 over 3–4 decades. The length ofdiastole,
the pressure gradient between the LA and the left
ventricle and the mitral valve area, determine LV
ﬁlling. As the mitral valve oriﬁce decreases in size,
there is a gradual increase in impedance to LV ﬁlling,
and a pressure gradient develops across the valve
such that LAP exceeds LV diastolic pressure.
Early in the disease process, complete LV ﬁlling
occurs without an elevation ofmean LAP ifdias-
tole is long enough and ifan atrial systole exists. As
the valve area decreases and the transvalvular gradi-
ent rises, a long diastole and an elevated mean LAP
are necessary to ensure ventricular ﬁlling. Eventu-
ally, the valve oriﬁce narrows to the point at which
these compensatory mechanisms fail. The pressure–
volume loop for MS is illustrated in Fig. 5.12.
Because MS presents a ﬁxed resistance to ven-
tricular inﬂow and because the atrial systole is of
short duration, a large portion ofthe kinetic energy
produced by atrial systole is dissipated in overcom-
ing resistance to inﬂow. The role ofatrial systole in
(a)
(b)
Fig.5.11 (a) This is a patient with rheumatic mitral
valve disease. There is commissural fusion with a classic
“hockey stick” deformity of the anterior mitral valve
leaﬂet (arrow) seen in diastole. (b) In systole this same
patient now exhibits signiﬁcant mitral regurgitation. The
left atrium is severely dilated. Mixed lesions, mitral
stenosis with regurgitation, are common in patients
with rheumatic valvular disease.
augmenting LVEDV in MS is less dramatic than in
AS but important nonetheless. At heart rates of
80–110 b/min, the loss ofatrial systole results in a
20% decrease in diastolic ﬂow per beat and CO in
patients with moderate and severe MS. However, in
moderate and severe MS, the presence ofan atrial
systole alone will not maximize LV ﬁlling, and an
elevation ofmean LAP is necessary.
The high LAP that develops as a result ofthe
stenotic mitral valve oriﬁce results in left atrial
hypertrophy and left atrial distention. This dis-
tension results in the development ofatrial dys-
rhythmias, the most common ofwhich is atrial
ﬁbrillation. In severe MS, atrial ﬁbrillation gener-
ally is the rule. When atrial systole is lost, diastolic
ﬂow is dependant on mean LAP. The higher theAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch05” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 150 — #22
150 Chapter 5
Wall stress
Normal
Mitral stenosis
Volume
Fig.5.12 Pressure–volume loop from a patient with
mitral stenosis. The left-ventricular end-diastolic volume
(LVEDV) is severely limited compared to a normal
patient. This preload reduction results in reduced stroke
volume and cardiac output. (From DiNardo JA.
Anesthesia for valve replacement in patients with
acquired valvular heart disease. In: DiNardo JA (ed).
Anesthesia for Cardiac Surgery, 2nd edn. Stamford, CT:
Appleton & Lange, 1998:109–40, with permission.)
mean LAP, the more complete the LV ﬁlling. Mean
LAP is limited by the development ofpulmonary
congestion, and pressures>25 mmHg are rarely tol-
erated without symptoms. For a given valve area
and LAP, ventricular inﬂow is determined by the
length ofdiastole.
Ventricular diastolic function and compliance
remain unchanged in MS. Despite this, preload
reserve is severely limited in this lesion. Maxi-
mal LVEDV in moderate and severe MS is well
below that seen in patients with normal mitral
valves. Mean LAP must be elevated (often to the
point ofpulmonary congestion) to obtain an LVEDV
large enough to meet baseline CO demands. Fur-
ther increases in mean LAP only slightly augment
LVEDV due to the large pressure gradient across the
valve. In addition, this further elevation of mean
LAP leads to progressive pulmonary congestion and
pulmonary edema.
There are no special considerations regarding
myocardial oxygen balance in patients with MS. It
is important, however, to keep in mind the relation-
ship between the length ofdiastole, aortic diastolic
pressure, and LVEDP on subendocardial perfusion.
It is also important to determine the extent ofcoro-
nary artery disease in patients with MS and angina
pectoris.
Myocardial ﬁbrosis in the posterobasal region
ofthe LV may result in segmental wall motion
abnormalities and reduced systolic performance in
patients with rheumatic MS. Patients with MS
have normal indices ofLV contractility, but have
a reduced EF due to limited preload.
The prolonged elevations ofLAP seen in progres-
sive MS have profound effects on the pulmonary
vasculature and RV function. Early in the dis-
ease, elevated LAP is transmitted to the pulmonary
venous system, and there is reversible passive ele-
vation ofthe pulmonary artery pressures while PVR
remains normal (Fig. 5.13). RV function remains
unchanged.
As the disease progresses, reactive changes occur
in the pulmonary vasculature. Prolonged perivas-
cular edema results in arterial intimal ﬁbroelastosis
and nonreversible elevations in PVR. Progression of
this process presents a large increase in RV after-
load or a “second stenosis” (see Fig. 5.13). The RV is
poorly adapted to generate pressures that approach
systemic. As a result, afterload mismatch occurs,
the RV invariably fails, and the RV output falls.
Peripheral edema and hepatic congestion ensue. RV
failure and dilation also may lead to functional tri-
cuspid regurgitation and worsening symptoms of
right heart failure. In the steady-state, RV output
and LV output must be equal. Therefore, LV out-
put is limited by RV failure. Efforts to reduce RV
afterload and improve RV output with nitroprusside
signiﬁcantly improve systemic output in patients
with elevated PVR.
Figure 5.8 illustrates the reduction in diastolic ﬁll-
ing time that accompanies an increase in heart rate.
IfCO is to remain constant as heart rate increases,
then the ﬂow rate across the mitral valve in dias-
tole must increase. Recall that as ﬂow rate increases
across the stenotic valve, the gradient across the
valve will increase by the square ofthe ﬂow. Thus,
the requirement for increased ﬂow can result in
prohibitive increases in mean LAP.
Figure 5.14(a–c) illustrates the effect of heart rate
changes in MS. Higher heart rates can potentially
improve CO when SV is small. However, in MS,
the transvalvular gradient increases so dramatically
with tachycardia that prohibits increases in mean
LAP ensue. At slower rates, more diastolic ﬁllingAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch05” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 151 — #23
Anesthesia for Valvular Heart Disease 151
Normal
SVC
IVC
5 5 20/5 20/8 (12)
Without pulmonary
vascular disease
With pulmonary
vascular disease
RA RV PA PV LA LV Ao
MVA – 4.0 cm2
MVA – 0.5cm2
MVA – 1.0 cm2
PC
66 6
5 5 45/5 45/25 (32) 25 25 25 120/5
20 20 130/20 130/80 (100) 30 30 30 110/5
120/6 120/80
Flow
6L/min
Flow
5L/min
Flow
3 L/min
Tight
mitral stenosis
Tight
mitral stenosis
Fig.5.13 Illustration ofchanges seen with progression
ofmitral stenosis (MS). Pressure in each ofcardiac
chambers and great vessels is indicated.
In MS without pulmonary vascular disease, there is
reversible passive elevation ofpulmonary vein (PV),
pulmonary capillary (PC), and pulmonary artery (PA)
pressures while pulmonary vascular resistance remains
normal. These elevations are secondary to elevation of
left atrium (LA) pressure, which is necessary to maintain
left ventricle (LV) ﬁlling across stenotic mitral valve.
Right ventricle (RV) pressure is elevated in response to
elevated PA pressure, and RV concentric hypertrophy
may result. RV systolic dysfunction usually is not present.
In MS with pulmonary vascular disease, PA pressure is
elevated far in excess of LA, PC, and PV pressures
because ofthe presence ofpulmonary arterial occlusive
disease with elevated pulmonary vascular resistance. This
results in a second stenosis at the level ofthe PA.
This second stenosis causes dramatic elevations in RV
pressure. This RV pressure elevation may result in
reduced RV stroke volume due to afterload mismatch
and to tricuspid regurgitation due to RV dilation.
Reduction in RV stroke volume results directly in a
decrease in systemic cardiac output. Similar changes
would be expected over time in patients with sustained
elevations in LA pressure due to mitral regurgitation.
Ao, aorta; IVC, inferior vena cava; LA, left atrium; LV,
left ventricle; MVA, mitral valve area; PA, pulmonary
artery; PC, pulmonary capillary; PV, pulmonary vein;
RA, right atrium; RV, right ventricle; SVC, superior vena
cava. (From Grossman W. Proﬁle ofheart disease. In:
Baim DS, Grossman W (eds). Cardiac Catheterization,
Angiography and Intervention, 5th edn. Baltimore:
Williams & Wilkins, 1996:735–56, with permission.)
time is available to augment LVEDV, but CO is
compromised by bradycardia unless LVEDV is large.
Large LVEDVs require a further increase in mean
LAP as ventricular compliance diminishes at higher
LVEDVs. For these reasons, heart rates between 70
and 90 b/min are optimal.
Most patients with moderate and severe MS are
in atrial ﬁbrillation. In these patients, control of
heart rate is dependent on adequate control ofthe
ventricular response rate to the ﬁbrillating atrium.
Drugs used to control the ventricular response rate
by producing AV nodal block such as digoxin,
diltiazem, and beta-blockers must be continued.
Patients with MS have severely limited preload
reserve, as discussed previously. Some patients may
have depressed systolic function due to posterobasal
wall motion abnormalities. In addition, high base-
line afterload states may limit SV in other patients.
For these reasons, patients with MS tolerate large
increases in afterload poorly because it is likely
to cause afterload mismatch. LV afterload reduc-
tion is fraught with hazard because of the limitedAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch05” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 152 — #24
152 Chapter 5
10000
(a) Mitral stenosis
4.0 2.0
1.0
0.7
0.5
Assumption: HR = 72 b/min, DFP = 0.58 s/beat
7500
5000
Cardiac output (cc/min)2500
0
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35
Mean gradient (mmHg)
40 45 50 55 60
(b)
10000
Mitral stenosis
4.0
2.0
1.0
0.7
0.5
Assumption: HR = 88 b/min, DFP = 0.43 s/beat
7500
5000
Cardiac output (cc/min)2500
0
01 53 0
Mean gradient (mmHg)
45 60
(c)
10000
Mitral stenosis
4.0
2.0
1.0
0.7
0.5
Assumption: HR = 100 b/min, DFP = 0.32 s/beat
7500
5000
Cardiac output (cc/min)2 500
0
01 5 3 0
Mean gradient (mmHg)
45 60
Fig.5.14 The relationship ofheart rate (HR), cardiac
output (CO), mitral valve area, and diastolic pressure
gradient across the mitral valve is illustrated for patients
with mitral stenosis. CO is plotted against diastolic
pressure gradient for mitral valve areas ranging from
0.5–4.0 cm2. (a) Plot illustrates these relationships for
HR of72 b/min and diastolic ﬁlling period (DFP) of
0.58 s/beat. (b) Plot illustrates these relationships for
HR of88 b/min and DFP of0.43 s/beat. (c) Plot illustrates
these relationships for HR of 100 b/min and DFP
of0.32 s/beat.
It is clear that for given CO and HR, diastolic pressure
gradient increases as mitral valve area decreases.
Furthermore, for a given CO and mitral valve area, the
diastolic pressure gradient increases as HR increases.
With CO constant, an increase in HR requires that a
smaller volume cross the stenotic mitral valve
during the DFP. This should result in reduction in
diastolic pressure gradient. However, increases in HR in
the range examined here progressively shorten the
length ofDFP. Reduction in DFP requires that
volume move across stenotic mitral valve in less
time, which increases diastolic pressure gradient.
Shortening ofDFP is the more important determinant
ofdiastolic pressure gradient at HRs illustrated here.
(From DiNardo JA. Anesthesia for valve replacement in
patients with acquired valvular heart disease. In:
DiNardo JA (ed). Anesthesia for Cardiac Surgery, 2nd edn.
Stamford, CT: Appleton & Lange, 1998:109–40,
with permission.)
preload reserve in these patients. Recall that after-
load reduction will increase SV by reducing LVESV
ifLVEDV is maintained. Recall also that LVEDV is
below normal in these patients and small decreases
in mean LAP will result in large decreases in LVEDV
due to the mitral valve gradient. Because afterload
reduction invariably results in some preload reduc-
tion due to venodilation, great care must be taken to
maintain preload in these patients when afterload
reducing agents are used.Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch05” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 153 — #25
Anesthesia for Valvular Heart Disease 153
CriticalMS
The term “critical mitral stenosis” commonly
describes mitral valve disease. Typically, it is used to
describe patients with mitral valve areas <1.0 cm2.
As with AS, the term “critical MS” properly
describes a speciﬁc pathophysiologic state, rather
than an absolute valve area. Critical MS exists
when LA pressure is elevated producing pulmonary
venous congestion at rest. In the presence ofdias-
tolic and systolic dysfunction or poorly controlled
atrial ﬁbrillation or ﬂutter, critical MS may exist
with larger valve areas.
AnesthetictechniqueinMS
Goals
• Maintain sinus rhythm when possible; control
ventricular rate in atrial ﬁbrillation.
• Maintain heart rate at 70–90 b/min; slower better
than faster.
• Maintain PCWP high enough to ensure as large
an LVEDV as possible without pulmonary edema.
• Maintain a normal LV afterload; increases are
poorly tolerated. Decreasing afterload is warranted
when LV systolic function is poor and afterload is
high. In this instance, preload must be maintained.
• Maintain contractility.
• When PVR is high and RV systolic performance
is poor, RV afterload reduction will improve RV
and LV output. Caution must be exercised so that
excessive systemic vasodilation does not result.
• Avoid hypercarbia, hypoxemia, and acidemia
that tend to cause pulmonary hypertension and
may result in acute RV decompensation.
Preinduction
Standard monitoring and IV access is required.
Although placement ofa pulmonary artery catheter
can be safely performed after the induction of gen-
eral anesthesia, placement ofthe pulmonary artery
catheter before induction allows recording baseline
values and optimization ofpreload and af terload.
The insertion distance necessary to obtain a wedge
pressure trace is greater (5 cm more via the right
internal jugular route) in patients with pulmonary
hypertension than in normal patients. The risk of
pulmonary artery perforation is greater in patients
with pulmonary hypertension. Pulmonary artery
rupture may be due to eccentric balloon inﬂation
forcing the catheter tip into the wall of vessel, ves-
sel rupture from balloon over-inﬂation, or distal
catheter migration during balloon deﬂation.
Patients in sinus rhythm will have a very large
A wave on the PCWP trace, which can be used to
estimate LVEDP. Patients in atrial ﬁbrillation have
no A wave, and mean PCWP can be used. It must be
remembered that both the A-wave pressure and the
mean PCWP will overestimate the LVEDP. The error
is compounded (overestimated) with a smaller valve
area and elevated heart rate. The cardiac catheter-
ization report will provide information as to the
relationship between mean PCWP and LVEDP in a
given patient. In general, for patients with moder-
ate to severe MS, a mean PCWP of20–30 mmHg
will optimize LVEPV. Some patients may present in
heart failure and require diuresis preoperatively.
The pulmonary artery catheter allows calculation
ofPVR and measurement ofpulmonary artery and
central venous pressures (CVPs). This information
is essential in treating RV afterload and improving
RV systolic performance.
For patients with severe RV failure, pulmonary
congestion, and systemic hypotension (systolic
blood pressure below 90 mmHg), efforts to improve
RV function with vasodilator therapy may be unsuc-
cessful due to worsening systemic hypotension.
For these patients, the addition ofinotropic sup-
port is necessary. Dobutamine 5–10 µg/kg/min is a
good choice because it has no α-adrenergic activ-
ity and little chronotropic activity, and it tends to
reduce pulmonary artery pressures. Therefore, it
will not exacerbate pulmonary artery hyperten-
sion or cause tachycardia. Other agents ofbeneﬁt
include epinephrine 0.03 µg/kg/min or milrinone
0.5 µg/kg/min.
Induction and maintenance
Adherence to the hemodynamic goals rather than
a speciﬁc agent is the most important consideration
in choosing an induction and maintenance plan for
anesthesia.
Hypotension may be treated initially with volume
infusion if PCWP has decreased and with cautious
use ofphenylephrine 40–80 µg. After preload andAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch05” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 154 — #26
154 Chapter 5
heart rate are optimized, it may be necessary to
use an inotropic agent. As discussed previously,
dobutamine, epinephrine and milrinone are all
appropriate choices.
Ifsurgical stimulation (skin incision, sternotomy,
sternal spreading, or aortic manipulation) pro-
duces hypertension, additional doses ofsuf entanil
(1–2 µg/kg) or fentanyl (5–10 µg/kg) may be nec-
essary. Ifthis f ails to control the hypertension,
the use ofadditional agents will be necessary.
Benzodiazepines and inhalational agents in com-
bination with narcotics will cause vasodilation in
patients and reduce blood pressure. Vasodilation
with sodium nitroprusside can be titrated easily and
terminated quickly. This makes it an ideal choice
for treatment of transient elevations in peripheral
vascular resistance.
Post-CPB management
After mitral valve replacement for MS, a small mean
gradient of2–5 mmHg usually exists across the
prosthetic valve. Mechanical valves exhibit a small
amount ofregurgitant ﬂow in systole (Fig. 5.15a,b).
Repaired mitral valves may exhibit some residual
mild regurgitation and stenosis. TEE allows the
anesthesiologist and surgeon an excellent oppor-
tunity to evaluate the new valve structure and
function. A full examination of the valve includ-
ing color Doppler and pressure gradients is required.
A dramatic improvement in LV ﬁlling via the LA
after replacement or repair is expected. As a result,
preload reserve is greatly improved. This makes LV
afterload mismatch less likely and allows augmen-
tation ofCO via increases in preload even when
preoperative systolic dysfunction exists. A mean
PCWP or LAP of10–15 mmHg usually is adequate
to take advantage ofthis increased preload reserve.
Patients in atrial ﬁbrillation with large left atria
rarely convert to sinus rhythm postoperatively.
Although the reduction in the transvalvular gra-
dient allows greater hemodynamic tolerance with
tachycardia, control ofthe ventricular response rate
is important to allow adequate time in diastole to ﬁll
the LV.
The management ofRV f unction and the pul-
monary vasculature can be problematic in the
post-bypass period. In all patients with elevated
(a)
(b)
Fig.5.15 (a) Replacement ofthe mitral valve with a
St. Jude mechanical valve yields a characteristic
regurgitant pattern. The regurgitant “ﬂames” are normal
backwash from the valve closure (arrows). (b) In this
patient there is a signiﬁcant perivalvular leak around the
St. Jude valve (arrow). Note the normal regurgitant
backwash next to the perivalvular leak.
pulmonary artery pressures, there will be a dra-
matic reduction in pulmonary artery pressures due
to the reductions in the mean LAP and passive pul-
monary congestion after valve replacement. Despite
this, some patients will continue to have elevated
PVR due to reversible (reactive pulmonary vasocon-
striction) and nonreversible (morphologic changes
in the pulmonary vasculature) causes. For these
patients, careful management is necessary. LV SV
depends on proper RV function. In RV failure, there
is inadequate transit ofblood to the lef t heart and
CO falls. The hallmarks of this syndrome are a high
right atrial pressure (RAP) ( >10 mmHg) and PVR
(over 150 dynes/s/cm5), coupled with a low LAP
(<5 mmHg) and cardiac index ( <2.2 L/min/m2).
The clinician should aggressively strive to keepAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch05” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 155 — #27
Anesthesia for Valvular Heart Disease 155
PVR as low as possible by avoiding hypercar-
bia, hypoxemia, and acidemia, and by avoiding
pulmonary vasoconstrictors. Ifpulmonary hyper-
tension persists despite these efforts, then active
pulmonary vasodilation will be necessary. Nitro-
glycerin has been shown to be effective in reducing
pulmonary artery pressures and increasing pul-
monary blood ﬂow after mitral valve replacement.
Nitroglycerin can be started at 0.15–0.30µg/kg/min
and titrated upward as needed. Sodium nitroprus-
side started at the same dosage and titrated upward
also is effective. Other effective pulmonary vasodila-
tors include inhaled nitric oxide (NO) and prostacy-
clin (PGI2). These agents are discussed in detail in
Chapter 7.
In some patients, inotropic support ofthe
RV may be necessary in addition to pulmonary
vasodilation. Inotropic support without increased
PVR is ideal. Epinephrine 0.015–0.030 µg/kg/min,
dopamine 1–5 µg/kg/min, or dobutamine
5–10 µg/kg/min all meet this goal. Increased doses
ofepinephrine and dopamine may result in pro-
gressive pulmonary vasoconstriction from increased
α-adrenergic activity. In situations in which increas-
ing demand for inotropic support is required, mil-
rinone 0.5–0.75 µg/kg/min after a loading dose of
50–75 µg/kg may be added. Milrinone, a phospho-
diesterase III inhibitor, provides potent inotropic
support and pulmonary vasodilation. Isoproterenol,
a potent β1-agonist offers can improve inotropy and
induce pulmonary vasodilation; however, isopro-
terenol is associated with an increase in heart rate,
myocardial oxygen consumption, and the incidence
ofventricular dysrhythmias, all ofwhich may limit
its usefulness. The combination of prostaglandin E1
(PGE1) and norepinephrine is effective in treat-
ing refractory pulmonary hypertension and RV
failure after mitral valve replacement. PGE 1 is a
potent pulmonary and systemic vasodilator. PGE 1
30–150 ng/kg/min is infused into the right heart
in combination with norepinephrine in doses up
to 1–2 µg/kg/min infused via a left atrial line.
The norepinephrine is infused via the left atrial
line to minimize its vasoconstricting effects on the
pulmonary vasculature, provide inotropic support,
and counteract the profound systemic vasodilatory
effects of PGE 1. Management ofRV dysf unction,
including TEE ﬁndings are discussed in detail in
Chapter 7.
A rare but potentially lethal complication of
mitral valve replacement is ventricular disruption.
This complication has been described after mitral
valve replacement for a variety of lesions, but is
most common in patients undergoing replacement
for chronic MS. Three types of ventricular rupture
are described. Type 1 involves rupture ofthe mitral
annulus or ofthe ventricle at the atrioventricular
junction due to a diseased annulus or posterior ven-
tricular wall. Type 2 rupture occurs at the site ofthe
excised papillary muscle due to surgically-induced
thinning ofthe ventricular wall. Type 3 rupture or
transverse mid-ventricular disruption (TMD) occurs
midway between type 1 and 2 ruptures. Type 3
ruptures are secondary to a variety ofcauses. Endo-
cardial injury from inadvertent surgical trauma or
the valve prosthesis may be involved. Total exci-
sion ofthe mitral valve apparatus may result in
loss oflongitudinal support, which predisposes the
ventricle to transverse disruption when ventricular
dilation occurs.
Goals
• Maintain the ventricular response rate to atrial
ﬁbrillation below 100 b/min in absence ofnormal
sinus rhythm.
• Maintain LAP high enough to take advantage of
the increased preload reserve.
• Avoid pulmonary artery hypertension by treating
hypercarbia, hypoxemia, and acidemia.
• Aggressively treat pulmonary artery hyperten-
sion with vasodilator therapy to avoid RV failure.
IfRV f ailure does occur, inotropic support ofthe RV
and pulmonary vasodilation may be necessary.
• Maintain awareness ofpotential f or LV rupture.
Mitralregurgitation(MR)
Any abnormality ofthe mitral valve apparatus may
cause MR. The most common cause in the west-
ern countries is myxomatous mitral valve disease
(Barlow syndrome). This condition is character-
ized by a prolapse ofone or more valve seg-
ments into the LA. There is elongated or ruptured
chordae, a thickened valve, and dilated annulus.
Other causes include mechanical impairment due toAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch05” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 156 — #28
156 Chapter 5
Fig.5.16 Severe ischemic mitral regurgitation in the
color compare mode. Note the dilated left ventricle and
the central mitral regurgitation jet.
rheumatic fever, trauma, or infective endocardi-
tis. Calciﬁcation ofthe valve annulus may result
in mechanical impairment ofleaﬂet apposition.
Functional impairment ofleaﬂet apposition due to
annular dilation may result from ventricular dila-
tion caused by ischemia or a dilated cardiomyopathy
(Fig. 5.16). Mechanical impairment may result from
rupture ofthe chordae tendinae. Infective endocardi-
tis, rheumatic fever, trauma, or long-standing strain
from mitral valve prolapse may result in chordae
tendinae rupture.
Ischemia may cause ventricular wall motion
abnormalities or papillary muscle dysfunction lead-
ing to regurgitation. The posterior papillary muscles
are more vulnerable to ischemia than the anterior
papillary muscles. This occurs because the poste-
rior papillary muscle is supplied with blood solely
from the posterior descending artery; whereas the
anterior papillary muscle derives its blood supply
from branches of both the left anterior descending
and circumﬂex arteries. With continued ischemia,
papillary muscle dysfunction may progress to necro-
sis and rupture ofthe papillary muscle. Classically,
rupture ofone or more ofthe papillary mus-
cle heads from necrosis occurs 2–7 days after an
inferior myocardial infarction. This leads to acute,
severe MR.
PathophysiologyandadaptationinMR
MR is an LV volume overload lesion that can be
either acute or chronic. In essence, a double-outlet
left ventricle exists. There is a low-impedance out-
ﬂow tract into the low-pressure LA via the incom-
petent mitral valve, and a high-impedance outﬂow
tract into the high-pressure aorta via the aortic
valve. The extent ofregurgitation depends on the
size ofthe mitral valve oriﬁce, the time available
for regurgitation (systole), and the pressure gradi-
ent between the LA and LV. The area ofthe mitral
valve oriﬁce is determined, in part, by the size of
the LV. Dilation ofthe LV will result in distortion
and enlargement ofthe valve oriﬁce. Ventricular
systolic pressure, LA pressure, and LA compliance
all contribute to the valve gradient.
Regurgitant ﬂow ceases when the LV and LA pres-
sures equalize. Equalization ofpressure will occur
more rapidly when a small, noncompliant LA exists,
because LA pressure will rise more rapidly than in
a large compliant atrium. Equalization ofpressure
also occurs more rapidly when the impedance to LV
ejection in the aorta is low. When aortic impedance
is low, there is a larger forward SV, and equalization
ofpressure will occur quickly.
Chronic volume overloading ofthe lef t ventricle
results in eccentric ventricular hypertrophy similar
to that seen in AR. The results ofthis process are
summarized in Fig. 5.17. As in AR, both LVESV and
LVEDV increase, but LVEDV increases to a greater
extent. This results in an enhanced SV with no
need for an increased EF. The slope of the dias-
tolic pressure–volume curve is little changed, and
thus, compliance is only slightly increased. The
entire pressure–volume loop is shifted to the right.
This rightward shift of the diastolic pressure–volume
curve allows low diastolic pressures at very large
end-diastolic volumes. The large increase in ventric-
ular radius that accompanies eccentric hypertrophy
elevates wall stress and stimulates some degree of
concentric hypertrophy. Unlike AR, this compen-
sation is complete and wall stress is normalized in
both end systole and end diastole (Fig. 5.17a).
Unique LV pressure loading exists in chronic MR,
as illustrated in Fig. 5.17a. The isovolumic phase
ofventricular systole is ofvery short duration and
limited pressure generation. In fact, because the
impedance to ejection into the LA is so low, the
isovolumic phase is shorter and lower in pressure
than that seen in AR. This allows a greater portionAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch05” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 157 — #29
Anesthesia for Valvular Heart Disease 157
Wall stress
Wall stress
Normal Normal
Depressed
Eccentric hypert
rophy
Eccentric hypertrophy
EFx 60%
Volume Volume
EFx 65%
Post-op.
EFx 37%
EFx 50%
(a) (b)
Fig.5.17 Left ventricular wall stress–volume loops for
a patient with progressive mitral regurgitation (MR).
(a) Wall stress–volume loops ofnormal ventricle and of
ventricle having developed eccentric hypertrophy in
response to chronic volume overload ofMR. The
ventricle with eccentric hypertrophy has reduced
isovolumic contraction phase and has its entire wall
stress–volume relationship shifted to the right. The
isovolumic contraction phase is even shorter than seen in
aortic regurgitation (see Fig. 5.10). In addition,
end-systolic wall stress is normalized. These adaptations
allow the ventricle to deliver large stroke volume (SV)
with high normal ejection fraction (EF). (b) Wall
stress–volume relationships in ventricle with chronic
mitral regurgitation and systolic dysfunction.
Low-impedance outﬂow tract to the left atrium
provided by an incompetent mitral valve allows wall
stress to remain low during early and late ventricular
systole. Thus, despite the presence ofsystolic
dysfunction, EF is maintained near normal (EF= 50%).
After surgical replacement of mitral valve, the
low-impedance outﬂow tract to the left atrium is
abolished. This results in an elevation ofwall stress
during early and late systole. Under these loading
conditions, afterload mismatch occurs and ventricular
systolic dysfunction manifests as reduced EF (EF= 37%).
Post-op., postoperative. (From Ross J Jr. Left ventricular
function and the timing of surgical treatment in valvular
heart disease. Ann Intern Med 1981;94:498–504, with
permission.)
ofmyocardial energy expenditure directed toward
ejecting a large volume and less toward overcoming
impedance to begin ejection.
In chronic MR, the sustained high LAP results in
left atrial hypertrophy and eventually left atrial dis-
tension. This distension results in the development
ofatrial dysrhythmias, the most common ofwhich
is atrial ﬁbrillation. In severe MR, atrial ﬁbrillation
rather than sinus rhythm generally is the rule.
In acute MR, there is not ample time for ven-
tricular eccentric hypertrophy to occur. As a result,
the ventricle does not have the enormous preload
reserve available in chronic MR. Ofgreater impor-
tance, is the status ofthe LA. In acute MR, a small,
noncompliant LA exists. Regurgitation ofvolume
into a small LA results in high LA pressures, which
manifests as a regurgitant V wave. The height of the
V wave does not quantify the regurgitant volume
but rather is an indicator ofthe relationship between
regurgitant volume and LA compliance. Nonethe-
less, this elevation ofLA pressure results in acute
pulmonary congestion.
In chronic MR, as in AR, a large total SV is neces-
sary to maintain forward SV when the regurgitant
volume is large. An atrial kick is helpful in augment-
ing LVEDV; however, the increased compliance and
rightward shift of the diastolic pressure–volume
curve allows passive ﬁlling ofthe LV in early and
mid-diastole when atrial ﬁbrillation exists.
In acute MR, increased ventricular compliance
and a rightward shift of the diastolic pressure–
volume curve are absent. In this setting, an atrial
systole may be necessary to increase the left atrial
to LV pressure gradient enough to complete ﬁlling
ofthe lef t ventricle via the LA.
In chronic MR, eccentric hypertrophy and a
right shift in the pressure–volume curve allow
large increases in LVEDV with minimal increasesAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch05” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 158 — #30
158 Chapter 5
in LVEDP. This affords a great deal of preload
reserve. Unfortunately, the ventricular dilation that
accompanies increases in LVEDV results in enlarge-
ment ofthe mitral annulus and an increase in the
regurgitant fraction.
In contrast, in acute MR preload reserve is nearly
exhausted. Without adequate time for adaptation,
the left ventricle operates on the steep portion of
its diastolic pressure–volume curve. Again, preload
augmentation may result in ventricular dilation and
a worsening ofthe regurgitation.
Myocardial oxygen consumption is altered in MR.
There is an increase in oxygen consumption due to
the large mass ofmyocardium that must be supplied
with oxygen and the enormous volume work done
by the left ventricle. Volume work increases oxy-
gen consumption, but to a much lesser extent than
pressure work. The isovolumic contraction phase
is highly energy-consumptive. Because ofthe low
impedance to ejection into the LA, the isovolumic
contraction phase is very briefand represents only
a small portion ofthe total work done by the ven-
tricle (see Fig. 5.17a). A greater portion ofthe total
workload is devoted to the generation ofvolume
ejection, which is an energy efﬁcient process.
In addition to the increased myocardial oxygen
demands, oxygen supply is compromised when
there are coexistent coronary artery stenoses. This
is particularly important for patients with acute MR
from papillary muscle rupture or dysfunction. For-
tunately, unlike AR, aortic diastolic blood pressure
is normal, which helps maintain the gradient for
coronary blood ﬂow. Further impairment ofsup-
ply occurs because ofthe high LV end-diastolic
pressures that accompany acute MR. In acute MR,
eccentric hypertrophy has not had time to occur,
and large LVEDV is accompanied by large LVEDP.
Patients with chronic MR may remain symptom-
free for years despite progressive decreases in
systolic function. The enormous preload reserve
available to these patients allows maintenance of
SV by progressive increases in LVEDV in the face
ofdeclining contractile f unction and increasing
LVESV. When preload reserve is exhausted, fur-
ther diminution in systolic function goes uncom-
pensated and SV falls. At this point, symptoms of
reduced CO and CHF appear (Fig. 5.17b). There is
usually signiﬁcant systolic impairment in patients
with acute MR secondary to ischemia.
EF will greatly overestimate systolic function in
MR because a portion ofthe SV is ejected backwards
as mitral regurgitant volume. Recall that EF deter-
minations are very afterload-dependent. In MR, the
impedance to ejection via the incompetent mitral
valve is low. Therefore, EF may remain in the
normal range despite severe systolic dysfunction.
This severe dysfunction may only become appar-
ent after mitral valve repair or replacement when
the low-impedance outﬂow tract is eliminated (see
Fig. 5.17b).
The large, compliant LA that develops in chronic
MR tends to shield the pulmonary circulation from
elevated LA pressures. With time, however, pul-
monary artery hypertension will develop from pas-
sive pulmonary venous distension. IfLA pressures
remain elevated over a long period, reactive changes
occur in the pulmonary vasculature. Prolonged
perivascular edema results in arterial intimal ﬁbroe-
lastosis and nonreversible elevations in pulmonary
artery pressures and PVR. RV dysfunction from
afterload mismatch may develop, as occurs in MS
(see Fig. 5.13). In the most severe instances, tricus-
pid regurgitation from RV distension will complicate
the picture. Pulmonary vasodilators may reduce RV
afterload and improve RV output in patients with
elevated PVR.
In acute MR the small, noncompliant LA is
poorly adapted to shield the pulmonary vascula-
ture from the regurgitant volume. Regurgitation of
volume into the noncompliant LA results in pro-
found and immediate elevation of LAP with a very
large V wave. Pulmonary vascular congestion with
interstitial pulmonary edema rather than secondary
pulmonary artery hypertension is the issue here.
RV systolic dysfunction may exist because reduc-
tions in posterior descending coronary artery per-
fusion severe enough to produce posterior papillary
muscle dysfunction or infarction also may produce
RV ischemia or infarction.
Bradycardia (heart rate < 60 b/min) is detri-
mental in MR because it prolongs systole, which
increases the time available for regurgitation.
In addition, bradycardia prolongs diastole allow-
ing a large LVEDV to develop. This may resultAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch05” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 159 — #31
Anesthesia for Valvular Heart Disease 159
in LV distension, particularly in acute MR, in
which eccentric hypertrophy and pressure–volume
compensation are absent. LV distension leads to
enlargement ofthe mitral annulus and worsening
regurgitation. Finally, when the regurgitant fraction
is large (50–60%), total SV will be large but forward
SV low. Elevating the heart rate enhances forward
ﬂow in this situation.
Efforts to increase heart rate into the opti-
mal range of80–100 b/min are balanced with
the increased oxygen demand and decreased oxy-
gen supply with tachycardia. This is particularly
important for patients who have MR secondary
to papillary muscle rupture or dysfunction from
ischemia.
Most patients with moderate and severe MR are
in atrial ﬁbrillation. In these patients, control of
heart rate is dependent on adequate control ofthe
ventricular response rate to the ﬁbrillating atrium.
Drugs used to control the ventricular response rate
at the AV node, such as digoxin, diltiazem, and
beta-blockers, must be continued.
Increased afterload is poorly tolerated by patients
with acute and chronic MR because it increases
the regurgitant fraction. Increased afterload tends to
increase the size ofthe LV by increasing LVESV, f ol-
lowed by a compensatory increase in LVEDV. This
LV dilation increases the size ofthe mitral oriﬁce.
Increased afterload also increases the impedance to
aortic ejection. This favors ejection into the LA via
the lower impedance outﬂow tract.
Unlike AR, in which afterload reduction must be
used selectively, afterload reduction is uniformly
advantageous in both acute and chronic MR. After-
load reduction improves forward CO by promoting
ejection via the aorta and reducing the regurgi-
tant fraction. This is because the incompetent mitral
valve provides such low impedance to ejection that
any decrease in the impedance to ejection via the
aortic valve will augment forward ﬂow.
AnesthetictechniqueinMR
Goals
• Maintain sinus rhythm when possible.
• Maintain heart rate at 80–100 b/min; faster better
than slower.
• Maintain end-diastolic PCWP high enough to
guarantee a large LVEDV without ventricular
distension and increased valve area.
• Decrease LV afterload; increases are poorly
tolerated. Decreasing afterload will improve CO
by decreasing regurgitation but preload must be
maintained.
• Maintain contractility; there may be signiﬁcant
LV dysfunction.
• When PVR is high or when RV systolic dys-
function exists RV afterload reduction will improve
RV and subsequently LV output. The concur-
rent systemic vasodilation also will directly reduce
regurgitation.
• Avoid hypercarbia, hypoxemia, and acidemia
which tend to cause pulmonary hypertension and
may result in acute RV decompensation.
Premedication
For patients with acute MR, severe hemodynamic
compromise usually is the rule. It is dangerous to
sedate these patients before surgery. All sedatives
and narcotics should be given with careful obser-
vation ofthe f ully monitored patient. In chronic
MR, the usual cautions are appropriate when
considering premedication.
Preinduction
The V wave and the mean PCWP are not good esti-
mates ofLVEDP in patients with MR. Recall that
the V wave occurs during early ventricular systole
and quantiﬁes the relationship between the regur-
gitant volume and left atrial compliance. The mean
PCWP is skewed upward by a large V wave and will,
therefore, overestimate the LVEDP by an amount
proportional to the amplitude and duration ofthe
V wave. The best estimate ofLVEDP is the end-
diastolic PCWP. In patients in sinus rhythm, this will
be the A-wave pressure. In patients in atrial ﬁbrilla-
tion, it will be the PCWP just before the onset of the
V wave. The cardiac catheterization report will pro-
vide information regarding the optimal LVEDP in a
given patient. The pulmonary artery catheter allows
PVR to be calculated as well as measurement ofthe
CVP. Therapy to reduce RV afterload and improve
RV systolic performance cannot be initiated safely
without this information.Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch05” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 160 — #32
160 Chapter 5
In chronic MR, because ofthe increased ventric-
ular compliance and the right shift in the pressure–
volume relationship, LVEDV will be supplemented
with only small increases in the mean PCWP. In
patients with preserved LV function, a mean PCWP
in the range of10–15 mmHg will usually ensure
optimal LVEDV. In patients with depressed ventric-
ular function and exhausted preload reserve, PCWP
will be in the range of20–25 mmHg are sometimes
required for optimal loading conditions.
In acute MR, there will be large V waves and
LVEDP will be elevated because ofthe lack ofcom-
pensatory atrial and ventricular enlargement. It
may be necessary to have an end-diastolic PCWP
of20–25 mmHg to ensure an adequate LVEDV in
patients with acute MR.
For patients in whom afterload reduction is
required before induction, sodium nitroprusside is
the agent ofchoice. It is easily titratable with a
very short half-life. The infusion can be started
at 0.15–0.30 µg/kg/min and titrated with care-
ful attention paid to CO, arterial blood pressure,
and PCWP. Nitroprusside is primarily an arterial
vasodilator; however, it has vasodilatory effects on
the venous system as well. It is important not to let
reductions in preload offset the beneﬁcial effects of
arterial dilation. Ifnecessary, volume inf usion can
maintain PCWP in the optimal range.
For patients with severe RV failure, pulmonary
congestion, and systemic hypotension (systolic
blood pressure < 90 mmHg), efforts to improve RV
function and reduce regurgitation with vasodila-
tor therapy may be unsuccessful due to worsen-
ing systemic hypotension. For these patients, the
addition ofinotropic support ofthe RV and LV is
necessary. Dobutamine 5–10 µg/kg/min is a good
choice because it has no α-adrenergic activity, little
chronotropic activity and it tends to reduce pul-
monary artery pressures. Therefore, it will not exac-
erbate pulmonary artery hypertension or increase
LV afterload and regurgitation.
In patients with myocardial ischemia, efforts must
be directed toward lowering LVEDP, decreasing
ventricular radius, improving aortic diastolic blood
pressure, and decreasing heart rate as much as is
possible without worsening the regurgitant pro-
cess. IV nitroglycerin is a mainstay oftherapy.
Dobutamine 5–10 µg/kg/min is a good choice ifan
inotropic agent is necessary. It reduces LV radius
and end-diastolic pressure while increasing aortic
blood pressure and causing little change in heart
rate. In patients with MR, the resultant reduction
in wall stress and the valve oriﬁce area will serve
to decrease both myocardial oxygen consumption
and the regurgitant volume. When pharmacologic
interventions fail, the use of the intra-aortic balloon
pump (IABP) may be indicated.
Induction and maintenance
Patients with chronic, stable MR usually tolerate
induction without signiﬁcant hemodynamic com-
promise. Etomidate, pentothal, ketamine, or propo-
fol are all appropriate agents. Hypotension may
be treated with vasopressors; however, caution is
urged because in some patients, increasing after-
load will increase the regurgitant volume which
worsens the situation. In all patients heart rate
and preload must be optimal. Ifinotropic support
is required, dobutamine 5–10 µg/kg/min can aug-
ment CO without increasing afterload or worsening
pulmonary artery hypertension.
Many patients with acute MR from myocardial
ischemia or infarction will be in cardiogenic shock
with possible respiratory distress from pulmonary
vascular congestion. These patients may arrive from
the cardiac catheterization laboratory or ICU intu-
bated, on inotropes, and supported with an IABP.
Narcotics, small dose benzodiazepines, and muscle
relaxants are appropriate in this group ofpatients.
In nonintubated patients with acute MR, the induc-
tion sequence should be modiﬁed to account for
the hemodynamic condition and the higher risk of
aspiration. After preoxygenation and with cricoid
pressure applied, etomidate 0.15–0.30 mg/kg, suc-
cinylcholine 1.0–1.5 mg/kg, in conjunction with
fentanyl 10 µg/kg or sufentanil 1 µg/kg can be
administered. Alternatively, sufentanil 5µg/kg and
succinylcholine 1.0–1.5 mg/kg can be used.
Post-CPB management
Repaired mitral valves may exhibit some residual
mild regurgitation and stenosis. TEE is essential in
evaluating valvular repairs.Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch05” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 161 — #33
Anesthesia for Valvular Heart Disease 161
After mitral valve replacement or repair for
chronic MR, the ventricle is now faced with a
relative pressure overload. The competent mitral
valve eliminates the low-impedance outﬂow into
the LA. Ejection ofthe SV is now directed out
the high-impedance outﬂow tract into the aorta.
This causes a substantial elevation ofventricular
pressure during the isovolumic contraction phase.
The elimination ofregurgitation by the competent
valve greatly reduces the need for a large total SV.
Therefore, a greater proportion of total myocardial
oxygen consumption goes toward the more energy-
consumptive process ofpressure generation to begin
ejection and less toward volume ejection. There is
an elevation ofearly and late systolic wall stress.
This occurs despite the dramatic reduction in ven-
tricular radius that accompanies elimination ofthe
regurgitant volume (see Fig. 5.17b). This results in a
state ofaf terload mismatch such that postoperative
systolic function is compromised. The temptation
when CO is low will be to use the large preload
reserve available in these patients. Because ven-
tricular pressure is already elevated, during the
prolonged isovolumic contraction phase wall stress
for a given LVEDV will be greater in the post-bypass
period. Efforts to increase preload to contend with
poor systolic function or high afterload states will
only worsen afterload mismatch. A mean PCWP or
LAP of10–15 mmHg usually is adequate.
For these reasons, particularly ifpoor myocar-
dial protection is obtained during bypass and aor-
tic cross-clamping or ifdepressed systolic f unction
exists preoperatively, management ofthese patients
post-CPB is challenging. The mainstays oftherapy
are afterload reduction and inotropic support of sys-
tolic function. The goal of vasodilator therapy is to
reduce afterload.
An inotrope is indicated when systolic blood
pressure is low ( <90 mmHg) and the cardiac
index is low ( <2.0 L/min/m2). Epinephrine
0.015–0.030 µg/kg/min is a good choice because
it is a potent inotrope with little vasoconstrictor
activity at this dose. When afterload reduction is
needed, as determined by a high SVR or mean
aortic pressure, nitroprusside can be added. It is
easily titratable with a short half-life. The infusion
can be started at 0.15–0.3 µg/kg/min and titrated
with careful attention paid to cardiac index, arte-
rial blood pressure, and PCWP. Volume infusion
may be necessary to keep PCWP in the optimal
range. Ifthe PCWP remains elevated ( >18 mmHg)
with inotrope infusion, then nitroglycerin started
at 0.15–0.30 µg/kg/min and titrated upward is the
vasodilator ofchoice. Alternatively, a phosphodi-
esterase inhibitor can be used. Milrinone provides
both inotropy and vasodilation.
The management ofRV f unction and the pul-
monary vasculature can be problematic in the
post-bypass period. Management ofthis problem is
described in detail in the section on MS.
Patients in atrial ﬁbrillation with large left atria
will rarely convert to sinus rhythm postoperatively.
Therefore, the ventricular response rate will have to
be controlled. Bradycardia is better tolerated after
replacement ofthe incompetent mitral valve than
before replacement.
Goals
• Maintain the ventricular response rate to atrial
ﬁbrillation <100 b/min ifsinus rhythm cannot be
maintained.
• Avoid reliance on a large LVEDV; wall stress
will be greatly elevated and systolic function may
decline.
• Aggressively use inotropic support and afterload
reduction ofthe LV.
• Avoid pulmonary artery hypertension by treating
hypercarbia, hypoxemia, and acidemia.
• Aggressively treat pulmonary artery hyperten-
sion with vasodilator therapy to avoid RV failure.
IfRV f ailure does occur, inotropic support ofthe RV
and pulmonary vasodilation may be necessary.
Thetricuspidvalve
The tricuspid valve (TV) consists ofanterior, pos-
terior, and septal cusps tethered by chordae ten-
dinae and papillary muscles all suspended by a
ﬁbromuscular annulus. The commissures ofthe
TV are not as well deﬁned as those ofthe mitral
valve. The oriﬁce is larger than that ofthe mitral
valve and is triangular in shape, as compared to
the saddle-shape ofthe mitral valve. The ante-
rior leaﬂet is the largest and is tethered to theAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch05” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 162 — #34
162 Chapter 5
Table5.4 The primary and secondary causes of
tricuspid insufﬁciency.
Primary Secondary
Infective endocarditis Myocardial ischemia/
Carcinoid tumor infarction
Rheumatic heart disease Cor pulmonale
Trauma Pulmonary embolism
Papillary muscle dysfunction Left heart failure
Fen-Phen valvulopathy Pulmonic stenosis
Ebstein anomaly Pulmonary hypertension
Connective tissue disorders Mitral insufﬁciency
Pulmonary artery
catheter/pacemaker
anterior papillary muscle which arises from the
moderator band. The moderator band is composed
ofmuscular tissue arising f rom the intraventric-
ular septum and can sometimes be seen on the
echocardiogram. The posterior leaﬂet is the smallest
and is anchored by the posterior papillary muscle.
The septal leaﬂet attaches to the ventricular sep-
tum and is in very close proximity to the bundle
ofHis.
Tricuspid valvular disease is almost always regur-
gitant in nature. The defect may be either functional
or anatomic. The result is RV dilation, elevation
ofRV systolic and diastolic pressures, and tricuspid
annular dilatation. Left-sided valvular lesions with
pulmonary hypertension, RV infarction, pacemaker
malfunction, or RV failure from any cause can result
in tricuspid regurgitation (TR). Other causes oftri-
cuspid abnormalities include rheumatic valvulitis,
endocarditis, carcinoid, radiation therapy, trauma,
or congenital lesions. Ebstein’s anomaly is seen
when the TV is displaced toward the apex in the RV
(Table 5.4). Tricuspid stenosis (TS) is less common
and most likely secondary to rheumatic heart dis-
ease. Other causes ofTS include congenital abnor-
malities or endocarditis. Right atrial masses may act
as functional stenotic lesions and impede TV inﬂow.
There is a giant a wave on the CVP waveform
in TS, and abnormal c and v waves with TR. TEE
is most helpful in the diagnosis of TS and TR
(Fig. 5.18). It is common for TR to present in con-
junction with other valvular heart lesions (i.e. MS
Fig.5.18 A mid-esophageal four-chamber view
transesophageal echocardiographic image demonstrating
severe tricuspid regurgitation. Note the large right atrium
and the bulging intra-atrial septum indicating high right
atrial pressures (arrow).
or MR). Ifthere is RV f ailure, the medical prog-
nosis is worse. The anesthetic management should
consider the degree of RV failure. Most frequently,
the surgical intervention for TR is a repair with a
ring annuloplasty.
Thepulmonaryvalve
The pulmonary valve (PV) is anterior and supe-
rior to the aortic valve. Similar to the aortic valve,
it is trileaﬂet and semilunar, consisting ofante-
rior, left and right leaﬂets. The plane of the valve
is roughly perpendicular in orientation to the aor-
tic valve. The pulmonic valve is isolated from the
other three heart valves by the infundibulum. Pul-
monary valvular disease is usually congenital in
nature. Stenosis is more common than regurgi-
tation although a wide spectrum ofpathology is
possible (Fig. 5.19). Congenital pulmonary steno-
sis is usually treated with balloon valvuloplasty.
Mild pulmonary regurgitation occurs in nearly all
cardiac surgical patients in whom a pulmonary
artery catheter has been placed. Signiﬁcant pul-
monary regurgitation is rare, and is usually well
tolerated. In some patients, RV dysfunction may
occur secondary to pulmonary regurgitation and
should be surgically corrected. Pulmonary allografts
are usually chosen when replacing a pulmonaryAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch05” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 163 — #35
Anesthesia for Valvular Heart Disease 163
Fig.5.19 Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE)
color compare image ofsevere pulmonary artery
aneurysm with pulmonary hypertension and mild
pulmonary insufﬁciency. On the left image the aneurysm
is indicated by the arrow. In the right image, the
pulmonary insufﬁciency is seen with color Doppler.
LA, left atrium; PA, pulmonary artery; PR, pulmonary
regurgitation; RA, right atrium; RV, right
ventricle.
valve; pulmonary valvular repair is typically not
performed.
Multiplevalvelesions
It is not uncommon for patients with valvular heart
disease to have both a stenotic and regurgitant pro-
cess affecting one valve or to have involvement of
two or more valves. There are several important
points to keep in mind when evaluating patients
with multiple valve lesions.
It is possible for a valve to be stenotic and incom-
petent; however, a severely stenotic valve can allow
only minimal regurgitation because ofthe prof ound
reduction in valve area. Likewise, a severely incom-
petent valve can offer only minimal impedance
to ﬂow across its large area. It is possible for a
prosthetic valve to possess high-grade stenosis and
regurgitation ifit has a large perivalvular leak.
When a valve is not clearly primarily stenotic
or incompetent, it is necessary to determine which
lesion has the most pronounced effect on the
patient’s hemodynamics. Ifa patient with MS and
MR has a large LVEDV, it follows that MR is the
predominant lesion. Likewise, ifa patient with AS
and AR is found to have a normal LVEDV with left
atrial enlargement and a large A-wave pressure, it
follows that AS is the predominant lesion.
When two valves are involved, it is necessary to
know which features of each lesion exacerbate or
ameliorate the effects of the other lesions.
ARandMS
The under-loading ofthe LV characteristic ofMS
will be offset by the regurgitation of the aortic valve
lesion. Increased LAP and pulmonary artery hyper-
tension characteristic ofMS will be present. The
increased heart rate so beneﬁcial in AR will cause
precipitous increases in LAP with subsequent pul-
monary congestion. Therapy for both RV and LV
afterload reduction will be necessary.
ASandMS
The LV under-loading characteristic ofMS will
severely limit the preload reserve ofthe LV because
LV compliance in AS will be diminished, LAP will
have to be greatly elevated to ensure adequate ﬁll-
ing ofthe LV with the gradient across the mitral
valve. This will exacerbate pulmonary congestion.
LV afterload reduction will be poorly tolerated
because ofthe large gradient across the aortic valve
and the limited ability to increase LVEDV. Efforts to
reduce RV afterload will be severely limited by the
concomitant systemic vasodilation.
ARandMR
The pathophysiology ofLV volume overload will
be predominant. Efforts to reduce LV afterload will
be ofbeneﬁt in the management ofboth lesions.
Likewise, a relatively fast heart rate will be advan-
tageous. High LAP and pulmonary artery hyperten-
sion not normally seen in AR may be a feature here.
Ifthe MR is secondary to ventricular dilation f rom
AR, then only replacement ofthe aortic valve will
be necessary.
ASandMR
High ventricular pressure in AS will cause dramatic
MR ifthe mitral valve is incompetent. The com-
bination ofconcentric and eccentric hypertrophy
will allow the LV to maintain a relatively large
SV. With a larger than normal preload reserve
available, some LV afterload reduction might beAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch05” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 164 — #36
164 Chapter 5
tolerated in an effort to reduce regurgitation if
the AS is mild. Efforts to increase heart rate to
reduce the regurgitant process will have detrimen-
tal effects on the subendocardial perfusion of the
hypertrophied LV. Pulmonary congestion and pul-
monary artery hypertension with RV failure are
likely. Reduction ofpulmonary arterial pressure will
be difﬁcult for patients with severe AS, because
the concomitant systemic vasodilation may result
in profound systemic hypotension. In instances in
which MR is mild to moderate and AS is severe,
replacement ofthe aortic valve may reduce ventric-
ular pressures and ventricular dilatation such that
mitral valve replacement or repair is unnecessary.
Pulmonaryautograftforaorticvalve
replacement
In some patients with aortic valve disease, mov-
ing the pulmonary valve to the aortic position and
implantation ofa pulmonary homograf t is beneﬁ-
cial (Ross procedure). In children, the pulmonary
autograft will increase in size as the child grows
and there is no need for anticoagulation. Hemo-
dynamics seen across the new aortic valve are
excellent and the development ofnew AR is low.
The freedom from autograft replacement is approx-
imately 50–75% at 20 years. This procedure is tech-
nically more complicated and requires an extended
CPB time.
Table5.5 Indications for aortic valve replacement. (Reprinted with permission from Bonow RO, Carabello BA,
Chatterjee K et al. ACC/AHA 2006 guidelines f or the management ofpatients with valvular heart disease: a report ofthe
American College ofCardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines (Writing Committee to
Develop Guidelines for the Management of Patients with Valvular Heart Disease).J Am Coll Cardiol 2006;48:e1–148.)
Class I
1 AVR is indicated for symptomatic patients with severe AS (Level of evidence: B)
2 AVR is indicated for patients with severe AS undergoing coronary artery bypass graft surgery (CABG) (Level of
evidence: C)
3 AVR is indicated for patients with severe AS undergoing surgery on the aorta or other heart valves (Level of evidence: C)
4 AVR is recommended for patients with severe AS and LV systolic dysfunction (ejection fraction<0.50) (Level of
evidence: C)
Class IIa
AVR is reasonable for patients with moderate AS undergoing CABG or surgery on the aorta or other heart valves (see
Sections on Combined multiple valve disease and on AVR in patients undergoing CABG) (Level of evidence: B)
Class IIb
1 AVR may be considered for asymptomatic patients with severe AS and abnormal response to exercise (e.g. development
of symptoms or asymptomatic hypotension) (Level of evidence: C )
2 AVR may be considered for adults with severe asymptomatic AS if there is a high likelihood of rapid progression (age,
calciﬁcation, and CAD) or if surgery might be delayed at the time of symptom onset (Level of evidence: C )
3 AVR may be considered in patients undergoing CABG who have mild AS when there is evidence, such as moderate to
severe valve calciﬁcation, that progression may be rapid (Level of evidence: C )
4 AVR may be considered for asymptomatic patients with extremely severe AS (aortic valve area less than 0.6cm2, mean
gradient >60mmHg, and jet velocity>5.0m/s) when the patient’s expected operative mortality is 1.0% or less (Level of
evidence: C)
Class III
AVR is not useful for the prevention of sudden death in asymptomatic patients with AS who have none of the ﬁndings
listed under the class IIa/IIb recommendations (Level of evidence: B)
AS, aortic stenosis; AVR, aortic valve replacement; CABG, coronary artery bypass graft; CAD, coronary artery disease; LV, left
ventricle.Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch05” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 165 — #37
Anesthesia for Valvular Heart Disease 165
Previouslyundiagnosedvalve
diseasefoundduringCABG
Occasionally, patients presenting for CABG are
found to have signiﬁcant AS during the TEE exam-
ination. The new lesion should be fully evaluated
by TEE and the indications for replacement are the
same as in any other patient (Table 5.5). Ifthe
AS is moderate to severe, the aortic valve should
be replaced. Controversy exists when mild AS is
uncovered.
MR is also a common unexpected ﬁnding in
patients having CABG surgery. The MR requires full
evaluation by TEE. Ifthere is a structural def ect
such as valve prolapse or ﬂail, the valve should
be repaired or replaced. Ischemic MR is due to LV
remodeling and apical tenting ofthe chordae. The
MR jet us usually central in nature as compared to
the more eccentric MR jets seen with either restric-
tive disease or valve prolapse. Severe ischemic MR
should be surgically corrected. Controversy exists
about mild to moderate ischemic MR. Ischemic MR
Table5.6 Indications for mitral valve surgery. (Reprinted with permission from Bonow RO, Carabello BA,
Chatterjee K et al. ACC/AHA 2006 guidelines for the management of patients with valvular heart disease: a report of
the American College ofCardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines (Writing Committee
to Develop Guidelines for the Management of Patients with Valvular Heart Disease).J Am Coll Cardiol 2006;48:e1–148.)
Class I
1 MV surgery is recommended for the symptomatic patient with acute severe MR (Level of evidence: B)
2 MV surgery is beneﬁcial for patients with chronic severe MR and NYHA functional class II, III, or IV symptoms in the
absence of severe LV dysfunction (severe LV dysfunction is deﬁned as ejection fraction<0.30) and/or end-systolic
dimension >55mm (Level of evidence: B)
3 MV surgery is beneﬁcial for asymptomatic patients with chronic severe MR and mild to moderate LV dysfunction,
ejection fraction 0.30–0.60, and/or end-systolic dimension≥40mm (Level of evidence: B)
4 MV repair is recommended over MV replacement in the majority of patients with severe chronic MR who require
surgery, and patients should be referred to surgical centers experienced in MV repair (Level of evidence: C )
Class IIa
1 MV repair is reasonable in experienced surgical centers for asymptomatic patients with chronic severe MR with
preserved LV function (ejection fraction>0.60 and end-systolic dimension<40mm) in whom the likelihood of successful
repair without residual MR is>90% (Level of evidence: B)
2 MV surgery is reasonable for asymptomatic patients with chronic severe MR, preserved LV function, and new onset of
atrial ﬁbrillation (Level of evidence: C )
3 MV surgery is reasonable for asymptomatic patients with chronic severe MR, preserved LV function, and pulmonary
hypertension (pulmonary artery systolic pressure>50mmHg at rest or>60mmHg with exercise) (Level of evidence: C )
4 MV surgery is reasonable for patients with chronic severe MR due to a primary abnormality of the mitral apparatus and
NYHA functional class III–IV symptoms and severe LV dysfunction (ejection fraction<0.30 and/or end-systolic dimension
>55mm) in whom MV repair is highly likely (Level of evidence: C )
Class IIb
MV repair may be considered for patients with chronic severe secondary MR due to severe LV dysfunction (ejection
fraction <0.30) who have persistent NYHA functional class III–IV symptoms despite optimal therapy for heart failure,
including biventricular pacing (Level of evidence: C )
Class III
1 MV surgery is not indicated for asymptomatic patients with MR and preserved LV function (ejection fraction>0.60 and
end-systolic dimension<40mm) in whom signiﬁcant doubt about the feasibility of repair exists (Level of evidence: C )
2 Isolated MV surgery is not indicated for patients with mild or moderate MR (Level of evidence: C )
LV, left ventricular; MR, mitral regurgitation; MV, mitral valve; NYHA, New York Heart Association.Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch05” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 166 — #38
166 Chapter 5
(a) (b)
Fig.5.20 (a) Schematic ofthe endovascular repair
system guide catheter across the atrial septum. The clip
delivery system is positioned through the guide. The clip
is in the open position in the left ventricle, ready to be
retracted to grasp the mitral leaﬂets. (b) The distal end of
the delivery system and the polyester-covered clip shown
in the open position. (From St. Goar FG, Fann JL,
Komtebedde J et al. Endovascular edge-to-edge mitral
valve repair: short term results in a porcine model.
Circulation 2003;108:1990–3, with permission.)
is dynamic and is responsive to pharmacologic alter-
ations in loading conditions and LV remodeling. The
indications for mitral valve repair or replacement
are given in Table 5.6.
Alternativestosurgicalrepair
For some patients, alternatives to surgical repair
exist. Techniques are now available for percuta-
neous replacement ofthe pulmonary and aor-
tic valve. There is active work on percutaneous
endovascular end-to-edge repair ofthe mitral
valve (Fig. 5.20a,b). The coronary sinus wraps
around the mitral valve and allows an opportu-
nity for positioning of an annular constraint device,
which may reduce mitral annular size and MR
(Fig. 5.21). Finally, there is some enthusiasm for
Coronary sinus Mitral annular
constraint device
Mitral valve
Fig.5.21 The position ofthe mitral annular constraint
device in the coronary sinus and its relation to the
posterior aspect ofthe mitral valve. Elements ofthe
device, including proximal and distal anchors and an
intervening cable, are depicted. (From Kaye DM,
Byrne M, Alferness C, Power J. Feasibility and short-term
efﬁcacy of percutaneous mitral annular reduction for the
therapy ofheart f ailure-induced mitral regurgitation.
Circulation 2003;108:1795–7, with permission.)
a surgical edge-to-edge annuloplasty ofthe mitral
valve (Alﬁeri stitch); although late outcome data
suggest that long-term beneﬁt is lacking. In any
case, the techniques and indications for percuta-
neous repair and replacement ofvalvular heart
disease will likely only increase in the next years.
Suggestedreading
Bonow RO, Carabello BA, Chatterjee K et al. ACC/AHA
2006 guidelines for the management of patients with
valvular heart disease. J Am Coll Cardiol 2006;48:
1–148.
Carabello BA. Is it ever too late to operate on the
patient with valvular heart disease? J Am Coll Cardiol
2004;44:376–83.
Rahimtoola SH. Choice ofprosthetic heart valve f or adult
patients. J Am Coll Cardiol 2003;41:893–904.
Rahimtoola SH. The year in valvular heart disease. JA m
Coll Cardiol 2005;45:111–22.
Vahanian A, Acar C. Percutaneous valve procedures: what
is the future? Curr Opin Cardiol 2005;20:100–6.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 167 — #1
CHAPTER 6
CongenitalHeartDisease
Theincidenceofcongenitalheartisapproximately
7–10 per 1000 live births. Environmental factors
such as drugs, viral infection, maternal diabetes,
or maternal alcohol abuse may account for spe-
ciﬁc lesions. Most congenital heart defects are the
resultofaninteractionofgeneticpredispositionand
environmentalfactors.
Theanesthesiologistwhocaresforpatientswith
congenital heart disease (CHD) faces myriad chal-
lenges in the perioperative management of these
complexindividuals.Inmajorpediatriccardiaccen-
ters, almost every lesion is amenable to surgical
intervention.Thepathophysiologyofawidevariety
of congenital heart defects can be best understood
byapplyingcertainbasicprinciplestoeachpatient.
Thischapteroutlinesthoseprinciples.Theanesthe-
siologist who understands the dynamics of these
lesionsandtheplannedsurgicalinterventionwillbe
abletoconductanappropriateanesthetic.Although
younger,smaller,andsickerpatientsarepresenting
formorecomplex,innovativesurgicaltreatment,it
isencouragingandimpressivethattherehasbeen
a concomitant decrease in surgical and anesthetic
morbidityandmortality.
Pediatric cardiovascular
physiology
Dramaticcirculatorychangesoccurwithinminutes
ofbirth,thereandcontinueovertheﬁrstfewdays
and weeks of life. These changes have profound
effectsonneonatalcardiovascularphysiology.Itis
not coincidental that 50% of the neonates born
with CHD will become ill enough during the ﬁrst
days or weeks of life to require medical or surgi-
cal intervention. Optimal anesthetic management
oftheneonatewithCHDmustbebasedonaﬁrm
understandingofthesedevelopmentalchanges.
Fetal circulation
The placenta provides gas exchange in the fetus.
Changes at birth are directly related to the exclu-
sion of the placenta and the establishment of the
lungsastheunitofgasexchange.Fetalcirculatory
channels shunt blood away from the lung, result-
ing in a parallel circuit in which both ventricles
supplysystemiccirculation.Thisparallelcirculation
permitsnormalfetalgrowthanddevelopmenteven
infetuseswithcardiacmalformations.Fetalshunts
permit alternate pathways and provide adequate
systemicbloodﬂow.
Oxygenated blood from the placenta returns to
the fetus via the umbilical vein, which enter the
portal venous system (Fig. 6.1). The ductus veno-
susconnectstheleftportalveintothelefthepatic
vein at its junction with the inferior vena cava
(IVC). This allows approximately 50% of umbili-
calvenousbloodtobypassthehepaticsinuses.The
remainderofumbilicalvenousﬂowpassesthrough
the liver and enters the IVC via the hepatic veins.
FetalIVCbloodisacombinationofbloodfromthe
lowerfetalbody,umbilicalvein,andhepaticveins.
The stream of blood from the ductus venosus has
a higher velocity in the IVC than the stream from
167AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 168 — #2
168 Chapter6
Upper body
and brain
DA
Ao PA
LungsRV LV
LA
RA
Liver
DV
Placenta
Lower body
Gastrointestinal
Fig. 6.1 Schematicofthefetalcirculation.Ao,aorta;
DA,ductusarteriosus;DV,ductusvenosus;LA,left
atrium;LV,leftventricle;PA,pulmonaryartery;
RA,rightatrium;RV,rightventricle.
thelowerbodyandhepaticveins.Thishigherveloc-
ityfacilitatesdeliveryofthishigheroxygencontent
blood across the foramen ovale (FO) into the left
atrium(LA).
IVC blood enters the right atrium (RA) and due
to the position of the Eustachian valve, Chiari
network,andFOenterstheLAduring80%ofthe
cardiaccycle.Duringtheother20%(atrialsystole)
IVCbloodcrossesthetricuspidvalveandentersthe
rightventricle(RV).Theoverwhelmingmajorityof
superiorvenacava(SVC)crossesthetricuspidvalve
and enters the RV as well. Blood from the RV is
ejected into the pulmonary artery (PA). Approxi-
mately10–15%ofbloodfromthePApassesthrough
the lungs to reach the LA the rest is shunted to
the distal aorta via the ductus arteriosus (DA). As
a result, two-thirds of total fetal cardiac output is
provided by the RV with the remaining one-third
providedviatheleftventricle(LV).
The dynamics of shunting at the level of the
ductus venosus, FO, and DA result in preferential
delivery of the most highly oxygenated blood to
the coronary and cerebral circulations. Obviously,
this preferential delivery of oxygenated blood is
compromisedinutero bycardiaclesionsthatprevent
orreduceLVoutput.
At birth, a series circulation is established in
which each ventricle pumps into a speciﬁc vascu-
larbed(RVtoPA;LVtoaorta).Theremovalofthe
placenta and the initiation of alveolar ventilation
at birth have the immediate effect of establish-
ing this series circulation. To maintain the adult
seriescirculation,thefetalchannelsmustbeclosed.
Complex neurochemical and hormonal inﬂuences
affect the closing of these fetal shunts. Acidosis,
sepsis,hypothermia,hypoxia,andhypercarbiamay
cause reopening of the shunts and persistence of
thefetalcirculation(PFC).Mostneonateswhoare
critically ill from CHD have one or more of these
incitingfactorsatthetimeofpresentation.Insome
instances, persistence of fetal circulatory channels
maybebeneﬁcialorevenmandatoryforsurvival.
Closure of the ductus arteriosus
Inthefetus,patencyoftheductusarteriosus(DA)is
maintainedbyhighlevelsofprostaglandin(prosta-
cyclin(PGI2)andprostaglandinE1(PGE 1)).There
are two stages of ductal closure in the newborn:
functional closure and permanent anatomic clo-
sure. Functional closure occurs by contraction of
the smooth muscle of the ductal wall and usually
occurs within the ﬁrst day of life. An increase in
partial pressure of oxygen (PO2) and a decrease
in prostaglandins contribute to functional closure.
Oxygenisadose-dependentductalconstrictorthat
actsbyincreasingtherateofoxidativephosphory-
lationwithinsmoothmusclecells.Inaddition,the
response to oxygen may be age-related; full-term
neonateshaveamoredramaticresponsetooxygen
than an immature newborn. Norepinephrine and
epinephrine,bychangingpulmonaryandsystemic
vascularresistances,maysecondarilycontributeto
ductalclosure.Acetylcholinehasadirectconstrictor
effectonductaltissue.Permanentanatomicclosure
of the duct usually is accomplished by 2–3weeks
oflifeinthenormalfull-termneonate.Thelumen
is sealed by ﬁbrous connective tissue, leaving the
vestigialstructure,knownastheligamentumarte-
riosum(Fig.6.2a–c).AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 169 — #3
CongenitalHeartDisease 169
(b)
m3850 
30
PA
68
97 DA
70
97
9767
60
RA 97
IVC
65
m2 m4
RV LV
LA PV
SVC
Ao
70
5
70
45 m55
50 
3
IVC
Ao
65
DA
55
55 65
60
PV
m55
RV LV
SVC
40
RA
70
m3 m2
LA
m5570
45
PA
(a)
70
4
70
3
70
45
(c)
99
65
PA
Ao
99
9965
RV
SVC
60 RA
LA
65
IVC
99
m4
m2
LV
PV
m60
65
m1830
12
80
5
80
50
30
3
Fig. 6.2 Hemodynamicsofthefetusandneonate.
Circledﬁguresareoxygensaturations.Systolic,diastolic,
andmean(m)pressuresappearneartheirrespective
chambersandvessels.(a)Circulationofthetermfetus.
(b)Transitionalcirculationlessthan1dayafterbirth.
(c)Circulationseveraldaysafterbirth.Ao,aorta;
DA,ductusarteriosus;DV,ductusvenosus;IVC,inferior
venacava;LA,leftatrium;LV,leftventricle;PA,
pulmonaryartery;PV,pulmonaryvein;RA,rightatrium;
RV,rightventricle;SVC,superiorvenacava.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 170 — #4
170 Chapter6
Survival of some neonates with congenital car-
diaclesionsisdependentonductalpatency.Because
functional closure is a reversible event, the use
ofPGE1 infusions(0.01–0.05 µg/kg/min)hasbeen
oneofthemajormedicaladvancesinstabilization
of neonates with ductal-dependent heart lesions.
Preterm neonates are at risk of delayed ductal
closure.Thismaybeduetodecreaseddegradation
of PGE1, increased production of PGE1, or dimin-
ished sensitivity to the ductal constricting effects
of oxygen. In instances in which delayed ductal
closureisdisadvantageous,prostaglandininhibitors
such as indomethacin (0.1–0.3mg/kg orally (PO)
orintravenously(IV))havebeenusedsuccessfully
to promote ductal closure and establish normal
patternsofpulmonarybloodﬂow.
Closure of the foramen ovale
In utero, the right atrial pressure is higher than
left atrial pressure (LAP) IVC blood ﬂows in such
a manner as to keep the foramen ovale (FO)
open.Removaloftheplacentacausesasigniﬁcant
decreaseinvenousreturntotherightheart,caus-
ing a decrease in right atrial pressure. In addition,
ventilationcausesamarkedincreaseinpulmonary
arterial and venous blood ﬂow resulting in an
increaseinLAP.Thiselevationofleftatrialrelative
torightatrialpressurecausestheﬂap-likevalveof
theFOtofunctionallyclose.Ininstancesinwhich
right atrial pressure remains elevated, right-to-left
(R–L)shuntingmaypersist.Functionalclosureusu-
allyprogressestoanatomicclosure.However,probe
patency of the FO may persist in 30% of normal
adults and 50% of children younger than 5years
ofage.
Closure of the ductus venosus
The umbilical vessels constrict strongly after
mechanical stimulation and high oxygen tensions
facilitate this process. The resultant decrease in
umbilicalvenousbloodﬂowcausespassiveclosure
oftheductusvenosus.Theductusvenosusdoesnot
appear to be as sensitive as the DA to the arterial
partialpressureofoxygen(Pa O2),thearterialpar-
tialpressureofcarbondioxide(Pa CO2),orpH.High
levelsofnorepinephrinealsocauseconstriction.The
ductus venosus is functionally closed by 1week
of life and anatomically closed by 3months. The
remainingstructureistheligamentumvenosum.
In addition to the establishment of the adult
seriescirculation,dramaticalterationsinpulmonary
circulation, cardiac output and distribution, myo-
cardial performance, and myocardial cell growth
andhypertrophycontinuetooccurduringtheﬁrst
weeks,months,andevenyearsoflife.Inthepres-
enceofCHD,thesechangesmaybepathologically
affected.
Pulmonary vascular changes
Thefetushaslowpulmonarybloodﬂowsecondary
toahighpulmonaryvascularresistance(PVR).The
minimal blood ﬂow that reaches the pulmonary
bedhasaverylowPa O2,whichmaycausehypoxic
pulmonaryvasoconstrictionandcontributestothe
elevated pulmonary resistance seen in the fetus.
Morphologic examinations of the small arteries of
the fetal and newborn lung show a thick medial
smooth muscle layer. The fetal pulmonary vas-
culature is reactive to a number of stimulants.
Vasoconstriction is induced by decreases in PaO2,
pH, and leukotrienes. Acetylcholine, histamine,
bradykinin, PGE1, PGE2, PGI2 (prostacyclin), and
prostaglandinD2 and β-adrenergiccatecholamines
are potent vasodilators of fetal pulmonary ves-
sels.
At birth, alveolar ventilation commences. This
reduces mechanical compression of small pul-
monary vessels and increases PaO2. The result is a
dramatic reduction in PVR. During the following
weeks and months, remodeling of the pulmonary
vesselsoccurs;themostnotablechangeisathinning
ofthemedialsmoothmusclelayer.By6monthsof
life,thisprocessresultsinreductionofPVRtonear
normaladultlevels.Thenormalprocessofpostnatal
pulmonarymaturationmaybealteredsigniﬁcantly
by pathologic conditions, such as those associated
withCHD.
Myocardial performance in
the neonate
In utero, the RV has a cardiac output of approxi-
mately330mL/kg/mincomparedwiththeLVout-
put of 170mL/kg/min. At birth, both RV and LV
eject an output of approximately 350mL/kg/min.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 171 — #5
CongenitalHeartDisease 171
This requires minimal stroke volume increase for
theRVbutaconsiderableincreaseinstrokevolume
for the LV. The high output state of the new-
born effectively limits further increases in cardiac
output. This high output state decreases to about
150mL/kg/minby8–10weeksoflife.
Myocardial morphology and performance is
notablydifferentintheneonate.Thesedifferences
aresummarizedasfollows:
• Afterload mismatch. The neonatal heart is more
susceptible to afterload mismatch, and therefore,
stroke volume is poorly maintained in the face of
increasingoutﬂowresistance.
• Limited preload reserve. The neonatal heart has
limited preload reserve. Augmentation of stroke
volumeviatheFrank–Starlingmechanismislimited
ascomparedwithanadult.
• Reduced contractile capacity.Neonatal cardiac cells
containmorewaterandfewercontractileelements
thanmaturemyocardium.
• Reduced ventricular compliance.The compliance of
theneonatalmyocardiumisreducedbecauseadeﬁ-
ciencyofelasticelementsparallelsthedeﬁciencyof
contractileelements.
• Increased intraventricular dependence. Changes in
ventricularpressurearetransmittedtotheopposite
ventricle via the ventricular septum more read-
ily in the immature myocardium. Left ventricu-
lar diastolic ﬁlling is disproportionately impaired
in the neonate by high right ventricular end-
diastolic pressure. This is due to a leftward shift
of the intraventricular septum and a reduction
in left ventricular distensibility. Right ventricu-
lar diastolic ﬁlling is impaired to an equal extent
by high left ventricular end-diastolic pressure in
neonates. This enhanced ventricular interaction
is caused by reduced ventricular compliance and
because,atbirth,theLVandRVareofequalmass.
The increased volume and pressure load experi-
enced by the LV after birth produces relative LV
hypertrophy. The normal adult LV to RV mass
ratio of 2:1 is not seen until several months after
birth.
• Incomplete autonomic innervation. Sympathetic
innervation, which is responsible for increasing
heart rate and contractility, is incompletely devel-
oped at birth. As a result, local myocardial release
of norepinephrine contributes less to increases
in contractility than do increases in circulating
catecholamine levels. For this reason, inotropic
agents such as dopamine, the effects of which
are partially mediated through release of nor-
epinephrine from myocardial nerve endings, may
have to be used in higher doses to be effective in
youngerpatients.Ontheotherhand,theparasym-
pathetic system, which reﬂexly slows the heart, is
fullyfunctionalatbirth.
• Immature myocardial metabolism. The neonatal
myocardium is more dependent on anaerobic
metabolism than the adult heart. This may have
a somewhat protective effect, making the neo-
natal myocardium more tolerant to the effects of
hypoxia.
Pathophysiology of CHD
Whilesomecongenitalheartdefectsinvolvepurely
obstructiveorregurgitantvalvularlesions,thepres-
ence of shunts (both physiologic and anatomic)
is the hallmark of CHD. Anesthetic management
of the patient with CHD is dependent on a clear
understandingof:
• The concepts of shunting (both physiologic
and anatomic), single ventricle physiology, and
intercirculatorymixing.
• The types of anatomic shunts and the dynamics
oftheanatomicshuntingprocess.
• The effects of congenital lesions on the
developmentofthepulmonaryvascularsystem.
• The factors that inﬂuence pulmonary and
systemicvascularresistance.
• Thefactorsresponsibleforproducingmyocardial
ischemia.
The concepts of shunting,
single ventricle physiology, and
intercirculatory mixing
Shunting
Shunting is the process whereby venous return
intoonecirculatorysystemisrecirculatedthrough
the arterial outﬂow of the same circulatory sys-
tem. Flow of blood from the systemic venous
atrium or RA to the aorta produces recirculationAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 172 — #6
172 Chapter6
of systemic venous blood. Flow of blood from
the pulmonary venous atrium or LA to the PA
producesrecirculationofpulmonaryvenousblood.
Recirculationofbloodproducesaphysiologicshunt.
Recirculationofpulmonaryvenousbloodproduces
a physiologic left-to-right (L–R), whereas recircu-
lation of systemic venous blood produces a physi-
ologic R–L shunt. A physiologic R–L or L–R shunt
commonlyistheresultofananatomicR–LorL–R
shunt.Inananatomicshunt,bloodmovesfromone
circulatory system to the other via a communica-
tion at the level of the cardiac chambers or great
vessels.Physiologicshuntscanexistintheabsence
of an anatomic shunt. Transposition physiology is
theprimaryexampleofthisprocess.
Effective blood ﬂow is the quantity of venous
blood from one circulatory system reaching the
arterial system of the other circulatory system.
Effective pulmonary blood ﬂow is the volume of
systemicvenousbloodreachingthepulmonarycir-
culation, whereas effective systemic blood ﬂow is
the volume of pulmonary venous blood reach-
ing the systemic circulation. Effective pulmonary
blood ﬂow and effective systemic blood ﬂows are
theﬂowsnecessarytomaintainlife.Effectivepul-
monary blood ﬂow and effective systemic blood
ﬂowarealwaysequal,nomatterhowcomplexthe
lesions.Effectivebloodﬂowusuallyistheresultof
a normal pathway through the heart, but it may
occur as the result of an anatomic R–L or L–R
shunt.
Total pulmonary blood ﬂow (QP) is the sum of
effective pulmonary blood ﬂow and recirculated
pulmonary blood ﬂow. Total systemic blood ﬂow
(QS)isthesumofeffectivesystemicbloodﬂowand
recirculated systemic blood ﬂow. Total pulmonary
bloodﬂowandtotalsystemicbloodﬂowdonothave
to be equal. Therefore, it is best to think of recir-
culatedﬂow(physiologicshuntﬂow)astheextra,
noneffective ﬂow superimposed on the nutritive
effectivebloodﬂow.Theseconceptsareillustrated
inFigs6.3and6.4.
Single ventricle physiology
Single ventricle physiology is used to describe
the situation wherein complete mixing of pul-
monaryvenousandsystemicvenousbloodoccurs
attheatrialorventricularlevelandtheventricle(s)
then distribute output to both the systemic and
pulmonarybeds.Asaresultofthisphysiologythe:
• Ventricularoutputisthesumofpulmonaryblood
ﬂow( Qp)andsystemicbloodﬂow( Qs).
• Distribution of systemic and pulmonary blood
ﬂowisdependentontherelativeresistancestoﬂow
(both intra and extracardiac) into the two parallel
circuits.
• Oxygensaturationsarethesameintheaortaand
thePA.
• This physiology can exist in patients with one
well-developedventricleandonehypoplasticven-
tricle as well as in patients with two well-formed
ventricles.
In the case of a single anatomic ventricle there
is always obstruction to either pulmonary or sys-
temicbloodﬂowastheresultofcompleteornear
completeobstructiontoinﬂowand/oroutﬂowfrom
thehypoplasticventricle.Inthiscircumstancethere
must be a source of both systemic and pulmonary
blood ﬂow to assure post-natal survival. In some
instancesofasingleanatomicventricle,adirectcon-
nectionbetweentheaortaandthePAviaapatent
ductus arteriosus (PDA) is the sole source of sys-
temic blood ﬂow (hypoplastic left heart syndrome
(HLHS)) or of pulmonary blood ﬂow (pulmonary
atresia with intact ventricular septum or PA/IVS).
This is known as ductal dependent circulation.
In other instances of a single anatomic ventricle,
intracardiac pathways provide both systemic and
pulmonary blood ﬂow without the necessity of a
PDA.Thisisthecaseintricuspidatresia(TA)with
normallyrelatedgreatvessels,anonrestrictiveven-
tricularseptaldefect(VSD)andminimalorabsent
pulmonarystenosis.
Singleventriclephysiologycanexistinthepres-
enceoftwowell-formedanatomicventricleswhen
there is complete or near complete obstruction to
outﬂowfromoneontheventricles:
• Tetralogy of Fallot (TOF) with PA where pul-
monarybloodﬂowissuppliedviaaPDAormajor
aortopulmonarycollateralarteries(MAPCAs).
• Truncusarteriosus.
• Severe neonatal aortic stenosis and interrupted
aorticarch;inbothlesionsasubstantialportionof
systemicbloodﬂowissuppliedviaaPDA.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 173 — #7
CongenitalHeartDisease 173
Saturations
(%)
98
80
65
65
LA RA
LA
LV
Ao
Qs
1.5 1.8
3.3
PA
Qp
1.5 1.3
2.8
2.8 3.3
Vena cavae
RA
RV
Effective pulmonary
and systemic blood
flow
Physiologic shunt
flow
80 80
LV RV
Pulmonary veins Vena cavae
Flow
(L/min/m2)
Flow
(L/min/m2)
Pressures
(mmHg)
Pressures
(mmHg)
A = 5
V = 7
100/4 25/5
Total systemic
blood flow
Total pulmonary
blood flow
10/6100/60
SVR = 22.7 mmHg/L/min/m 2 PVR = 1.4 mmHg/L/min /m2
4
Saturations
(%)
Pulmonary
veins
–
8–
A = 10
V = 5 5–
80 Ao
80
PA
80
—
Fig. 6.3 Depictionofsaturations,pressures,andblood
ﬂowsintype1Btricuspidatresiawithamildlyrestrictive
atrialseptaldefect(ASD),asmallrestrictiveventricular
septaldefect(VSD),andmildpulmonicstenosis(PS).
Completemixingorblendingoccursattheatriallevel.
Thiscompletemixingistheconsequenceofanobligatory
physiologicandanatomicright-to-left(R–L)shunting
acrosstheASD.Effectivepulmonaryandeffective
systemicbloodﬂowareequal(1.5L/min/m 2).Effective
systemicbloodﬂowoccursviaanormalpathway
throughtheheart.Effectivepulmonarybloodﬂowisthe
resultofananatomicR–Lshuntattheatriallevelandan
anatomicleft-to-right(L–R)shuntattheventricular
level.Thisillustratestheconceptthatwhencomplete
outﬂowobstructionexistsandthereisobligatory
anatomicshunting,adownstreamanatomicshuntmust
existtodeliverbloodbacktotheobstructedcircuit.Total
pulmonarybloodﬂow( QP)is2.8L/min/m 2 andisthe
sumofeffectivepulmonarybloodﬂow(1.5L/min/m 2)
andaphysiologicandanatomicL–Rshunt
(1.3L/min/m2)attheVSD.Totalsystemicbloodﬂow
(QS)is3.3L/min/m 2 andisthesumofeffectivesystemic
bloodﬂow(1.5L/min/m 2)andaphysiologicand
anatomicR–Lshunt(1.8L/min/m 2)attheASD.
Inthisdepiction,thereisasmallpressuregradientat
theatriallevelandalargepressuregradientatthe
ventricularlevel.Inaddition,thereisasmalladditional
gradientatthelevelofthepulmonicvalve.Ao,aorta;LA,
leftatrium;LV,leftventricle;PVR,pulmonaryvascular
resistance;RA,rightatrium;RV,rightventricle;SVR,
systemicvascularresistance.
• Heterotaxy syndrome where there are compo-
nentsofsystemicvenous(SVC,IVC,hepaticveins,
azygous veins) and pulmonary venous return to
both right and left sided atria. In addition, atrial
morphologyisambiguous.
Despitethefactthatpatientswithtotallyanoma-
louspulmonaryvenousreturn(TAPVR)havecom-
plete mixing of pulmonary and systemic venous
blood at the atrial level they do not manifest the
other features necessary to create single ventri-
cle physiology. This holds true as well for lesions
in which a common atrial or ventricular cham-
ber exists due to bidirectional (both L–R and R–L)
anatomic shunting across a large defect (atrial
septal or ventricular septal) and where there is
noobstructiontoventricularoutﬂow.Table6.1lists
anumberofsingleventriclephysiologylesions.
Allpatientswithsingleventriclephysiologywho
have severe hypoplasia of one ventricle will ulti-
matelybestageddownthesingleventriclepathway
to Fontan physiology. This will be discussed in
detail later. Patients with single ventricle physiol-
ogy and two well-formed ventricles will be able
to undergo a two-ventricle repair. In some cases
thetwo-ventriclerepairwillbecomplete.Inothers,
signiﬁcant residual lesions (VSD, aortopulmonary
collaterals)mayremain.
Withsingleventriclephysiology,thearterialsat-
uration (SaO2) will be determined by the relative
volumesandsaturationsofpulmonaryvenousandAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 174 — #8
174 Chapter6
Saturations
(%)
99
95
50
70
LA RA
LA
LV
PA
Qp
9.0 1.1
10.1
Ao
Qs
1.1 1.2
2.3
10.1 2.3
Vena cavae
RA
RV
Effective pulmonary
and systemic blood
flow
Physiologic shunt
flow
94 72
LV RV
Pulmonary veins Vena cavae
Flow
(L/min/m2)
Flow
(L/min/m2)
Pressures
(mmHg)
Pressures
(mmHg)
Pulmonary
veins
A = 3
V = 6
35/5 90/4
Total pulmonary
blood flow
Total systemic
blood flow
90/5018/10
PVR = 0.8 mmHg/L/min/m2 SVR = 28.7 mmHg/L/min/m2
4
Saturations
(%)
Pulmonary
veins
–
70—
A = 7
V = 3 4–
12 PA
94
Ao
72
—
Fig. 6.4 Depictionofsaturations,pressures,andblood
ﬂowsintranspositionofthegreatarterieswitha
nonrestrictiveatrialseptaldefect(ASD)andasmallleft
ventricularoutﬂowtractgradient.Intercirculatory
mixingoccursattheatriallevel.Effectivepulmonaryand
effectivesystemicbloodﬂowsareequal(1.1L/min/m 2)
andaretheresultofabidirectionalanatomicshuntatthe
atriallevel.ThephysiologicL–Rshuntis9.0L/min/m 2;
thisrepresentsbloodrecirculatedfromthepulmonary
veinstothepulmonaryartery.ThephysiologicR–L
shuntis1.2L/min/m 2;thisrepresentsbloodrecirculated
fromthesystemicveinstotheaorta.Totalpulmonary
bloodﬂow( QP =10.1L/min/m2)isalmostﬁvetimes
totalsystemicbloodﬂow( QS =2.3L/min/m2).Thebulk
ofpulmonarybloodﬂowisrecirculatedpulmonary
venousblood.Inthisdepiction,pulmonaryvascular
resistanceislow(approximately1/35ofsystemic
vascularresistance)andthereisasmall(17mmHgpeak
topeak)gradientfromtheleftventricletothe
pulmonaryartery.Theseﬁndingsarecompatiblewith
thehighpulmonarybloodﬂowdepicted.Ao,aorta;
LA,leftatrium;LV,leftventricle;PVR,pulmonary
vascularresistance;RA,rightatrium;RV,rightventricle;
SVR,systemicvascularresistance.
systemic venous blood ﬂows that have mixed and
reachtheaorta.Thisissummarizedinthefollowing
equation:
Aorticsaturation =
[
(systemicvenoussaturation )
× (totalsystemicvenousbloodﬂow )
+ (pulmonaryvenoussaturation )
× (totalpulmonaryvenousbloodﬂow )
]
÷
[
totalsystemicvenousbloodﬂow
+totalpulmonaryvenousbloodﬂow
]
.
ThisisillustratedinFig.6.3where:
SaO2 =[ (65)(3.3) + (98)(2.8)]/(3.3 +2.8) =80%
From this equation, it is apparent that with single
ventriclephysiology,threevariableswilldetermine
arterialsaturation:
1 The ratio of total pulmonary to total systemic
blood ﬂow (Q p:Qs). A greater proportion of
the mixed blood will consist of saturated blood
(pulmonary venous blood) than of desaturated
blood (systemic venous blood) when Qp:Qs is
high.Figure6.5demonstratestheincreaseinarte-
rial saturation that occurs with increases in pul-
monarybloodﬂowrelativetosystemicbloodﬂow.
Figure 6.5 also demonstrates that an arterial satu-
ration approaching 100% is possible only with an
extremelylarge Qp:Qs.
2 Systemic venous saturation.Foragiven QP:QS and
pulmonary venous saturation, a decrease in sys-
temic venous saturation will result in a decreased
arterial saturation. Decreases in systemic venous
saturation occur as the result of decreases in sys-
temic oxygen delivery or increases in systemic
oxygen consumption. Recall that systemic oxygen
delivery is the product of systemic blood ﬂow and
arterialoxygencontent.Arterialoxygencontentis
dependent on the hemoglobin concentration and
thearterialsaturation.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 175 — #9
CongenitalHeartDisease 175
Table 6.1 Anatomicsubtypesofsingleventriclephysiology.
Aortic blood
ﬂow from
Pulmonary artery
blood ﬂow from
HLHS PDA RV
Severe neonate aortic stenosis PDA RV
IAA LV (proximal)
PDA (distal)
RV
PA/IVS LV PDA
Tetralogy of Fallot with pulmonary atresia LV PDA, MAPCAs
Tricuspid atresia, NRGA, with pulmonary
atresia (type 1A)
LV PDA, MAPCAs
Tricuspid atresia, NRGA, with restrictive VSD
and pulmonary stenosis (type 1B)
LV LV thru VSD to RV
Tricuspid atresia, NRGA, with non-restrictive
VSD and no pulmonary stenosis (type 1C)
LV LV thru VSD to RV
Tricuspid atresia, D-TGA, with non-restrictive
VSD and pulmonary atresia (type 2A)
LV thru VSD to RV PDA, MAPCAs
Tricuspid atresia, D-TGA, with non-restrictive
VSD and pulmonary stenosis (type 2B)
LV thru VSD to RV LV
Tricuspid atresia, D-TGA, with non-restrictive
VSD and no pulmonary stenosis (type 2C)
LV thru VSD to RV LV
Tricuspid atresia, D-loop ventricles, L-TGA,
subpulmonic stenosis (type 3A)
LV LV thru VSD to RV
Tricuspid atresia, L-loop ventricles, L-TGA,
subaortic stenosis (type 3B)
LV thru VSD to RV LV
Truncus arteriosus LV and RV Aorta
DILV, NRGA LV LV thru VSD to BVF
DILV, L-loop ventricles, L-TGA, restrictive BVFLV thru VSD to
BVF, PDA
LV
BVF, bulboventricular foramen; D, dextro; DILV, double inlet left ventricle; HLHS, hypoplastic left
heartsyndrome;IAA,interruptedaorticarch;L,levo;LV,leftventricle;MAPCAs,multipleaortopul-
monary collateral arteries; NRGA, normally related great arteries; PA/IVS, pulmonary atresia with
intact ventricular septum; PDA, patent ductus arteriosus; RV, right ventricle; TGA, transposition
of the great arteries; VSD, ventricular septal defect.
3 Pulmonary venous saturation. In the absence of
large intrapulmonary shunts and/or V /Q mis-
match, pulmonary venous saturation should be
closeto100%breathingroomair.Inthepresence
of pulmonary parenchymal disease, pulmonary
venous saturation may be reduced. The V /Q
mismatchcomponentofpulmonaryvenousdesat-
urationwillbelargelyeliminatedwithafractional
inspired oxygen concentration (FiO2) of 1.0 while
theintrapulmonaryshuntcontributionwillnotbeAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 176 — #10
176 Chapter6
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
02468 1 0
QP:QS
SaO2
300 mL /min/kg
450 mL /min/kg
Fig. 6.5 GraphofsystemicSa O2 versus QP:QS fortwo
differentsystemicventricularoutputs(300mL/kg/min
and450mL/kg/min)insingleventriclephysiology.
Inthisexampleoxygen( O2)consumptionis
assumedtobe9mL/kg/minandSpv O2 =95%.Itis
clearthatSa O2 peaksatorneara QP:QS of1:1.Further
increasesin QP:QS produceminimaltonoincreases
inSaO2.
eliminated. For any given systemic venous sat-
uration and QP:QS a reduction in pulmonary
venoussaturationwillresultinadecreasedarterial
saturation.
Intercirculatory mixing
Intercirculatorymixingistheuniquesituationthat
exists in transposition of the great arteries (TGA)
(seeFig.6.4).InTGA,twoparallelcirculationsexist
duetotheexistenceofatrioventricular(AV)concor-
dance(RAtoRV,LAtoLV)andventriculoarterial
discordance(RVtoaorta,LVtoPA).Thisproduces
a parallel rather than a normal series circulation.
Inthisarrangement,bloodﬂowwillconsistofpar-
allel recirculation of pulmonary venous blood in
the pulmonary circuit and systemic venous blood
in the systemic circuit. Therefore, the physiologic
shuntorthepercentageofvenousbloodfromone
system that recirculates in the arterial outﬂow of
the same system is 100% for both circuits. Unless
there are one or more communications (atrial
septal defect (ASD), patent foramen ovale (PFO),
VSD, PDA) between the parallel circuits to allow
intercirculatory mixing, this lesion is incompatible
withlife.
An anatomic R–L shunt is necessary to pro-
vide effective pulmonary blood ﬂow, whereas
ananatomicL–Rshuntisnecessarytoprovideeffec-
tivesystemicbloodﬂow.Effectivepulmonaryblood
ﬂow,effectivesystemicbloodﬂow,andthevolume
of intercirculatory mixing must always be equal.
Totalsystemicbloodﬂowisthesumofrecirculated
systemicvenousbloodpluseffectivesystemicblood
ﬂow. Likewise, total pulmonary blood ﬂow is the
sum of recirculated pulmonary venous blood plus
effectivepulmonarybloodﬂow.Recirculatedblood
makesupthelargestportionoftotalpulmonaryand
totalsystemicbloodﬂowwitheffectivebloodﬂows
contributingonlyasmallportionofthetotalﬂows.
This is particularly true in the pulmonary circuit
wherethetotalpulmonarybloodﬂow( QP)andthe
volumeofthepulmonarycircuit(LAtoLVtoPA)is
2–3timeslargerthanthetotalsystemicbloodﬂow
(QS)andthevolumeofthesystemiccircuit(RAto
RVtoaorta).Thenetresultistranspositionphysi-
ology,inwhichthePAoxygensaturationisgreater
thantheaorticoxygensaturation.
Arterialsaturation(Sa O2)willbedeterminedby
therelativevolumesandsaturationsoftherecircu-
latedsystemicandeffectivesystemicvenousblood
ﬂowsreachingtheaorta.Thisissummarizedinthe
followingequation:
Aorticsaturation =
[
(systemicvenoussaturation )
× (recirculatedsystemicvenousbloodﬂow )
+ (pulmonaryvenoussaturation )
× (effectivesystemicvenousbloodﬂow )
]
÷
[
totalsystemicvenousbloodﬂow
]
.
ThisisillustratedinFig.6.4where:
SaO2 =[ (50)(1.2) + (99)(1.1)]/2.3 =73%.
Obviously,thegreatertheeffectivesystemicblood
ﬂow(intercirculatorymixing)relativetotherecir-
culated systemic blood ﬂow, the greater the aortic
saturation. For a given amount of intercirculatory
mixingandtotalsystemicbloodﬂow,adecreasein
systemic venous or pulmonary venous saturation
willresultinadecreaseinarterialsaturation.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 177 — #11
CongenitalHeartDisease 177
Table 6.2 Simpleshunts(noobstructive
lesions).
Restrictive
(small communication)
Nonrestrictive
(large communication)
1 Large shunt pressure gradient 1 Small shunt pressure gradient
2 Direction and magnitude of
shunt are relatively independent
of PVR:SVR
2 Direction and magnitude of shunt
are largely dependent on PVR:SVR
3 Shunt is less subject to control
by ventilatory or pharmacologic
interventions
3 Shunt is subject to control by
ventilatory or pharmacologic
interventions
Examples: Small VSD, small PDA,
modiﬁed Blalock–Taussig shunt,
small ASD
Examples: Large VSD, large PDA, CAVC
ASD, atrial septal defect; CAVC, complete atrioventricular canal defect; PDA,
patent ductus arteriosus; PVR, pulmonary vascular resistance; SVR, systemic
vascular resistance; VSD, ventricular septal defect.
Classiﬁcation of anatomic shunts
Anatomicshuntscanbecharacterizedassimpleor
complex.
Simple shunts
In an anatomic shunt, a communication (oriﬁce)
exists between pulmonary and arterial vessels or
heartchambers(Table6.2).Inasimpleshunt,there
isnoﬁxedobstructiontooutﬂowfromthevessels
orchambersinvolvedintheshunt.Whentheshunt
oriﬁce is small (restrictive shunt), a large pressure
gradient exists across the oriﬁce, and variations
in outﬂow resistance (PVR; and systemic vascular
resistance(SVR))havelittleeffectonshuntmagni-
tudeanddirection.Inthisinstance,themagnitude
of the shunt is affected by the size of the shunt
oriﬁce. However, when the shunt oriﬁce is large,
theshuntbecomesnonrestrictive,andtheoutﬂow
resistancebecomestheprimarydeterminantofthe
magnitudeanddirectionofshunting.Theseshunts,
in which the ratio of PVR to SVR determines the
magnitude of shunting, are known as dependent
shunts. When the communication is very large,
no pressure gradient exists between the vessels or
chambers involved. In this instance, bidirectional
shuntingoccurs,resultingincompletemixingand
afunctionallycommonchamber.Netsystemicand
pulmonary blood ﬂow is then determined by the
ratioofsystemictoPVR(Fig.6.6a–c).
Complex shunts
Incomplexanatomicshuntlesionsthereisobstruc-
tion to outﬂow in addition to a shunt oriﬁce
(Table6.3).Theobstructionmaybeatthevalvular,
subvalvular, or supravalvular level. The obstruc-
tionmaybeﬁxed(aswithvalvularorinfundibular
stenosis) or variable (as with dynamic infundibu-
larobstruction).Incomplexshunts,outﬂowresis-
tance is a combination of the resistance across the
obstructivelesionsandtheresistanceacrossthepul-
monary or systemic vascular bed (Fig. 6.7). When
an obstruction is severe, the SVR or PVR distal
to the obstruction will have little effect on shunt
magnitudeordirection.
TOF is a good example of a complex shunt
in which there is partial obstruction to out-
ﬂow. There is a ﬁxed component of right ven-
tricular outﬂow obstruction in TOF secondary to
infundibular, valvular, and possibly supravalvu-
lar obstruction. A dynamic component of right
ventricular obstruction is produced by changes
in the caliber of the right ventricular infundibu-
lum. These two components of right ventricular
outﬂow obstruction can produce a R–L shunt.
Because right ventricular outﬂow obstruction is
incomplete, increases in PVR will also increase
the total right ventricular outﬂow resistance and
increase R–L shunting. Similarly, a decrease in
SVR relative to PVR will increase R–L shuntingAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 178 — #12
178 Chapter6
Outflow  =  PVR
resistance
SVR  =  Outflow
              resistance
Increased PVR
Pulmonary
flow
PVR
Systemic
flow
Pulmonary
flow
SVRPVR
SVR
Systemic
flow
Increased SVR
2) Balance of:
1) Orifice size
Pulmonary sideSystemic side
Chamber or great vessel(a)
(b) (c)
Fig. 6.6 Inﬂuenceoforiﬁcesizeandthepulmonary
vascularresistance:systemicvascularresistance
(PVR:SVR)ratioonthemagnitudeanddirectionof
adependantshunt.(a)PVRandSVRarebalanced
resultinginequalpulmonaryandsystemicbloodﬂows.
(b)PVRisreducedrelativetoSVR,resultinginan
increaseinpulmonarybloodﬂowandadecreasein
systemicbloodﬂow.(c)PVRiselevatedrelativetoSVR,
resultinginadecreaseinpulmonarybloodﬂowandan
increaseinsystemicbloodﬂow.
Partial outﬂow obstruction Complete outﬂow obstruction
1 Shunt magnitude and direction
is largely ﬁxed due to the
obstruction
1 Shunt magnitude and direction
is totally ﬁxed
2 Shunt dependence on PVR:SVR
is inversely related to the severity
of the obstructive lesion
2 All ﬂow is thru the shunt,
independent of PVR:SVR
3 Shunt pressure gradient is
determined by both the shunt
oriﬁce and the obstructive lesion
3 Shunt pressure gradient is
determined only by the shunt
oriﬁce
Examples: TOF, VSD and
pulmonary stenosis, VSD with
coarctation
Examples: Tricuspid atresia, mitral
atresia, pulmonary atresia, aortic
atresia
PVR, pulmonary vascular resistance; SVR, systemic vascular resistance; TOF,
tetralogy of Fallot; VSD, ventricular septal defect.
Table 6.3 Complexshunts(shuntand
downstreamobstructivelesion).AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 179 — #13
CongenitalHeartDisease 179
Fig. 6.7 Inﬂuenceoforiﬁcesizeand
totaloutﬂowresistanceonthe
magnitudeanddirectionofacomplex
shunt.Totaloutﬂowresistancewillbe
acombinationofpulmonaryvascular
resistance(PVR)orsystemicvascular
resistance(SVR)andtheresistance
offeredbytheobstructivelesion.
Systemic obstruction
Chamber or great vessel
Systemic side Pulmonary side
Orifice size
Orifice size
outflow
resistance
=  outflow
    resistance
= PVR
outflow
resistance
SVR =
SVR + outlet
           obstruction
=  outflow
    resistance
PVR + outlet
           obstruction
Pulmonary obstruction
Systemic
flow
Systemic
flow
Pulmonary
flow
Systemic side Pulmonary side
Pulmonary
flow
without any increase in right ventricular outﬂow
resistance.
Another form of complex shunt is present in
patients who have single ventricle physiology. In
these lesions, changes in SVR or PVR play no
role in determining shunt magnitude or direction.
Theentireshuntﬂowisﬁxedandobligatoryacross
the communication and complete mixing results.
Forﬂowofthismixedbloodtoreachtheobstructed
circuit, an additional downstream shunt, such as
a VSD or PDA must be present. The downstream
shuntmaybesimpleorcomplexandisdependant
ontheratioofPVRtoSVR.
Theseconceptsarecriticaltoaclearunderstand-
ingofthepathophysiologyinvolvedinpatientswith
CHD. Describing a lesion as cyanotic or acyanotic
maybemisleadingandsimplistic.Forexample,ina
patientwithTOF,theremaybeminimalvalvularor
infundibular obstruction to pulmonary blood ﬂow
at baseline, and the patient may not be cyanotic.
In fact, this type of patient (“pink Tet”) may have
alargeL–RshuntthroughtheVSDwithincreased
pulmonary blood ﬂow. During anesthesia, hyper-
carbia and hypoxemia may develop resulting in
an increase in both PVR and the dynamic compo-
nentofinfundibularobstruction.Thiswillproduce
anetR–Lshuntandcyanosis(“Tetspell”).Similarly,
acyanoticepisode(anetR–Lshunt)maybeprecip-
itatedinthesamepatientbytheSVRreductionthat
accompaniesafebrileillness.
Pulmonary vascular pathophysiology
Pulmonaryvascularocclusivedisease(PVOD)may
occur as the result of congenital heart lesions.
Unfortunately of late PVOD has been used as
anabbreviationforpulmonaryveno-occlusivedis-
ease, a different process. PVOD as described in
the context of CHD produces obstruction to pul-
monary blood ﬂow due to structural changes
in the pulmonary vasculature. The morphologic
changes have three components: increased mus-
cularity of small pulmonary arteries, small artery
intimal hyperplasia, scarring, and thrombosis and
reduced numbers of intra-acinar arteries. These
changes produce progressive obstruction to pul-
monary blood ﬂow and result in progressive and
irreversible elevations of PVR and PA pressure.
These changes may be graded morphologicallyAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 180 — #14
180 Chapter6
usinglungbiopsyorangiographicallyusingthePA
angiogram. Ultimately, these changes elevate PVR
and reduce pulmonary blood ﬂow. The increased
muscularity of the small pulmonary arteries that
accompanies development of PVOD enhances
the response of the pulmonary vasculature to
pulmonaryvasoconstrictors.
ThestimulusfordevelopmentofPVODisexpo-
sureofthepulmonaryvascularsystem(both inutero
andafterbirth)toabnormalpressureandﬂowpat-
ternsassociatedwithCHD.Inparticular,threecate-
goriesofabnormalitiespredisposethedevelopment
ofPVOD:
1 Exposure of the pulmonary vascular circuit to
systemic arterial pressures and high pulmonary
blood ﬂows. Patients for whom the pulmonary
vasculature is exposed to high ﬂows and systemic
arterial pressures typically have very early devel-
opment of PVOD. This classically occurs in the
presenceofalarge(nonrestrictive)VSD.
2 Exposure of the pulmonary vascular circuit to
highpulmonarybloodﬂowintheabsenceofhigh
PA pressures. The progression of PVOD is typi-
cally much slower in this situation than when PA
pressure is also elevated. A large ASD or a small
(restrictive)PDAareexamplesofthistypeoflesion.
3 Obstructionofpulmonaryvenousdrainage.This
will lead to elevation of pulmonary arterial pres-
sureandwillpredisposetodevelopmentofPVOD.
Pulmonary venous obstruction may result from
stenoticpulmonaryveins,whichcanexistinTAPVR
or cor triatriatum. Pulmonary venous obstruction
also may occur as the result of high LAPs (mitral
atresia,congenitalaorticstenosis,severecoarctation
oftheaorta)orhighrightatrialpressures(TAPVR).
Control of PVR
Alterations in PVR may be an important determi-
nant of shunt magnitude and direction in some
shunt lesions. Furthermore, the patient with CHD
islikelytohaveanenhancedresponseofthepul-
monaryvasculaturetovasoconstrictingsubstances.
It is therefore necessary to be familiar with the
interventions that will alter PVR in the patient
withCHD:
• PaO2.Bothalveolarhypoxiaandarterialhypox-
emia induce pulmonary vasoconstriction. A PaO2
lower than 50mmHg increases PVR over a wide
rangeofarterialpH;however,thiseffectisenhanced
whenpHislowerthan7.40.Conversely,highlevels
ofinspiredoxygencanreduceanelevatedPVR.
• PaCO2. Hypercarbia increases PVR, independent
ofchangesinarterialpH.Hypocarbia,ontheother
hand,reducesPVRonlythroughproductionofan
alkalosis. In fact, reliable reductions in PVR and
increases in pulmonary blood ﬂow and PaO2 are
seeninchildrenwithR–Lshuntswhenhyperventi-
lationtoaPaco 2near20mmHgandapHnear7.60
isobtained.Similarly,post-cardiopulmonarybypass
(CPB)hyperventilationtoaPaco 2 of20–33mmHg
andapHof7.50–7.56inpatientswithpreoperative
pulmonary hypertension results in a reduction in
PVRwhencomparedwithventilationthatproduces
normocarbiaorhypercarbia.
• pH. Both respiratory and metabolic alkalo-
sis reduce PVR, whereas both respiratory and
metabolicacidosisincreasePVR.
• Variation in lung volumes.Atsmalllungvolumes,
atelectasis results in compression of extra-alveolar
vessels, whereas at high lung volumes, hyper-
inﬂationofalveoliresultsincompressionofintra-
alveolarvessels.Therefore,PVRisnormallylowest
at lung volumes at or near the functional residual
capacity. Positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP)
may cause an increase in PVR by increasing alve-
olar pressure through hyperinﬂation. However, in
situationsinwhichPEEPworkstorecruitatelectatic
alveoliandincreasearterialPa O2,adecreaseinPVR
generallyisseen.
• Anesthetic agents. This topic will be discussed at
lengthinthesectiononanestheticagents.
• Vasodilator agents. Most IV pulmonary vasodila-
tors(PGE1,nitroglycerin,sodiumnitroprusside,and
tolazoline) induce systemic vasodilation as well.
Anumberofinhaledagents(ofwhichnitricoxide
(NO) is the prototype) capable of providing selec-
tive pulmonary vasodilatation are now available.
NOgeneratedbyendothelialNOsynthase(eNOS)
isanendogenousvasodilator.Awidevarietyofsub-
stancesthatincreaseintracellularcalciumstimulate
productionofNOfromL-arginineviaeNOS.After
ithasbeenformed,NOdiffusesfromendothelium
to vascular smooth muscle (VSM), where it binds
toandactivatesguanylatecyclasetoproducecyclicAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 181 — #15
CongenitalHeartDisease 181
guanosine monophosphate (cGMP). cGMP acts as
asecondmessengertocatalyzereactionsthatlead
to a reduction of VSM calcium by reduced cal-
ciuminﬂux,increasedcalciumefﬂux,andreduced
releaseofintracellularcalcium.Thisproducesrelax-
ation of VSM and vasodilation. NO is involved in
modulationofbasalVSMtoneaswell.Thismodula-
tioncapacityislostinvesselsinwhichendothelium
isremovedordamaged.
InhaledNOselectivelyreducespulmonaryhyper-
tensionandimprovesventilation/perfusionmatch-
ing in a variety of disease states. Pulmonary
selectivityisbasedonthreecharacteristicsofNO:
• Its gaseous state allows delivery to ventilated
alveolibyinhalation.
• Its small size and lipophilicity allows ready
diffusionintotheappropriatecells.
• Its avid binding to and rapid inactivation by
hemoglobin prevents systemic vasodilatation. NO
binds to oxyhemoglobin (Fe2+) to form nitro-
sylhemoglobin which is rapidly converted to
methemoglobin(Fe3+)andNO −
3.
Inhaled NO has been used to treat pulmonary
hypertensioninboththepre-andpost-CPBperiod
in a variety of congenital heart lesions and in
treatmentforpersistentpulmonaryhypertensionof
thenewborn.Generally,approximately20–40ppm
inhaled NO has been used. Some caution is war-
rantedbecausebothNOdependencyandrebound
pulmonaryhypertensionfollowingNOdiscontinu-
ationhasbeenreported.Nomaynotbeeffectivein
treating pulmonary hypertension when there is a
downstream obstruction to pulmonary blood ﬂow
suchas:
• Pulmonaryveinobstruction.
• LA hypertension from LV dysfunction or mitral
valvedisease.
• A small LV where an increase in pulmonary
venousreturnislikelytoelevateLAP.
In these situations NO is unlikely to reduce pul-
monaryarterypressure(PAP)andwilllikelycause
interstitialpulmonaryedema.
An alternative to inhaled NO is aerosolized
prostacyclin (PGI2) and aerosolized PGE1. PGI2
anditsanalogues(iloprost,epoprostenolorFlolan)
and PGE1 act by binding to prostacyclin receptors
and activating cyclic adenosine monophosphate
(cAMP). This activates protein kinase A, which
leads to a reduction of VSM intracellular cal-
cium, causing vasorelaxation. PGI2 also stimu-
lates endothelial release of NO. Aerosolized PGI2
(2–50ng/kg/min) is useful in selectively lowering
PVR after congenital cardiac surgery. There is less
experience with aerosolized PGE1 but at doses of
150–300ng/kg/min it has been proved useful in
treatmentofneonatalrespiratoryfailure.
Sildenaﬁl is cGMP-speciﬁc phosphodiesterase
(PDE5)inhibitorthatalsoworkstoincreasecGMP
levels.Oral,IV,andaerosolizedsildenaﬁliseffective
inreducingPVR.
Sympathetic nervous system stimulation
Sympathetic stimulation results in increases in
both pulmonary and systemic vascular resistance.
InchildrenwithPAmedialhypertrophy,thismay
result in a hyperactive pulmonary vasoconstrictor
response. Blunting of sympathetic outﬂow during
a stress response attenuates increases in PVR in
childrenpredisposedtopulmonaryhypertension.
In summary, control of ventilation with manip-
ulation of PaO2,P aCO2, pH, and lung volumes are
thebestmethodsforalteringPVRindependentlyof
SVR.AcombinationofahighinspiredFi O2,aPa O2
higher than 60mmHg, a PaCO2 of 30–35mmHg,
a pHof 7.50–7.60, and low inspiratory pressures
without high levels of PEEP, will produce reliable
reductions in PVR. Conversely, a reduced FiO2,a
PaO2of50–60mmHg,aPa CO2of45–55mmHg,and
theapplicationofPEEP,canbeusedtoincreasePVR.
InhaledNOandprostacyclinarevaluableselective
pulmonaryvasodilatorsinsomepatients.
Myocardial ischemia
PatientswithCHDaremoreatriskforthedevelop-
mentofsubendocardialischemiathaniscommonly
appreciated. In some congenital lesions there are
abnormalitiesinthecoronarycirculationpredispos-
ing to ischemia but in many others forms of CHD
ischemiaoccursinthepresenceofnormalcoronary
arteriessecondarytomyocardialoxygensupplyand
demandimbalance.
Subendocardial perfusion is largely determined
by coronary perfusion pressure (CPP), which isAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 182 — #16
182 Chapter6
the mean aortic diastolic pressure minus the ven-
tricularend-diastolicpressure.Inadditionthetime
intervalavailableforperfusion(predominatelydias-
tole)iscritical.Asaresult,therelationshipbetween
heart rate, diastolic blood pressure, and ventricu-
lar end-diastolic pressure will determine whether
subendocardial ischemia occurs. These factors as
they apply to patients with CHD are considered
below.
Aortic diastolic pressure
Subendocardial perfusion in a ventricle with
systemic pressure occurs predominately in early
diastole. In normal children, some subendocardial
perfusion of the pulmonary or RV can occur in
systole as well as in diastole because pulmonary
ventricular systolic pressure is low. However, in
many congenital lesions systolic pressure in both
ventricles is systemic, and in some cases the pul-
monary ventricle may have suprasystemic pres-
sures. As a result perfusion of both ventricles
may be dependent on the rapid increase in early
diastolicﬂow.
Aortic diastolic pressure, which is normally low
in neonates and infants, is further compromised
insingleventriclephysiologylesionsbecausethese
lesionspromotediastolicrunoffofaorticbloodinto
the lower resistance pulmonary circuit. The sub-
group of patients with ductal dependent systemic
bloodandpatientswithtruncusarteriosusarepar-
ticularlyatriskforenhancedaorticdiastolicrunoff.
Inaddition,coronaryperfusionisfurthercompro-
misedinpatientswithHLHSbecausethecoronary
ostia are perfused retrograde down a segment of
atreticascendingaorta.
Subendocardial pressure
Subendocardial pressure is elevated and subendo-
cardial perfusion is compromised in the pres-
enceofelevatedventricularend-diastolicpressure.
Elevated end-diastolic pressure may be the result
of impaired diastolic function (both reduced
ventricular compliance and impaired ventricular
relaxation), impaired systolic function, increased
ventricularend-diastolicvolume,oracombination
of all three. For example, elevated ventricular
end-diastolic pressure occurs as the result of the
ventricular volume overload that accompanies
single ventricle lesions, lesions with a highQP:QS,
and regurgitant AV and semilunar valve lesions.
Theventricularhypertrophythataccompaniespres-
sure overload lesions is particularly detrimental
tosubendocardialperfusion.Ventricularhypertro-
phy reduces ventricular compliance and elevates
ventricular end-diastolic pressure. In addition, the
extravascularcompressiveforcesthataccompanya
high external pressure workload further compro-
misemyocardialperfusionbyreducingtransmural
coronary vascular reserve (CVR). CVR is the ratio
of hyperemic myocardial blood ﬂow to baseline
myocardialbloodﬂow.
Heart rate
The duration of diastole diminishes geometrically
as heart rate increases while the duration of sys-
tole remains relatively constant. As a result, the
time available for diastolic coronary artery perfu-
sion falls as heart rate increases. Consequently,
a higher diastolic pressure is necessary to main-
tainsubendocardialperfusionathigherheartrates.
Hence, subendocardial perfusion is maintained in
thepresenceofalowdiastolicbloodpressureifthe
heart rate is slower. In an infant with HLHS and
anaorticdiastolicpressureof25mmHgaheartrate
of 130–140b/min may well be tolerated without
evidence of subendocardial ischemia whereas it is
unlikelythataheartrateof170–180b/minwillbe
toleratedatthesamediastolicpressure.
Anatomic coronary artery lesions
Anatomic coronary artery abnormalities compli-
cate the management of patients with a number
of congenital cardiac lesions such as PA/IVS and
Williams–Beurinsyndrome.
Preoperative evaluation
Psychological considerations
Theanesthesiologistwhoevaluatesthepatientwith
CHDmustbeawareoftheconsiderableeffectthat
appropriate psychological preparation may have
during the preoperative and postoperative period.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 183 — #17
CongenitalHeartDisease 183
The pediatric patient has unique psychological
concerns that depend on age and previous surgi-
calandanestheticexperience.Inaddition,theeffect
thatseriousheartdiseasehasonparentsandother
family members cannot be minimized and must
be addressed sensitively during the preoperative
evaluation.Althoughneonatesrequirenopsycho-
logical preparation, the perioperative process can
overwhelmtheparents.
Thepreoperativepsychologicalpreparationmust
be appropriate to the age of the patient. Fear of
separationfromparents(“strangeranxiety”)canbe
manifest in the infant at 8–12months with an
intense aversion to strangers. Very few toddlers,
even if playful and cooperative in the presence
of the parent, will leave their parent happily to
go to the operating room. Older children have
fears of disﬁgurement or that they will “wake up”
or feel pain during and after surgery. Even the
withdrawn,seeminglycomplacentadolescentoften
is in great turmoil regarding impending surgery.
Previoussurgeryandanesthesiawillinﬂuenceeven
a young child’s ability to cope with the newest
operativeexperience.Psychologicalissuesinﬂuence
not only the conduct of the physical examina-
tion but also how much detail is discussed with
parents in the presence of the patient. Obtaining
informed consent from the parent in the presence
ofaschool-agedchildmaycreateunduestressfor
thechild.Ontheotherhand,weakpromisesof“no
needles” or little discussion about what the child
can expect is equally unpleasant and counterpro-
ductive. Most experienced pediatric anesthesiolo-
gists, aware of the spectrum and unpredictability
of children’s behavior, prudently plan for alterna-
tiveapproachestophysicalexaminationand,most
importantly, how to pleasantly and safely sepa-
ratethechildfromtheparentfortheinductionof
anesthesia.
Clinical history
Clinical history should include medications, aller-
gies, past hospitalizations and operations (includ-
ing prior anesthetic experiences), and a thorough
reviewofsystems.Performanceofage-appropriate
activities will aid in the evaluation of cardiac
function and reserve. The infant in cardiac fail-
urewillmanifestsymptomsoflowcardiacreserve
during feeding. A parent might report that sweat-
ing,tiring,dyspnea,andcircumoralcyanosisduring
feeding.Theobservationbyaparentthatthepatient
cannotkeepthesamepaceassiblingsoftenisareli-
able clinical sign that cyanosis or congestive heart
failureisworsening.Frequentpulmonaryinfections
mayoccurasaresultofincreasedpulmonaryblood
ﬂow in otherwise asymptomatic patients. Cardiac
catheterizationdatamaybeseveralmonthsoldby
the time the patient presents for surgery, and the
newlyobservedclinicalsignsmaymoreaccurately
reﬂectthepatient’scurrentcardiacstatus.
Physical examination
Interpretation of vital signs is age-speciﬁc. Heart
rate decreases and blood pressure increases with
age (Figs 6.8 and 6.9). Growth curves also are
useful. Congestive heart failure will sequentially
inhibitage-appropriategainsinweight,heightand
head circumference. It is not unusual for patients
withseverecongestiveheartfailuretoweighlessat
4months of age than at birth. Interestingly, cyan-
otic children often do not manifest this failure to
thrive.
Physicalexaminationmayrevealcyanosis,club-
bing,orsignsofcongestiveheartfailuresimilarto
thoseseeninadults(hepatomegaly,ascites,edema,
or tachypnea). Rales may not be heard in infants
andchildrenwithcongestiveheartfailure,andthe
degree of heart failure may be determined more
reliably by some of the signs and symptoms out-
lined above. Cyanosis is visibly detectable when
thedeoxyhemoglobinconcentrationis >5g/dLand
anemia masks detection of cyanosis. Differentia-
tion between congestive heart failure and a upper
respiratorytractinfectioncanbedifﬁcult.Thephys-
icalexaminationinbothconditionsmayshowmild
tachypnea,wheezing,andupperairwaycongestion.
Abnormallaboratoryﬁndingsmayhelpdistinguish
betweenthetwo.Thedecisiontoproceedtosurgery
may be necessary even when the differentiation
between worsening congestive heart failure and
a respiratory tract infection cannot be made with
certainty.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 184 — #18
184 Chapter6
190
= Heart rate
= ± 2 Standard deviations
170
150
130
Average heart rate (b/min)
110
90
70
50
Birth 1st
month
1–6
months
6–12
months
1–2 
years
Age
2–4
years
6–10
years
10–14
years
14–18
years Fig. 6.8 Variationinaverageheartrate
withage.
150
125
100
75
Normal blood pressure (mmHg)
50
25
0
Newborn 6
months
1
year
2
years
3
years
4
years
5–6
years
Age
6–7
years
7–8
years
8–9
years
9–10
years
10–11
years
11–12
years
12–13
years
13–14
years
= Systolic blood pressure
= ±2 Standard deviations
= Diastolic blood pressure
= ±2 Standard deviations
= Point of muffling taken as
   diastolic pressure
Fig. 6.9 Variationinnormalbloodpressurewithage.
Physical examination should include an evalua-
tionofthelimitationstovascularaccessandmoni-
toringsites.Achildwhohasundergoneaprevious
palliativeshuntproceduremayhaveadiminished
pulseorunobtainablebloodpressureinthearmin
whichthesubclavianarteryhasbeenincorporated
intotheshunt.Thisobviouslyhasimplicationsfor
arterial catheter placement, blood pressure moni-
toring, and use of pulse oximetry during surgery.
Finally,thechildwhohasundergonemultiplepal-
liative procedures may have poor venous access,
whichwillinﬂuencethemodeofinduction.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 185 — #19
CongenitalHeartDisease 185
Approximately 8% of children with CHD have
other congenital abnormalities. Preoperative eval-
uation must deﬁne these defects. For example,
conotruncal lesions (TOF, interrupted aortic arch,
truncus arteriosus, VSDs) are commonly associ-
ated with a 22q11.2 chromosomal deletion. This
defectisassociatedwithDiGeorgesyndrome,velo-
cardiofacial syndrome, and conotruncal anomaly
face syndromes. These syndromes are associated
with hypocalcemia, immunodeﬁciency, facial dys-
morphia, palate anomalies, velopharyngeal dys-
function,renalanomalies,andspeechandfeeding
disorders.ASDs,VSDs,andTOFareseeninchildren
with VACTERL (vertebral, vascular, anal, cardiac,
tracheoesophageal,renal,andlimbanomalies)and
CHARGE(coloboma,heartanomaly,choanalatre-
sia, retardation, and genital and ear anomalies)
association. Tracheal stenosis must be considered
in patients with VATER (vertebral defects, imper-
forateanus,transesophagealﬁstula,andradialand
renal dysplasia) association who have undergone
tracheoesophageal ﬁstula repair. The incidence of
CHD (primarily AV canal defects) in patients with
trisomy 21 is approximately 50%. As they age
these patients may present with problematic air-
ways due to a large tongue and atlanto-occipital
instability.
Laboratory data
Areviewofpertinentlaboratorydataandcorrela-
tionwiththeclinicalﬁndingsisnecessary.Thechild
incongestiveheartfailuremayhavemildirondeﬁ-
ciency because of chronically increased metabolic
needs. The cyanotic child will be erythrocytotic
in direct relation to the degree of arterial desat-
uration. Hematocrit levels higher than 65% are
associatedwithamarkedincreaseinbloodviscosity.
To avoid possible neurologic sequalae from such
extreme viscosity, exchange transfusion should be
consideredbeforesurgery.Thisisespeciallyimpor-
tant if the proposed surgery is palliative and CPB
with hemodilution is not employed. Patients with
severe cyanosis and anemia may require transfu-
sion.Cyanosisalsoaffectsthecoagulationprocess,
and it is not unusual to observe prolongation of
prothrombintime(PT),partialthromboplastintime
(PTT), and bleeding times. Thrombocytopenia or
functionalplateletdefectsalsomayexist.Intheface
ofreoperationwithextensivedissection,theanes-
thesiologistshouldplanadequatebloodcomponent
therapyforeachpatient.
Plasma electrolyte concentrations should be
screened, especially in patients receiving digitalis
and diuretic therapy. Hypocalcemia may be
observed in patients with congestive heart fail-
ure as well as patients with DiGeorge syndrome.
Severecongestiveheartfailuremaybeaccompanied
byjitterinessandirritability.Itisimportanttorule
out hypoglycemia as an alternative cause of these
ﬁndings.
Thechestradiographservestoconﬁrmotherclin-
ical and diagnostic ﬁndings, such as cardiomegaly,
the quantity of pulmonary blood ﬂow, previous
surgicalprocedures,andthepresenceofacutepul-
monary infections. The electrocardiogram (ECG)
similarly conﬁrms chamber enlargement and the
presenceofdysrhythmias.Reviewofthecatheter-
ization and echocardiographic data is critical to a
clear understanding of the pathophysiology and
surgical plan. The following information should
be obtained routinely from a review of the
catheterizationdata:
• Anatomic diagnosis.
• Interpretationofsaturationdata. Saturationstep-ups
or step-downs between vessels and chambers are
usedtodetectshunts.Likewise,saturationdataare
usedtocalculatetheratioofpulmonarytosystemic
blood ﬂow (QP:QS). Saturation data also are used
to differentiate intrapulmonary shunting andV /Q
mismatch(atelectasis,hypoventilation,pulmonary
disease)fromintracardiacshunting.
• Interpretation of pressure data. Pressure data are
usedtocomparerightandleftheartpressuresand
systemicandpulmonaryarterialpressures.Inaddi-
tion, pressure gradients across valve and shunt
oriﬁces are measured. Pressure data can be used
toassessventriculardiastolicfunction(distensibility
andcompliance).
• Interpretationofangiographicdata. Cineangiograms
can be used to assess ventricular wall motion
(systolic function) and to assess intracardiac and
greatvesselbloodﬂowpatterns.
• Functional status and location of prior surgical inter-
ventions. This information will allow intelligentAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 186 — #20
186 Chapter6
decisions regarding monitor placement and
anestheticmanagementtobemade.
• Effect of interventions.Interventions made in the
catheterization laboratory to palliate congenital
heart lesions (balloon valvuloplasty, balloon sep-
tostomy, balloon angioplasty) are common. The
effects of these interventions on the underlying
lesion must be assessed. Furthermore, a trial of
100%inspiredoxygenorNOmaybeusedtoassess
thereversiblecomponentofPAhypertension.
Two-dimensional echocardiography has revolu-
tionized the ﬁeld of pediatric cardiology over the
last decade. Unlike adults, who may have limited
transthoracic echocardiographic windows, images
in pediatric patients are easily obtained. Most
neonatesproceedtosurgerywithoutcatheterization
studies.Inrareinstancescatheterizationisnecessary
to clearly delineate coronary or aortopulmonary
collateral anatomy. Although angiocardiographic
studies often complement echocardiographic ﬁnd-
ings,itisnotunusualfortheechocardiographicdata
tobeasuperiordiagnostictoolandofferthesurgeon
morevaluableanatomicinformation.
Preoperative preparation
The routine preoperative preparation of the anes-
thesiaequipmentisnotnoticeablydifferentforthe
pediatric patient. It is important to have various-
sized airway equipment so that there can be
quickselectionofappropriateairways,masks,and
endotracheal tubes. A pediatric circle system with
humidiﬁcation can be used for older children.
The resistance to airﬂow created by the unidirec-
tional valves is not an issue for patients receiving
mechanicalventilation.Generally,pressure-limited
ventilation is used to avoid inadvertent baro-
trauma.Thismodeofventilationrequiresvigilance
in that changes in chest wall or lung compli-
ance will lead to instantaneous changes in tidal
volumes.
Appropriate emergency medications should be
available in doses consistent with the patient’s
weight(Tables6.4and6.5).Forcriticallyillpatients
and patients with marginal reserve, selected infu-
sionsshouldbepreparedinanticipationoftheiruse.
Carefulattentionshouldbepaidtodosagesbecause
Table 6.4 Vasoactiveagents.
Agent Dosage (IV)
Calcium chloride 10–20mg/kg
Calcium gluconate 50–100mg/kg
Epinephrine 0.05–0.50 µg/kg/min
Norepinephrine 0.05–0.50 µg/kg/min
Phenylephrine 0.1–0.50 µg/kg/min
Isoproteronol 0.01–0.05 µg/kg/min
Dobutamine 5–10 µg/kg/min
Dopamine 3–15 µg/kg/min
Milrinone Bolus 50 µg/kg then
0.3–1.0 µg/kg/min
Nitroglycerin 0.5–5.0 µg/kg/min
Nitroprusside 0.5–5.0 µg/kg/min
Fenoldopam 0.1–0.5 µg/kg/min
PGE1 Initiate at 0.05–0.10µg/kg/min
then 0.01–0.05µg/kg/min
IV, intravenous; PGE1, prostaglandin E1.
Table 6.5 Antiarrythmicagents.
Agent Dosage (IV)
Lidocaine Bolus 1mg/kg then
20–50 µg/kg/min
Procainamide Bolus 2–5mg/kg then
20–50 µg/kg/min
Diltiazem Bolus 0.1–0.2mg/kg then
1–3 µg/kg/min
Amiodarone Slow bolus of 2–5mg/kg with extreme
caution in neonates/infants then
7 µg/kg/min
Esmolol Bolus 300–500 µg/kg then
50–300 µg/kg/min
Adenosine 50–200 µg/kg
Magnesium 10–25mg/kg
IV, intravenous.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 187 — #21
CongenitalHeartDisease 187
the dose per kilogram may vary signiﬁcantly from
thoseusedforadults.
AppropriateIVcathetersareplacedwithair-trap
ﬁltersinlinetoavoidthepotentialforairembolism
ineverypatient(notjustthosewithR–Lshunts).
Preoperative ﬂuid therapy
Preoperative ﬂuid and NPO (nothing by mouth)
ordersareroutinelygearedtotheage-speciﬁcneeds
of the pediatric patient. Generally speaking the
rule of two, four, six, eight can be used as the
NPO interval for neonates, infants and children
withCHD:
• Twohoursforclearliquids.
• Fourhoursforbreastmilk.
• Sixhoursforformula.
• Eighthoursforsolidfood.
Obviously,intheabsenceofIVhydrationinfants
should remain NPO for the shortest possible
interval. Because dehydration may have poten-
tially deleterious effects on hemodynamics or on
the degree of blood viscosity in the polycythemic
patient, IV hydration with maintenance ﬂuids
before surgery should be considered for certain
patients (i.e. cyanotic patients with hematocrit
levelsof60%orhigher).
Maintenance caloric requirements in the awake
neonate and infant are 100kcal/kg/day or
4kcal/kg/h. This caloric requirement can be met
withglucose25g/kg/dayor1g/kg/h.Fromaprac-
ticalpointofviewthisglucoserequirementcanbe
met with 10% dextrose (100mg/mL) adminis-
tered at maintenance volume replacement rate of
4mL/kg/h. Ten percent dextrose administered at
half this rate (2mL/kg/h) is usually sufﬁcient to
meet the caloric requirements of an anesthetized
infant while avoiding both the hyper- and hypo-
glycemia that can be detrimental to neurologic
outcome following deep hypothermic circulatory
arrest(DHCA).Thesedextroseinfusionsshouldbe
discontinued prior to commencement of CPB as
CPBgenerallyproducesmildhyperglycemia.Some
patientsreceivenutritionalsupportaspartofmed-
icalstabilizationpriortosurgery.Highcalorietotal
parenteral nutrition and intralipid therapy should
be discontinued and replaced with a 10% dex-
trose infusion several hours prior to transport to
the operating room. Continued administration of
these high calorie infusions makes intraoperative
serum glucose management problematic. In these
patients, higher dextrose infusion rates may be
necessarypre-CPBtoavoidreboundhypoglycemia.
Preoperative medications
Premedication prior to induction can be used to
facilitate a number of objectives. In older chil-
dren it can be used to alleviate anxiety prior to
anIVorinhalationinduction.Inyoungerchildren,
premedicationcaneaseseparationofthechildfrom
the parents. In infants, judicious premedication
alone,orincombinationwithinhalednitrousoxide
can greatly simplify placement of an IV catheter.
Onemustalwaysconsiderhowstressfulitistopar-
entstoseetheirchildbeingtakentotheoperating
roomcryingorupset.
Currentinductiontechniquesdonotjustifyrou-
tine administration of atropine or glycopyrrolate
either IV or intramuscularly (IM) as a premedi-
cant. Midazolam 1.0mg/kg (20mg as a maximum
dose) orally in infants and younger children who
have not had prior cardiac surgery is useful. In
patients who have undergone previous operative
procedures midazolam alone may be insufﬁcient.
These patients are remarkably tolerant to midazo-
lam as the result of either heightened anxiety or
previousintra-andpostoperativeexposuretoben-
zodiazepines.Oralketamine(3–5mg/kgforinfants,
5–10mg/kgforchildren >1yearold)canbegivenin
conjunctionwiththemidazolamtothesepatients.
In circumstances in which the child will not take
oralmedicationtheIMroutecanbeused.Ketamine
2–3mg/kg and glycopyrrolate (8–10µg/kg) alone
or in combination with midazolam 0.1mg/kg is
appropriate.
Age-appropriate premedication dosages are out-
linedinTable6.6.Premedicationrequiresindividu-
alizationofdosagetoavoidrespiratorydepression.
Lowerdosesarebestusedforsmallerchildrenand
childrenincongestiveheartfailure.Premedication
shouldalwaysbeadministeredandassessedinthe
continuouspresenceoftheanesthesiologist.Older
childrenmayoptforplacementofanIV.
Digoxin, diuretics, and angiotensin-converting
enzyme (ACE) inhibitors are generally withheldAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 188 — #22
188 Chapter6
Table 6.6 Premedicationguidelines.
Age Medication
0–6months None
or
Midazolam 0.5–1.0mg/kg PO
or
Midazolam 0.5–1.0mg/kg PO
Ketamine 3–5mg/kg
6–12months None
or
Midazolam 0.5–1.0mg/kg PO
or
Midazolam 0.5–1.0mg/kg PO
Ketamine 3–5mg/kg
>12months Midazolam 0.5–1.0mg/kg PO
or
Midazolam 0.5–1.0mg/kg PO
Ketamine 5–10mg/kg
or
Pentobarbital 4mg/kg PO
Meperidine 3mg/kg
or
Midazolam 0.5–1.0mg/kg PO
Meperidine 3mg/kg
or
Ketamine 3mg/kg
Midazolam 0.1mg/kg IM
Glycopyrrolate 8–10µg/kg
IM, intramuscular; PO, by mouth.
themorningofsurgery.ACEinhibitorsexacerbate
hypotension occurring with anesthetic induction.
Inotropeandprostaglandininfusionsarecontinued
into the operative period for critically ill neonates
andchildren.
Monitoring
Iftheinfantorchildisawakeorminimallysedated,
application of multiple monitors can prevent a
smoothinduction,evenforaninitiallycalmpatient.
Minimizing stimulation, including distracting dis-
cussion in the operating room, will avoid dis-
turbingthechild.Ideally,preinductionmonitoring
should include a noninvasive automated blood
pressurecuff,ECG,pulseoximeter,andanend-tidal
carbon dioxide monitor. In some cases, a pulse
oximeter and an ECG may be all that is practical
intheearlystagesofinduction.Othermonitorsare
thenquicklyaddedasinductionprogresses.
ECG and blood pressure
A5-leadECGwithleadsIIandV 5 displayedallows
rhythm and ischemia monitoring. Intra-arterial
access is obtained following induction, however
many neonates who have been medically stabi-
lizedintheintensivecareunit(ICU)preoperatively
will have an arterial catheter in place. Generally,
percutaneous arterial access can be accomplished
in even the smallest neonates. Radial and femoral
arteriesarethesitesmostcommonlyutilized.Poste-
rior tibial and dorsalis pedis arteries may be used
as well; however these sites often do not reﬂect
centralaorticpressureduringandimmediatelyfol-
lowing hypothermic CPB in neonates and infants.
Brachial arteries are not used given the high risk
of distal limb ischemia. Consideration is given to
anypreviousorproposedsurgicalprocedurewhich
maycompromisethereliabilityofipsilateralupper
extremityintra-arterialpressuremonitoringsuchas
a Blalock–Taussig shunt, modiﬁed Blalock–Taussig
shunt, subclavian artery patch repair of aortic
coarctation, or sacriﬁce of an aberrant subclavian
artery.Previouscatheterizationproceduresparticu-
larly those of an interventional nature may result
in femoral or iliac artery occlusion. Occasionally,
surgicalaccesstoaperipheralarteryisnecessary.
Umbilical artery catheters may be used intra-
operatively but are generally replaced with a
peripheral arterial catheter and removed postop-
eratively. Blood pressure monitoring consists of
an intra-arterial catheter as well as upper and
lower extremity noninvasive blood pressure cuffs.
This arrangement allows detection of residual
coarctation or aortic arch/isthmus obstruction via
comparison of upper and lower extremity blood
pressures.
Systemic oxygen saturation
Oxygen saturation (SaO2) monitoring is accom-
plished with pulse oximeter probes on both an
upper and a lower extremity; these can be placed
in pre- and post-ductal locations if the physiology
warrants.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 189 — #23
CongenitalHeartDisease 189
End-tidal carbon dioxide
End-tidalcarbondioxide(ET CO2)monitoringisrou-
tinelyemployedwiththecaveatthatthedifference
between PaCO2 and ETCO2 will vary as physio-
logic dead space varies and that in some circum-
stances the difference may be large (>10–15torr).
Any acute reduction in pulmonary blood ﬂow
(decreased cardiac output, pulmonary embolus,
increased physiologic intracardiac R–L shunting)
will increase this gradient. In patients with single
ventricle physiology (most commonly those with
HLHSortruncusarteriosus)withhigh QP:QS prior
toinitiationofCPB,therightPAmaybepartially,
orcompletely,occludedbythesurgeontomechan-
ically limit pulmonary blood ﬂow. This maneuver
dramatically increases physiologic dead space and
ETCO2 willvastlyunderestimatePa CO2.
Central venous pressure (CVP)
Percutaneous central venous access offers numer-
ous advantages and can be reliably obtained even
in small neonates. The use of ultrasound both
real-timeandoff-linehashelpedimprovethesuc-
cessful placement rate to 90–95% in neonates.
The preferred access sites are the internal jugular
andfemoralveins.Four-French5cmdoublelumen
catheters are available for use in neonates and
infants,5-French5cmdoublelumencathetersare
availableforuseinyoungchildrenand6–9-French
cathetersareavailableforuseinolderchildren.Pre-
operativeuseofPAcathetersforpediatricpatientsis
uncommon.Inpatientswherepostoperativeassess-
mentofPAPisimportantthesurgeonmaychoose
toplaceatransthoracicPAcatheter.
Central venous access is not without risks par-
ticularlyinneonatesandinfantsandthereforethe
decision to place a percutaneous central venous
cathetermustinvolveconsiderationoftherelative
risks and beneﬁts. In particular, the risk of inter-
naljugularorSVCthrombosismustbeconsidered
as this complication can be devastating in patients
whoaretobestagedtoasuperiorcavopulmonary
connection.Therelativeriskandbeneﬁtsofcentral
venous cannulation are outlined in Table 6.7. The
riskofthrombosisandinfectioncanbereducedby
maintainingaheparininfusion(2units/h)through
the central line lumens postoperatively and by
Table 6.7 Advantagesanddisadvantagesofcentral
venouspressuremonitoringinneonates,infantsand
children.
Advantages
• Central venous pressure monitoring
• Infusion site for vasoactive and inotropic agents
• Infusion site for blood products and intravascular
volume replacement
• Sampling of SVC blood for measurement of SVC
oxygenation saturation to determine the adequacy of
cardiac output and to determineQP:QS (internal jugular)
• Cardiac rhythm analysis (detection of cannon A waves
may accompany loss of atrial-ventricular synchrony)
• Detection of inadequate SVC drainage leading to
cerebral venous hypertension during CPB (internal jugular)
Disadvantages
• Pneumothorax (internal jugular)
• Hematoma with vascular or tracheal
compression/displacement
• Thoracic duct injury (left internal jugular)
• Air embolus
• Internal jugular and/or SVC thrombosis
• Femoral vein thrombosis
• Infection
CPB, cardiopulmonary bypass; SVC, superior vena cava.
removing the lines as soon as possible (typically
1–2days).
In some institutions neonates and infants are
managedpriortoCPBwithoutcentralvenouslines.
Transthoracicintracardiaclines(RA,LA,PA)placed
bythesurgeonpriortoterminationofCPBcanbe
usedforpressuremonitoring,infusionofvasoactive
andinotropicagents,andbloodproductandvolume
replacement. In older children particularly those
undergoingreoperationwithadhesionoftheaorta
or of the RV to PA conduit to the sternum large
borecentralvenouscathetersareusedinconjunc-
tion with a rapid infusion system. In these chil-
dren,transthoracicintracardiaclineswhilesuitable
for pressure monitoring and infusion of drugs are
insufﬁcientforrapidvolumereplacement.
Temperature
Rectal, esophageal and tympanic membrane tem-
peratures are monitored for all CPB cases.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 190 — #24
190 Chapter6
Rectaltemperatureisconsideredaperipheraltem-
perature site and equilibration of rectal tempera-
ture with tympanic and esophageal temperature
serves as the best index of homogenous somatic
cooling and rewarming. Rectal temperature lags
behind esophageal and tympanic membrane tem-
peratureduringbothcoolingandrewarming.Both
esophagealandtympanicmembranearecoretem-
peraturemonitoringsitesandtemperaturechanges
at these sites generally mirror brain temperature
changes.Evenso,esophagealandtympanicmem-
brane temperatures may over- or under-estimate
braintemperaturebyasmuchas5 ◦Cduringcooling
and rewarming. This observation underscores the
importanceofprovidinganadequatelylongperiod
of core cooling prior to commencement of low-
ﬂowCPBorDHCA.Thelikelihoodthattargetbrain
temperature (15–18◦C) will be reached is greatly
increased if core cooling is utilized to bring tym-
panic, esophageal, and rectal temperatures to this
targettemperature.
Near infra-red spectroscopy
Thisisanevolvingtechnologythatholdspromiseas
areal-time,on-linemonitorofcerebraltissueoxy-
genation. All commercially available NIRS devices
utilizecontinuouswave(cwNIRS)reﬂectancetech-
nology.Withthistechnologythetransmissionand
detection optodes are placed a few centimeters
(3–6cm)apartonthesamesideofthehead.There
are two closely placed (1–2cm apart) detection
optodes. The more proximal optode receives light,
whichpassesprimarilythroughextracranialtissue
(skin, bone) while the distal optode receives light,
which also passes through brain tissue. The dif-
ference between the two signals represents light
passingthroughbraintissue.
Near infra-red spectroscopy (NIRS) technology
is particularly suited to analysis of cerebral tissue
oxygenation because wavelengths of light in the
nearinfra-redrange(650–900nm)containphotons
capable of penetrating tissue far enough to reach
the cerebral cortex and because the peak absorp-
tion spectra of the chromophores best suited to
reﬂecttissueoxygenation–oxyhemoglobin(Hb O2),
deoxyhemoglobin (Hb), and oxidized cytochrome
aa3(CytOx)resideinthiswavelengthrange.
Cerebral oxygen saturation (SCO2) as measured
by NIRS is the combined oxygen saturation of an
uncertainmixofarterioles,capillaries,andvenules.
CommerciallyavailableNIRSmonitorsassumethat
SCO2 represents contributions of cerebral arterial
and venous blood in a ratio of 25:75 with the
contribution of capillary blood felt to be negli-
gible. Traditional pulse oximetry differs in this
respectfromNIRSbecauseitiscapableofisolating
and measuring the arteriole component by gating
measurementstopulsatility.
InvestigationsutilizingNIRSdevicesinneonates
andinfantsarelimitedandbothnormalandcritical
valuesforcerebraloxygenationhaveyettobedeter-
mined.Nonetheless,itisclearthatthetechnology
has an emerging role in detecting cerebral deoxy-
genation and in guiding appropriate corrective
interventions.
Transcranial Doppler
The role of Transcranial Doppler (TCD) monitor-
inginthecareofpediatriccardiacsurgicalpatients
is evolving. TCD allows measurement of cerebral
blood ﬂow velocity as well as detection of cere-
bralmicroemboliandisatechnologyideallysuited
to use in neonates and infants. The thin skull of
neonates/infants combined with a low-frequency
ultrasonic transducer allows transmission of ultra-
sonicenergyintobraintissuewithlittlesignalatten-
uation. Placement of a 2MHz pulsed wave (PW)
Doppler probe over the temporal bone allows the
ultrasonicsignaltobealignedparalleltotheprox-
imal (M1) segment of the middle cerebral artery
(MCA). The ability of PW Doppler to be gated to
aspeciﬁcdepthallowsdeterminationofbloodﬂow
velocityintheMCAjustdistaltothetakeoffofthe
anterior cerebral artery. This PW Doppler interro-
gation yields a velocity spectrum in the MCA for
each cardiac cycle. Integration of the area under
thevelocityspectrumyieldsthetime-velocityinte-
gral(TVI)inunitsofcm/cardiaccycle.Theproduct
of vessel TVI and vessel cross-sectional area (units
of cm2) is ﬂow (units of cm3/cardiac cycle). If it
is assumed that MCA cross-sectional area remains
constantthanthereisalinearrelationshipbetween
TVIandMCAbloodﬂow.NormalTCDvelocityval-
ues in various patient subgroups (cyanotic versusAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 191 — #25
CongenitalHeartDisease 191
noncyanotic, age, following DHCA), and under
variousCPBconditions(hematocrit,ﬂow,pressure,
acid-basestatus,temperature)haveyettobedeter-
mined. TCD determination of cerebral blood may
prove useful as a continuous surveillance moni-
tor for detection of inadequate ﬂow or obstructed
cerebralvenousdrainageduringCPB.
Cerebralmicroemboliproducetransientincreases
in reﬂected Doppler energy as compared to the
background Doppler spectra. These high inten-
sity transient signals (HITS) can be counted by
the TCD microprocessor and displayed as micro-
embolic events per hour. Due to their higher
reﬂective capacity gaseous emboli can be detected
overagreaterdistancethanparticulateemboliand
as a result have a higher sample velocity length
(the product of emboli duration and velocity).
At present, cerebral emboli detection with TCD
requirestheconstantattentionofaskilledobserver
becauseTCDtechnologyalonelackssufﬁcientsensi-
tivityandspeciﬁcitytodistinguishbetweengaseous
brainemboli,particulatebrainemboliandartifacts.
TCDembolidetectionisbeinginvestigatedastoolto
reﬁne post-CPB de-airing routines and to reduce
the number of cannulation and perfusion related
inatrogenicembolicevents.
Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE)
7.5MHz multiplane probes are available for intra-
operativeuseinneonatesandinfants.Theseprobes
possesstwo-dimensionalcontinuouswaveDoppler,
PWDoppler,colorDoppler,andM-modecapability.
Although intraoperative TEE can be performed
safely in the smallest patients (2.5–3.5kg) caution
mustbeexercisedasthepresenceoftheprobeinthe
esophagusmaycausetrachealandbronchialcom-
pression with compromise of ventilation, inadver-
tenttrachealextubation,rightmainstembronchial
intubation,esophagealperforation,aorticarchcom-
pressionwithlossofdistalperfusion,andcompres-
sion of the LA resulting in left atrial hypertension
or compromise of ventricular ﬁlling. In particular,
ante-orretroﬂexionoftheprobemustbeperformed
withcautioninsmallpatients.
Intraoperative TEE has a major impact on
post-CPB decision making (such as return to
CPB to repair residual lesions) in approximately
15% of cases when it is used nonselectively.
Some institutions use intraoperative TEE selec-
tively (approximately 30–40% of CPB cases) in
cases involving repair of a semilunar or AV valve,
complex ventricular outﬂow tract reconstructions,
and for delineation of complicated anatomy that
cannotbecompletelydelineatedwithtransthoracic
echocardiography preoperatively. In the subset of
patientsundergoingvalverepairandoutﬂowtract
reconstruction TEE provides the best immediate
assessmentoftheadequacyoftheoperativeproce-
dureandifnecessarydirectsitsrevision.TEEisnot
helpful in assessment of residual arch obstruction
followingstage1repairsasthisareaispoorlyvisu-
alized. While detection of retained intracardiac air
iscertainlyfacilitatedbyuseofintraoperativeTEEit
remainstobedeterminedwhatrolethetechnology
willplayinimprovingcardiacde-airingalgorithms
particularlyinneonatesandinfants.
TheroleofTEEinthedetectionofresidualVSDs
followingrepairofbothsimpleandcomplexdefects
deservessomediscussion.Residualdefects <3mm
aredetectablebyTEEbutgenerallydonotrequire
immediate reoperation as they are hemodynam-
ically insigniﬁcant. The majority (75%) of these
smalldefectsarenotpresentatthetimeofhospital
discharge as determined by transthoracic echocar-
diography.Residualdefects >3mmdetectedbyTEE
requireimmediatereoperationonlyiftheyareasso-
ciatedwithintraoperativehemodynamic(elevated
LAPand/orPAPinthepresenceofgoodventricu-
lar function) and oximetric (QP:QS > 1.5:1 or RA
to PA oxygen saturation step-up with FiO2 ≤ 0.5)
evidencethattheyaresigniﬁcant.
Airway management
Fundamentaltotheanestheticcareofeverypatient
withCHDisgoodairwaymanagement.Asdiscussed
previously,PVRisalteredbychangesinventilatory
pattern, PaO2,P aCO2, and pH. Changes in PVR
maydramaticallyaffectshuntmagnitudeanddirec-
tionaswellascardiovascularfunctionandstability.
Therefore,promptcontroloftheairwayandofven-
tilationwillallowoptimalpulmonarybloodﬂowin
eachpatient.
Childrenwithhighpulmonarybloodﬂowpartic-
ularlythosewithinterstitialpulmonaryedemahaveAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 192 — #26
192 Chapter6
surprisingly poor lung compliance necessitating
higher than expected airway pressures. Care must
be taken not to insufﬂate the stomach during
mask ventilation. The relatively large occiput of
infants and small children will cause the head to
ﬂex forward; placement of a small roll under the
neck or shoulders will allow the head to remain
in the neutral position. Placement of an oral air-
way in neonates and infants will greatly facilitate
maskventilationbypullingthelargetongueaway
fromthepharyngealwall.Inchildren <10–12years
old nasal endotracheal tubes are generally uti-
lized as they provide better stability intra- and
postoperatively. This is particularly important in
patients undergoing intraoperative TEE examina-
tions.Denitrogenationofthelungsisrecommended
priortoinductioninallpatientsincludingthosein
whom high inspired oxygen concentrations might
temporarilyreducePVRandcompromisesystemic
perfusion.
In patients with high venous pressure and
cyanosis, such as those with a bidirectional Glenn
shunt or Fontan, nasal endotracheal tubes must
be passed cautiously as substantial nasal bleeding
canbeinitiated.Uncuffedendotrachealtubeswitha
leakatornear25–30cmH 2Oaregenerallyusedin
children <6–8years of age. Consideration is given
to use of a cuffed endotracheal tube in patients
where poor pulmonary compliance secondary to
lungwater,chestwalledema,orabdominaldisten-
tion are anticipated to compromise minute venti-
lation.Inthesepatientstemporaryinﬂationofthe
cuffwillallowhigherairwaypressurestobeutilized
asneeded.
Anesthesia induction and
maintenance
Induction of anesthesia
A variety of induction techniques provide hemo-
dynamic stability and improved arterial oxygen
saturation in patients with cyanotic heart dis-
ease. Sevoﬂurane, halothane, isoﬂurane, and fen-
tanyl/midazolam do not changeQP:QS in children
withASDsandVSDswhencautiouslyadministered
with 100% oxygen. Sevoﬂurane (1 MAC) and
fentanyl/midazolam have no signiﬁcant effect on
myocardial function in patients with a single ven-
tricle.Halothane(1and1.5MAC)depressescardiac
indexandcontractilitymorethancomparablelevels
ofsevoﬂurane,isoﬂurane,andfentanyl/midazolam
anesthesia. In addition, halothane anesthesia may
result in more severe hypotension and emergent
drug use than sevoﬂurane anesthesia in children
withCHD.
No one anesthetic induction technique is suit-
able for all patients with CHD. The patient’s age,
cardiopulmonaryfunction,degreeofcyanosis,and
emotional state all play a role in the selection
of an anesthetic technique. IV administration of
induction agents clearly affords the greatest ﬂex-
ibility in terms of drug selection and drug titra-
tion and allows prompt control of the airway. IV
induction is the preferred technique in patients
withseverelyimpairedventricularsystolicfunction
andinpatientswithsystemicorsuprasystemicPA
pressures.
Mask induction
Maskinductionofanesthesiacanbeaccomplished
safely in the subset of children without severe
cardio-respiratory compromise. However, reduced
pulmonary blood ﬂow in cyanotic patients will
prolong the length of induction and the interval
duringwhichtheairwayisonlypartiallycontrolled.
Inaddition,inthesepatientsevenshortintervalsof
airway obstruction or hypoventilation may result
in hypoxemia. Sevoﬂurane and halothane are the
inhalationinductionagentsofchoice.Sevoﬂurane
causeslessmyocardialdepression,hypotensionand
bradycardiathanhalothane.Isoﬂuraneandparticu-
larlydesﬂuraneareunsuitableagentsastheirpun-
gency causes copious secretions, airway irritation,
andlaryngospasm.
IV induction
High-dosesyntheticnarcoticsincombinationwith
pancuronium(0.1mg/kg)iscommonlyusedforIV
inductioninneonatesandinfants.Thevagolyticand
sympathomimetic effects of pancuronium coun-
teract the vagotonic effect of synthetic opioids.
In patients with a low aortic diastolic blood
pressureandahighbaselineheartratevecuronium
(0.1mg/kg) or cisatracurium (0.2mg/kg) may beAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 193 — #27
CongenitalHeartDisease 193
usedwithoutaffectingheartrate.Inolderchildren
withmildtomoderatelydepressedsystolicfunction
lower doses of a synthetic opioid can be used in
conjunctionwithetomidate(0.1–0.3mg/kg).
Ketamine(1–2mg/kg)isausefulinductionagent.
For patients with both normal and elevated base-
linePVR,ketaminecausesminimalincreasesinPA
pressure as long as the airway and ventilation are
supported. The tachycardia and increase in SVR
inducedbyketaminemakesitunfavorableforuse
in patients with systemic outﬂow tract obstructive
lesions.
The myocardial depressive and vasodilatory
effects of propofol and thiopental make them
unsuitable as induction agents except in patients
withsimpleshuntlesionsinwhomcardiovascular
functionispreserved.
An alternative to IV induction in patients
with difﬁcult peripheral IV access is IM induc-
tion with ketamine (3–5mg/kg), succinylcholine
(2–5mg/kg), and glycopyrrolate (8–10 µg/kg).
Glycopyrrolate is recommended to reduce the air-
way secretions associated with ketamine adminis-
tration and to prevent the bradycardia that may
accompany succinylcholine administration. The
dose of succinylcholine per kg body weight is
highestininfants.Thistechniqueprovidesprompt
inductionandimmediatecontroloftheairwaywith
tracheal intubation. It is useful in circumstances
where it is anticipated that initial IV access will
have to be obtained via the internal or external
jugular vein or the femoral vein. This technique
is hampered by the fact that the short dura-
tion of action of succinylcholine limits the period
of patient immobility. An alternative technique
combinesIMketamine(3–5mg/kg),glycopyrrolate
(8–10 µg/kg), and rocuronium (1.0mg/kg). This
technique is hampered by the slightly longer time
interval until attainment of adequate intubating
conditionswithrocuronium.
Maintenance of anesthesia
Anesthesia is generally maintained using a syn-
thetic opioid (fentanyl or sufentanil) based tech-
nique. These opioids may be used in high
doses (25–100µg/kg fentanyl or 2.5–10.0µg/kg
sufentanil)orinlowtomoderatedoses(5–25 µg/kg
fentanyl or 0.5–2.5µg/kg sufentanil). In either
instancetheseopioidsareusedincombinationwith
aninhalationagent(generallyisoﬂurane0.5–1.0%
or sevoﬂurane 1.0–2.0%) or a benzodiazepine
(generally midazolam 0.05–0.10mg/kg). Caution
mustbeexercisedbecausethecombinationofnar-
cotics and benzodiazepines is synergistic in reduc-
ing SVR. The high-dose technique is particularly
usefulinneonatesandinfants.Patientsinthisage
group presenting for surgery often have signiﬁ-
cantventricularpressureand/orvolumeoverload.
In addition, many of these patients have tenuous
subendocardial and systemic perfusion secondary
to runoff into the pulmonary circulation and the
associatedlowaorticdiastolicbloodpressure.Given
the limited contractile reserve available in the
immature myocardium, it is not surprising that
the myocardial depressive and systemic vasodila-
toryeffectsofinhalationagentsandthesynergistic
vasodilatoryeffectsofbenzodiazepinesandopioids
maybepoorlytoleratedinthispatiengroup.
Thereareuniqueconsiderationsformaintenance
of anesthesia during CPB. Light anesthesia, par-
ticularly during cooling and rewarming, may lead
to elevated SVR requiring a reduction in pump
ﬂow rate which compromises both somatic per-
fusion and the efﬁciency of CPB cooling and
rewarming. Subclinical shivering due to inade-
quate neuromuscular blockade and light anes-
thesia are avoidable causes of increased systemic
oxygen consumption. Increased systemic oxygen
consumption during CPB will manifest as a lower
thanacceptablevenoussaturation( <65%)atwhat
shouldbeanadequateCPBﬂowrateforthepatient.
Furthermore,foramembraneoxygenatoratornear
its maximum ﬂow capacity, a low venous satura-
tionmayresultinalowerthanacceptablearterial
saturationonCPB.
Lower doses of opioid in conjunction with an
inhalationagentorbenzodiazepinearesuitablefor
older patients with better cardiovascular reserve.
In fact, carefully selected patients (>1year old,
no pulmonary hypertension, benign past medical
history) undergoing simple ASD or VSD closure
are candidates for immediate tracheal extubation
in the operating room or in the ICU within
2–3hours.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 194 — #28
194 Chapter6
Speciﬁc lesions
This section discusses speciﬁc lesions and the
anesthetic considerations applicable to their
management.
Ventricular septal defects
Anatomy
Anopeningintheventricularseptumthatpermits
communication between the RV and LV is a Ven-
tricularseptaldefects(VSD).Suchcommunications
may exist in one or more locations in the ventric-
ularseptum.AsillustratedinFig.6.10,VSDcanbe
classiﬁedbytheirlocationintheseptum.
Subpulmonary or supracristal defects
These are located in the infundibular septum
just below the aortic valve. Subpulmonary lesions
may be associated with aortic insufﬁciency due to
alackofsupportfortherightcoronarycuspofthe
aorticvalveandprolapseofthisleaﬂet.
Membranous or perimembranous defects
These defects comprise approximately 80% of all
VSDs and are located in the subaortic region of
Subpulmonary
Membranous
Muscular
AV canal
type
Fig. 6.10 Locationofventricularseptaldefects.
AV,atrioventricular.
themembranousseptum.Thesedefectsarelocated
near or under the septal leaﬂet of the TV, and
communicate with the LV just below the aortic
valve.Thesedefectsarecommonlypartiallyclosed
byacollectionoftricuspidvalveandmembranous
septaltissuegivingananeurysmalappearancetothe
septum.
Conoventricular defects
These defects involve the same area as peri-
membranousdefectsbuthaveextensionanteriorly
andsuperiorlyintheseptum.
Inlet or canal-type defects
Thesedefectsinvolvetheposteriorseptumnearthe
AVvalves.
Muscular defects
These defects are located in the lower trabecular
septum and may appear deceptively small on
inspection from the right ventricular aspect of
the septum due to heavy trabeculation. These
defects may be apical, midmuscular, anterior, or
posterior.
Physiology
A VSD is an example of a simple shunt. The
size of the defect is the critical determinant of
the magnitude of shunting. If the defect is small
(restrictiveshunt),ﬂowthroughthedefectwillbe
limited and there will be a large pressure gradient
across the defect. However, as the oriﬁce becomes
larger (approximating the size of the aortic valve
oriﬁce)andthepressuregradientacrosstheoriﬁce
decreases,themagnitudeanddirectionofshunting
becomesmoredependentontherelativeresistances
ofthesystemicandpulmonaryvascularbeds.
Because the ratio of PVR to SVR is normally
1:10–1:20, VSDs generally result in production of
aL–Rshunt.Insomeinstances,however,theratio
of PVR to SVR may be higher, resulting in near-
normalpulmonarybloodﬂowor,inextremecases,
productionofaR–Lshunt.
The infant with a large VSD may have near-
normal pulmonary blood ﬂow as a result of high
PVR present at birth. By the second week of
life, PVR begins to fall to near-normal levels
and pulmonary blood ﬂow increases dramatically.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 195 — #29
CongenitalHeartDisease 195
Continued decreases in PVR after birth may be
delayed by the elevated LAP that accompanies
increasedpulmonarybloodﬂow.
LargeVSDspredisposethedevelopmentofPVOD
during the ﬁrst few years of life due to expo-
sure of the pulmonary vasculature to high ﬂows
andsystemicbloodpressures.TheincreasesinPVR
thataccompanyPVODwillultimatelyproducebidi-
rectional and R–L shunts. Patients with advanced
PVODandmarkedlyincreasedPVR(Eisenmenger’s
complex) generally are not candidates for VSD
closure,becauseclosurewillresultinanenormous
increase in RV afterload and RV afterload mis-
match.Forthisreason,largeVSDs( Qp:Qs >2:1)are
correctedearlyinchildhood.
AnincreaseinLAvolumeandpressureparallels
the increase in pulmonary blood ﬂow seen with a
large VSD. The resultant pulmonary venous con-
gestion increases the work of breathing, decreases
pulmonarycompliance,andincreasesairwayresis-
tance.Allofthesefactorspredisposerecurrentpul-
monary infections. LV end-diastolic volumes are
increasedinparallelwiththeincreaseinpulmonary
bloodﬂow.RVend-diastolicvolumesareoftennot
increasedbecauseshuntingfromtheLVacrossthe
VSDintotheRVoccursinsystole.
In VSDs with a large L–R shunt, systemic blood
ﬂowismaintainedattheexpenseofalargevolume
loadonboththeRVandLV.Thislimitsthecapac-
ityofthepatienttomeetincreasedcardiacoutput
demandsandmayresultinpulmonaryandsystemic
venous congestion at rest. The timing of surgery
often is dictated by failure of medical therapy to
controlthiscongestion.
Surgical therapy
VSDs generally are closed with a patch via a vari-
etyofapproaches,dependingontheirlocation.To
avoid postoperative compromise of a small ventri-
cle, with its poor compliance and limited capac-
ity for tension development, a ventriculotomy to
approach and correct VSDs should be avoided.
ManydefectsareapproachablethroughtheRAand
tricuspid valve, aorta, or PA. However, in some
instances, a right ventriculotomy may be the nec-
essary approach. Less commonly, assessment and
closureofsomemusculardefectswillrequirealeft
ventriculotomy.Becausealeftventriculotomymay
seriously compromise myocardial function in the
infant,palliationwithPAbandingmaybepreferable
toaleftventriculotomyforsmallinfants.Nonoper-
ativedeviceclosureofmuscularVSDsremotefrom
AV or semilunar valves is possible in the cardiac
catheterizationlaboratory.
Anesthetic management
Theanestheticmanagementgoalsaresummarized
inTable6.8.
Induction and maintenance
As discussed previously, control of ventilation is
the most reliable way to manipulate PVR. For
infants and children without congestive heart
failure (CHF), an inhalational induction is well
tolerated. For neonates and patients with CHF, an
IV induction with fentanyl or sufentanil will pro-
vide better hemodynamic stability. In particular,
for patients with reactive pulmonary vasculature,
highdosesoffentanylandsufentanilwillbeuseful
in blunting increases in PVR associated with sur-
gical stimulation. In the absence of IV access, IM
ketamineandatropinemaybeusedforinduction,
followedbyplacementofanIVcatheter.
Table 6.8 Anestheticmanagementgoalsinpatients
withatrialseptaldefect(ASD),ventricularseptaldefect
(VSD),atrioventricularcanaldefect(AVC),andpatent
ductusarteriosus(PDA).
1 Maintain heart rate, contractility, and preload to
maintain cardiac output. A reduction in cardiac output
will compromise systemic perfusion, despite a relatively
high pulmonary blood ﬂow
2 Avoid decreases in the PVR:SVR ratio. The increase in
pulmonary blood ﬂow that accompanies a reduced
PVR:SVR ratio necessitates an increase in cardiac output to
maintain systemic blood ﬂow
3 Avoid large increases in the PVR:SVR ratio. An increase
may result in production of a right-to-left shunt
4 In instances in which a right-to-left shunt exists,
ventilatory measures to decrease PVR should be used. In
addition, SVR must be maintained or increased. These
measures will reduce the magnitude of the right-to-left
shunt
PVR, pulmonary vascular resistance; SVR, systemic vascular
resistance.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 196 — #30
196 Chapter6
Post-CPB management
The post-CPB management goals are summarized
inTable6.9.
Closure of the VSD will prevent further expo-
sureofthepulmonaryvasculaturetohighﬂowsand
pressures. This usually will result in some imme-
diate decrease in PA pressures. For patients with
smalldefectsandpatientswithlargeVSDsinwhom
PVODhasnotyetdeveloped,near-normalPApres-
suresmayresult.Inthesepatients,inotropicsupport
post-CPB is rarely necessary. In fact, reduction in
the large volume load on the LV usually results
inpost-CPBhypertension.Directvasodilatorssuch
as sodium nitroprusside (0.5–1.0µg/kg/min) or
inodilators such as milrinone (0.5–1.0µg/kg/min)
maybenecessary.
PulmonaryarterypressuresandPVRwillremain
elevatedinpatientswithunderlyingPVOD.Inaddi-
tion, the pulmonary vasculature of these patients
will remain hyper-responsive to vasoconstricting
Table 6.9 Post-cardiopulmonarybypass(CPB)
managementgoalsinpatientswithatrialseptaldefect
(ASD),ventricularseptaldefect(VSD),and
atrioventricularcanaldefect(AVC).
1 Maintain heart rate (preferably sinus rhythm) at an
age-appropriate rate. Cardiac output is likely to be more
heart rate dependent in the post-CPB period
2 Reduce PVR through ventilatory interventions. This is
particularly important if PVOD is present
3 Inotropic support of the right ventricle may be
necessary, particularly if PVR is high. In VSD and AVC
patients the left ventricle will no longer contribute to
ejection of blood via the pulmonary artery and the right
ventricle will face a high afterload. Dobutamine
(5–10 µg/kg/min) or dopamine (5–10µg/kg/min) is useful
in this instance because both agents provide inotropic
support without increasing PVR. Milrinone
(0.5–1.0 µg/kg/min following a loading dose of 50µg/kg)
may also be considered. Milrinone has more direct PVR
reducing effects in addition to inotropic, lusitrophic, and
SVR reducing effects
AVC, atrioventricular canal defect; PVOD, pulmonary
vascular occlusive disease; PVR, pulmonary vascular resis-
tance; SVR, systemic vascular resistance; VSD, ventricular
septal defect.
stimuliduetomedialhypertrophythataccompanies
PVOD. Therapy to reduce PVR in the post-CPB
periodmaybenecessaryforthesepatientstoavoid
RVafterloadmismatch.
Separation from CPB may be complicated by a
varietyofsurgicalproblems.Inadequateclosureof
the VSD or the presence of an unrecognized VSD
may prevent separation from CPB. Assessment of
the presence and location of such defects in the
operating room can be accomplished with TEE. In
addition, tricuspid valve damage due to a difﬁcult
transatrial approach may produce tricuspid regur-
gitation(TR).PatchclosureoftheVSDmaycreate
subaorticorsubpulmonicobstruction.Becausethe
AV node and His bundle are often near the area
wherethesurgeonisworking,transientheartblock
may occur. Temporary epicardial A–V sequential
pacingmaybenecessarytoterminateCPB.
Atrial septal defect
Anatomy
Strictly speaking an atrial septal defect (ASD) is a
communication between the LA and RA due to a
defectintheintra-atrialseptum(IAS).TheIAScon-
sistsofacentralmembranousportionandathicker
inferiorandsuperiorfattylimbus.Thecentralmem-
branous portion is formed by tissue of the septum
primum ultimately forming the fossa ovalis. This
membrane lies posterior to the superior aspect of
thefattylimbus.
ASDs, like VSDs, are classiﬁed by their location.
Figure6.11illustratestheanatomyofASDs.There
are four morphological types of ASDs: (i) ostium
secundum defects; (ii) ostium primum defects;
(iii)inferiorandsuperiorsinusvenosusdefects;and
(iv)coronarysinus(CS)defects.Althoughtheyare
classiﬁedasASDs,sinusvenosusandCSdefectsare
nottrulydefectsintheIAS.
Ostium secundum ASD
Thesedefectscomprise80%ofASDs.WhileaPFO
results from incomplete fusion of an intact fossa
ovalis membrane with the superior aspect of the
fattylimbus,anostiumsecundumASDistheresult
of actual deﬁciencies in the membrane (septum
primum)ofthefossaovalis.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 197 — #31
CongenitalHeartDisease 197
Sinus
venosus
defect
ASD 1°
ASD 2°
Fig. 6.11 Locationofatrialseptaldefects(ASDs).
ASD1 =primumASD;ASD2 =secundumASD.
Superiorandinferiorsinusvenousdefectsareshown.
Ostium primum ASD
Isolated ostium primum ASDs, also know as par-
tial AV canal defects develop when partial fusion
of the endocardial cushions separates the two AV
valves and closes the ventricular septal communi-
cation, but fails to close the ostium primum. This
defectoccursoutsidetheconﬁnesofthefossaovalis
inferiorlyattheleveloftheAVvalves.Theisolated
ostiumprimumdefectextendsfromtheinferiorIAS
fattylimbus,tothecrestoftheIVS.Acharacteristic
ﬁndingofthislesionisinsertionoftheseptalpor-
tionsofbothAVvalvesontheIVSatthesamelevel.
NormallyinsertionoftheTVtotheIVSisinferiorto
the mitral valve (MV), producing the ventriculoa-
trialseptum(VAS)thatseparatestheRAfromthe
LV.Isolatedostiumprimumdefectsarecommonly
associatedwithacleftanteriorMVleaﬂetandmitral
regurgitation(MR)resultingfrompartialfusionof
the leftward portions of the antero-superior and
infero-posteriorbridgingleaﬂetsthatnormallyfuse
toformtheanteriorMVleaﬂet.
Sinus venous defects
These defects are located either superiorly at the
junction of the RA and the SVC, or inferiorly at
thejunctionoftheRAandtheIVC.Bothdefectsare
locatedposteriortothefossaovalis.Superiordefects
comprisethemajorityandinferiordefectsarerare.
Thesedefectsarebelievedtoresultfromadeﬁciency
in the common wall that normally separates the
right upper pulmonary vein/LA junction from the
RA/SVC junction and the right lower pulmonary
vein/LAjunctionfromtheRA/IVCjunction,rather
thanadefectintheIASorachangeintheposition
ofthepulmonaryveinsperse.Unrooﬁngofthepul-
monaryvein(locatedposteriorly)permitsdrainage
oftheLAdirectlyintheSVCorIVC(locatedante-
riorly). Intra-atrial communication occurs at the
levelofthepulmonaryvein/LAjunctionratherthan
throughanIASdefect.
Both types are associated with partially anoma-
louspulmonaryvenousreturn(PAPVR).Inthecase
of the superior defect, anomalous drainage of the
rightupperpulmonaryveinintotheSVC/RAjunc-
tion is the most common ﬁnding. In the case of
the inferior defect Scimitar syndrome (anomalous
drainage of the right upper and lower pulmonary
veinstotheIVC/RAjunction,aortopulmonarycol-
laterals to the right lower lobe, and hypoplasia of
therightlung)canbeseen.
CSdefect
UnrooﬁngoftheCS(posterior)allowsdirectcom-
munication with the LA (anterior). At its entry
in the RA, the CS oriﬁce becomes the connection
betweentheLAandRA.CSdefectsarecommonly
associatedwithapersistentleftsuperiorvenacava
(LSVC)drainingtoalargedilatedCS.
Physiology
An ASD is a simple shunt. A small, restrictive
defectwillallowminimalshuntﬂow.Alargedefect
(atleast1mmindiameter),isunrestrictiveandthe
atriaactlikeasinglechamberwithshuntmagnitude
anddirectiondependentontherelativeresistances
ofthepulmonaryandsystemicvascularbeds.After
the high PVR present after birth declines, a L–R
shuntoccursbecause:
• PVRis1/10–1/20thatofSVR.
• Increased pulmonary blood ﬂow increases
LAP. This favors ﬂow of blood from the LA into
theRA.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 198 — #32
198 Chapter6
• RV compliance is greater than LV compliance.
This also favors ﬂow of blood from the left to
theRA.
A large defect will greatly increase pulmonary
blood ﬂow however, unlike a VSD, systemic pres-
suresarenottransmittedtothepulmonaryvascu-
lature. In fact, PAP may remain normal for many
years due to the distensibility of the pulmonary
arteries.IncontrasttoapatientwithVSD,theonset
of PVOD may not occur until the third or fourth
decadeoflifeforapatientwithASD.Finally,alarge
ASD imposes a large volume load on the LA, RA,
and RV. RV volume overload (RVVO) is typically
reportedonechocardiogramsinpatientswithASD.
Surgical therapy
Some small ostium secundum ASDs can be pri-
marily closed; whereas larger defects are patched,
usually with pericardium. An alternative is non-
operativedeviceclosureofsecundumASDsinthe
cardiac catheterization laboratory. Primum ASDs
generally require patch closure and suture closure
of the anterior leaﬂet mitral cleft. Sinus venous
defectswithoutPAPVRcanbeclosedprimarilywith
apatch.
Analternativeprocedureisperformedwhenthe
pulmonaryvein(s)anomalouslyentertheSVC.The
SVC is transected above the origin of the anoma-
lous vein(s). The proximal end of the SVC is over
sewn, and the SVC oriﬁce is directed across the
defectintotheLAwithapericardialpatch.Thedistal
endoftheSVCisthenanastomosedend-to-endto
theroofoftheRAappendagerecreatingSVCtoRA
continuity.
CSdefectsaretreatedasfollows:
• IntheabsenceofapersistentLSVCdrainingtothe
CS,aCSdefectistreatedbyoversewingtheoriﬁce
oftheCSandallowingCSbloodtodraintotheLA
(averysmallphysiologicright-toleftshunt).
• InthepresenceofapersistentLSVCdrainingto
theCSinwhichtheLSVCisconnectedtotheright
SVCbytheinnominateveintheLSVCcanbeligated
belowtheinnominateveinandtheCSoversewn.
• InthepresenceofapersistentLSVCdrainingto
theCSinwhichtheLSVCisnotconnectedtothe
right SVC by the innominate vein the CS defect
must be closed with a patch from the LA. This
isolates the LA from the LSVC blood and directs
LSVCbloodthruthroughtheoriﬁceoftheCSinto
theRA.
Anesthetic management
Theanestheticmanagementgoalsaresummarized
inTable6.8.
Induction and maintenance
Most children with ASDs have excellent cardiac
reserve and will tolerate an inhalation induc-
tion without problems. Good airway manage-
ment is necessary to allow manipulation of PVR
and prevent reversal of L–R shunting. The pres-
ence of an enlarged atrium may predispose atrial
dysrhythmias;theseusuallyarewelltolerated.
For children with an isolated ASD and no
PVOD early extubation in the ICU or extuba-
tion in the operating room after repair is possible.
An inhalational induction with sevoﬂurane fol-
lowedbyplacementofanIVandadministrationof
pancuronium0.1mg/kgandfentanyl10–15 µg/kg
can be used. An alternative following IV place-
ment is thiopental, propofol, or etomidate in con-
junction with pancuronium and a remifentanil
infusion(0.3–1.0 µg/kg/min).Ineithercase,anes-
thesiaismaintainedwithisoﬂurane(0.5–1.0%)or
sevoﬂurane (1.0–2.0%) supplementation. Caudal
morphine (70µg/kg in 5–10mL of preservative-
free saline) can be administered after induc-
tion. A vaporizer on the CPB circuit can provide
anesthesiaduringCPB.
Post-CPB management
The post-CPB management goals are summarized
inTable6.9.
SeparationfromCPBusuallyisnotproblematic.
Inprimumdefects,thereisthepossibilityofheart
block, as the patch must be sutured to the crest
of the IVS. In addition, the possibility of residual
mitralregurgitationexists.Ifpartialanomalouspul-
monary venous drainage is unrecognized during
sinus venous defect closure, a residual L–R shunt
may exist after repair. Intraoperative TEE can be
used to detect this defect. In the rare patient with
PVOD, the pulmonary vasculature is likely to be
hyper-reactive in the post-CPB period. Therefore,
itisnecessarytouseventilatorymeasurestoreduce
post-CPB PVR. These manipulations will preventAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 199 — #33
CongenitalHeartDisease 199
rightventriculardysfunctionsecondarytoincreased
afterload.
Atrioventricular canal defects
Anatomy
Embryologically, there are four endocardial cush-
ionsthatcontributetothedevelopmentofthelower
ostiumprimumportionoftheatrialseptumandthe
upper,posteriorinletportionoftheIVSwherethe
AV valves insert. The cushions also contribute to
thetissuethatformstheseptalleaﬂetsofthemitral
andtricuspidvalves.Therefore,cushiondefects,or
atrioventricularcanal(AVC)defects,includeabnor-
malitiesinallthesestructures.Theterminologyof
these lesions can be confusing and is summarized
(Figs6.12and6.13a–c)asfollows:
• Partial AVC. This is an ostium primum ASD in
associationwithacleftmitralvalve.Therearetwo
separate AV valve (mitral and tricuspid) annuli.
NoinletVSDispresent.
• Transitional AVC.ThisisanostiumprimumASD,
commonAVvalveoriﬁce,commonantero-superior
and postero-inferior bridging leaﬂets with dense
chordalattachmentstothecrestoftheIVScreating
functionally separate mitral and tricuspid valves.
ThereisaverysmallorabsentinletVSD.
Atrial septum
Atrial part
of CAVC
Rt vent
Parts of
common
AV valve
Ventricular
part of CAVC
IVC
SVC
Fig. 6.12 Rightventricleopenedtorevealcomponents
ofacommonatrioventricularcanaldefect.AV,
atrioventricular;CAVC,commonatrioventricularcanal;
IVC,inferiorvenacava;Rtvent,rightventricle;SVC,
superiorvenacava.
• Complete AVC (CAVC).This is an ostium primum
ASD, common AV valve oriﬁce, common anterio-
superiorandposterio-inferiorbridgingleaﬂetswith
varying chordal attachments to the crest of the
IVS. There is a moderate to large inlet VSD. The
type of chordal attachments are summarized as
follows:
• Rastelli A. The anterio-superior bridging leaﬂet
is effectively divided into left (mitral) and right
(tricuspid) anterio-superior leaﬂets by choral
attachments to the crest of IVS. There is usually
attachment of the postero-inferior leaﬂets to the
crestoftheIVSaswell.Themajority(70%)ofCAVC
areofthistype.
• RastelliB. Therearechordalattachmentsfromthe
right side of the IVS (RV septal papillary muscle)
to left side of the anterio-superior bridging leaﬂet.
RLL
(a) (b) (c)
LLL
LILLSL
RSL RIL
RLL
LLL
LILLSL
RSL RIL
RLL
LLL
LIL
SL
RIL
Fig. 6.13 Typesofcompleteatrioventricularcanalseen
fromabove.(a)Rastellityp eA–themostfrequentform
ofcommonatrioventricularcanal(CAVC).Thesuperior
(anterior)bridgingleaﬂetiseffectivelydividedintomitral
(LSL)andtricuspid(RSL)portions,bothofwhichare
attachedtothecrestoftheventricularseptum.The
tricuspidportionrepresentsthetrueanteriortricuspid
valveleaﬂet.(b)Rastellityp eB–theleastfrequentform
ofCAVC.Thesuperior(anterior)bridgingleaﬂetis
effectivelyundividedbuttherearechoralattachments
fromarightventricle(RV)septalpapillarymuscletothe
leftsideoftheleaﬂet.(c)Rastellityp eC–theformof
CAVCmostcommonlyassociatedwithothermajor
cardiacanomalies(suchastetraologyofFallot).The
superior(anterior)bridgingleaﬂetisclearlyundivided
withnochordalattachmentstotheventricularseptum.
LILandRIL,leftandrightinferior(posterior)leaﬂets;
LLLandRLL,leftandrightlateralleaﬂets;LSLandRSL,
leftandrightsuperior(anterior)leaﬂets;SL,superior
(anterior)bridgingleaﬂet.(FromJacobsJP, et al.
Congenitalheartsurgerynomenclatureanddatabase
project;atrioventricularcanaldefect. Ann Thorac Surg
2000;69:S37,withpermission.)AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 200 — #34
200 Chapter6
There are no choral attachments to the crest of
theIVS.
• Rastelli C. There are no chordal attachments of
theanterio-superiorbridgingleaﬂettoanyportion
oftheIVS;thereisusuallyanattachmenttoaRV
freewallpapillarymuscle.Thiscreateswhatappears
to be a free-ﬂoating common AV valve. This type
is seen most commonly in conjunction with other
lesionsuchasTOF.
Physiology
Thesedefectscanresultincommunicationbetween
allfourheartchambersaswellasinabnormalitiesof
themitralandtricuspidvalves.Becausetheoriﬁce
between the four chambers is large, these lesions
tendtoproducedependentsimpleshunts.Aswith
largeVSDs,thisresultsin:(i)productionofalarge
L–R shunt; (ii) increased pulmonary blood ﬂow;
(iii)transmissionofsystemicpressurestotheRVand
pulmonaryarteries;and(iv)volumeoverloadingof
theRVandLV.
AswithlargeVSDs,CAVCdefectspredisposethe
earlydevelopmentofPVOD.AdvancedPVODmay
increasethePVR:SVRratiosuchthatabidirectional
orR–Lshuntdevelops.Thisisaparticularconcern
forpatientswithtrisomy21.CAVCdefectsarecom-
moninthesepatients,whoareparticularlyproneto
earlydevelopmentofPVOD.InsomeCAVCdefects,
the presence of severe mitral insufﬁciency results
in regurgitation of left ventricular blood directly
intotheRA(LV–RAshunt).ThisincreasestheL–R
shunt.Inaddition,mitralregurgitationincreasesthe
volumeworkoftheLV.
Surgical therapy
Repairofthesedefectsinvolves:
• Septation of the common AV valve tissue into
twoseparatecompetent,nonstenotictricuspidand
mitralvalves.
• ClosureoftheostiumprimumASD.
• ClosureoftheinletVSD.
This can usually be accomplished using a one-
patch technique wherein a single patch is used to
closeboththeVSDandASDandthereconstructed
AVvalvesarere-suspendedbysuturestothepatch.
WhentheVSDislargeandextendstootherareas
of the septum (as in TOF) two patches (atrial and
ventricular)maybenecessary.WhentheinletVSD
component is small the AV valve tissue can be
sutureddowntothecrestoftheventricularseptum
essentiallyclosingtheVSD.Apatchisthensutured
tothecrestoftheventricularseptumandisusedto
closetheASD.
Anesthetic management
Theanestheticmanagementgoalsaresummarized
inTable6.8.
Induction and maintenance
Anestheticmanagementissimilartothatforlarge
VSDs. However, the child with CAVC also may
haveseveremitralregurgitationandahighlyreac-
tive pulmonary vasculature. Because control of
ventilation is the most reliable way to manipu-
late PVR, prompt and reliable control of the air-
way at induction is important. The goal should
be to use a reduced FiO2 and to maintain PaCO2
at 35–40mmHg. Inhalational induction should be
reservedforinfantsandchildrenwithsmalldefects,
no mitral regurgitation, and no PVOD. Cardiac
reserveoftenislimitedorexhaustedinpatientswith
largeshuntsandhighpulmonarybloodﬂow.More-
over, the additional volume load imposed on the
LVbymitralregurgitationwillfurtherlimitcardiac
reserve.
AnIVinductionandmaintenancewithfentanyl
orsufentanilwillprovidebetterhemodynamicsta-
bility. In particular, for patients with reactive pul-
monary vasculature, high doses of fentanyl and
sufentanil will be useful in blunting increases in
PVR associated with surgical stimulation. In addi-
tion,highdosesoffentanylorsufentanilwillblunt
stimulation-induced increases in SVR, which will
increasethemitralregurgitantfraction.
Post-CPB management
The post-CPB management goals are summarized
inTable6.9.
Closureofthedefectswillpreventfurtherexpo-
sure of the pulmonary vasculature to high blood
ﬂowsandpressures.Thisusuallywillresultinsome
immediate decrease in PA pressures. In patients
withsmalldefectsandpatientswithlargedefectsin
whom PVOD has not yet developed, near-normalAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 201 — #35
CongenitalHeartDisease 201
PA pressures may result. However, PA pressures
and PVR will remain elevated in patients with
underlyingPVOD.Inaddition,thepulmonaryvas-
culature of these patients (especially patients with
trisomy21)willremainhyper-responsivetovaso-
constrictingstimuliduetomedialhypertrophythat
accompaniesPVOD.TherapytoreducePVRinthe
post-CPBperiodmaybenecessaryforthesepatients
toavoidRVafterloadmismatch.
Separation from CPB may be complicated by a
varietyofsurgicalproblems.Inadequateclosureof
the defects or persistent mitral regurgitation may
prevent separation from CPB. Assessment of the
presence and location of such defects in the OR
canbeaccomplishedwithTEE.Thepresenceoflarge
Vwavesonthepressuretraceobtainedfromaleft
atrialcathetermaybehelpfulinassessingthedegree
of mitral regurgitation, whereas TEE will provide
deﬁniteinformation.Occasionally,patchplacement
reducestheleftventricularchambersizeandlimits
stroke volume. Because the AV node is near the
area of patch placement, heart block may occur.
TemporaryepicardialAVsequentialpacingmaybe
necessarytoterminateCPB.
Patent ductus arteriosus
Anatomy
Apatentductusarteriosus(PDA)connectsthemain
pulmonary trunk near the origin of the left PA
withtheproximaldescendingaortajustdistaltothe
originoftheleftsubclavianartery(Fig.6.14).
Physiology
A PDA is a simple shunt. When the PDA is large,
thereislittleornopressuregradientacrosstheduct
and shunting becomes dependent on the ratio of
PVR to SVR. Initially, the high PVR present after
birth tends to limit the shunt magnitude of even
the largest PDAs until PVR begins to decrease. As
PVR decreases a L–R shunt with increased pul-
monarybloodﬂowdevelops.Inorderforsystemic
bloodﬂowtobemaintainedleftventricularoutput
mustincreaseandavolumeloadmustbeimposed
on the LV. The increased pulmonary blood ﬂow
increasespulmonaryvenousreturnandLAP.These
factorsmay,inturn,increasePVRandtheworkof
Asc Ao
Pulmonary
artery
Patent ductus
arteriosus
Desc Ao
Fig. 6.14 Patentductusarteriosus.AscAo,ascending
aorta;DescAo,descendingaorta.
breathing. Finally, runoff of blood from the prox-
imal aorta into the PA tends to compromise distal
organperfusionanddecreasesaorticdiastolicblood
pressurereducingCPP.
Surgical therapy
Closure of the PDA was the ﬁrst “cardiac” oper-
ation, successfully performed by Robert Gross at
Children’sHospitalBostonin1938.Theusualsur-
gical approach is via a left thoracotomy or via
video-assistedthoracoscopicsurgery(VATS).CPBis
notused.Theductusiseitherligatedorligatedand
transected.TheleftPA,leftmainstembronchus,or
descendingaortaisatrisktobeinadvertentlyligated
ifthePDAismisidentiﬁed.Injurytotherecurrent
laryngealnerveisalsopossible.
ClosureofaPDAcurrentlyisbeingaccomplished
in some cardiac catheterization laboratories using
occlusiondevices.Ananestheticoftenisnecessary
for this procedure, because catheter insertion is
painfulandplacementofthedeviceisimpossiblein
amovingchild.Dislodgementofthedevicedown-
streamintothePAoraortamayoccurandrequire
surgicalintervention.
Anesthetic management
Theanestheticmanagementgoalsaresummarized
in Table 6.8. There are a few additional consid-
erations. Surgical retraction of the left lung mayAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 202 — #36
202 Chapter6
necessitate high inspired oxygen concentrations
to prevent hypoxemia. Blood pressure should be
monitored in an upper and lower extremity. The
right arm is preferable to the left arm because the
surgeonmayhavetoplaceaclampontheaortaif
controloftheaorticendofthePDAislostduringdis-
sectionorligation.InpatientswithalargeL–Rshunt
there will be an increase in aortic diastolic blood
pressurefollowingligationduetocessationofrunoff
ofbloodintothepulmonarycirculation.Anupper
andlowerextremitybloodpressureshouldbecom-
paredfollowingligationtoassurethatacoarctation
hasnotbeencreated.
Induction and maintenance
Most patients presenting for PDA ligation are pre-
matureinfantswithrespiratorydistresssyndrome.
AgeandthelikelihoodthatCHFexistsmakethese
patientspoorcandidatesforinhalationalanesthesia.
A technique using high-dose fentanyl or sufen-
tanilincombinationwithabenzodiazepineorlow
inspired concentration of inhalation agent is well
tolerated.
For older children with an isolated PDA and no
PVOD,earlyextubationorextubationintheoper-
ating room after ligation is possible. In this age
groupthoracotomycanbeavoidedusingVATS.An
inhalational induction with halothane or sevoﬂu-
rane followed by placement of an IV and admin-
istration of pancuronium 0.1mg/kg and fentanyl
10–15 µg/kg. Alternatively a remifentanil infusion
(0.5–1.0g/kg/min) can be utilized. Anesthesia
is supplemented with isoﬂurane (0.5–1.0%) or
sevoﬂurane (1.0–2.0%) supplementation. Caudal
morphine (70µg/kg in 5–10mL of preservative-
freesaline)canbeadministeredafterinductionfor
postoperativeanalgesiaifathoractomyisused.
Coarctation of the aorta
Anatomy
Coarctationoftheaortaisafocalnarrowingofthe
aortaandrepresents6–8%ofallcongenitalcardiac
defects.Coarctationoftheaortaismorecommonly
found in males and is the most common lesion
in patients with Turner syndrome. Almost half of
all cases have associated cardiac and noncardiac
anomalies. The anatomic pathology is remarkably
consistentwithadiscreteposteriorshelforinvagi-
nationintheaorticwalljustoppositeoftheinser-
tion of the DA (juxta-ductal) and distal to the
left subclavian artery. In some instances this shelf
may be circumferential. Longer segment coarcta-
tion and coarctation of the abdominal aorta are
alsoseen.
It has been postulated that coarctation develops
as the result of fetal blood ﬂow patterns which
reduceantegradeaorticbloodﬂowwithapropor-
tionate increase in PA and DA blood ﬂow. It is
not surprising then that coarctation is associated
with aortic valve stenosis (most commonly bicus-
pidaorticvalve),withhypoplasiaofotherleftheart
structuressuchasthemitralvalveandLV,andwith
hypoplasiaoftheaorticarch.Hypoplasiaoftheaor-
tic isthmus (the region of the aortic arch from the
leftsubclaviantotheDA)istheisolatedaorticarch
lesionmostcommonlyassociatedwithcoarctation.
VSDs, particularly posterior malalignment VSDs
that cause left ventricular outﬂow tract (LVOT)
obstruction and divert ﬂow from the ascending
aorta into the PA, are also associated with coarc-
tation. In contrast, coarctation is virtually never
found in association with obstructive right heart
lesions.
Physiology
Despiteremarkablyconsistentanatomicpathology,
the pathophysiology of coarctation is varied and
dependsontheseverityofthecoarctationandthe
location of associated lesions (Fig. 6.15a,b). These
variations in pathophysiology have led to the use
of confusing terms such as infantile and adult
coarctation or pre- and post-ductal coarctation,
which are of little practical signiﬁcance. Coarcta-
tionoftheaortaproducesLVpressureoverloadand
a reduction in lower body perfusion. The physio-
logicconsequencesofacoarctationwilldependon
severalfactors:
• Theseverityofthecoarctation.
• The extent of bypass afforded by the patent or
partiallyPDA.
• The extent of collateralization to the distal
aorta.
• Thetypeandseverityofassociatedheartlesions.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 203 — #37
CongenitalHeartDisease 203
(a) (b)
Fig. 6.15 Typicalappearancesofcoarctationofthe
aorta.(a)Coarctationassociatedwithhypoplasiaofthe
aorticisthmusandductaldependentperfusionofthe
descendingaortapresentatbirth.Closureoftheductus
arteriosuswilllikelyresultinleftventricle(LV)afterload
mismatchwithcompromiseofperfusionandoxygen
delivery,andpresentationininfancy.(b)Coarctationof
theaortainapatientwhohastoleratedductalclosure
anddevelopedextensivecollateralization.Extensive
ﬁbrosisinthejuxta-ductalregioninassociationwith
growthofthenativeaortahasproducedadiscrete
hourglassconstriction.Presentationwillbeasachildor
youngadult.
The DA plays a critical role in pathophysiology.
Closure of the DA after birth initially occurs at
the pulmonary end with constriction of the aor-
tic oriﬁce normally delayed for several weeks or
months. Closure of the aortic end of the DA may
abruptly impede ﬂow of blood around the aortic
shelf lesion and increase the severity of the lesion
(Fig.6.16a–c).Ductalclosuremayalsobeassociated
withconstrictionoftheaortaattheleveloftheDA
presumablyduetothepresenceofductaltissuein
this area. When coarctation is severe, distal aortic
perfusionwill,inpart,besuppliedwithbloodfrom
thePAviaaPDA(Fig.6.17a–c).Thiswillresultin
differentialcyanosiswithahigherarterialsaturation
proximal to the coarctation as compared to distal
tothecoarctation.Whenthedevelopmentofaortic
obstruction is gradual, collateral ﬂow to the distal
aortawillbeestablishedviatheintercostal,internal
thoracic,subclavian,andscapulararteries.
Presentation will be in infancy for all patients
except those capable of tolerating ductal clo-
sure without overt hemodynamic compromise.
In general, presentation beyond infancy is lim-
ited to patients with an isolated coarctation of
mild to moderate severity or to those with rapid
compensatorycollateralformation.Inthesepatients
there is a secondary phase of ﬁbrosis that occurs
in the ﬁrst 2–3months of life. As the child grows,
theligamentumarteriosumdevelopsathickﬁbrous
shelfwithinthelumenoftheaorta.
In the presence of severe coarctation, particu-
larly in association with left heart and aortic arch
hypoplasia,patencyoftheDAisnecessarytopro-
videbloodﬂowtotheaortadistaltothecoarctation
(R–L physiologic shunt). In this ductal dependent
physiology,RVpressuresaresystemicandfemoral
pulsesarepresent.
Ductal closure in patients with a severe coarc-
tation will result in near loss of distal perfusion.
LV dilation from the acute afterload increase, left
atrial hypertension, and pulmonary edema may
ensue.ThereductioninLVoutputmaybesosevere
that proximal hypertension will not be present.
The infant may present in a profound low cardiac
outputstateorfollowingcardiopulmonaryarrest.In
thecaseofalessseverecoarctation,ductalclosure
will result in a diminution of distal perfusion and
evidenceofleftatrialhypertension.
If an anatomic intracardiac shunt lesion (such
as ASD or VSD) is also present the increased
impedancetoaorticejectioninducedbythecoarc-
tation will enhance physiologic L–R shunting.
Reductions in PVR will increase pulmonary blood
ﬂow thereby diverting ﬂow from the distal aorta.
Leftatrialhypertensionwillbeexacerbatedbythe
increaseinpulmonarybloodﬂow.
In all these instances institution of PGE 1
(0.05–0.1 µg/kg/min) to re-establish ductal and
aorticpatencycanbelifesaving.Mechanicalventila-
torysupport,inotropicsupport,anddiuretictherapy
areusuallynecessarytostabilizethesickestinfants
following administration of PGE1. These patients
often present with a profound metabolic acidosis
and suffer transient renal and hepatic dysfunction
followinginitialresuscitation.
Patients presenting in childhood with coarcta-
tion will not be ductus dependent and will have
well developed collaterals. In addition, they will
have developed the concentric LV hypertrophy
that accompanies chronic LV pressure overload
lesions. These patients will have proximal aortic
hypertension.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 204 — #38
204 Chapter6
Pulmonary
aorta
Descending
aorta
Phrenic nerve
Vagus nerve
Phrenic nerve
Vagus
nerve
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 6.16 Anatomyofcoarctationoftheaortainvolvingasmallpatentductusarteriosus(PDA).ClosureofthisPDA
willcreateashelf-likeinvaginationoftheposterioraorticwallandincreasetheseverityofthecoarctation.Therepair
shownhere(a–c)isresectionofthecoarctedsegment,ligationofthePDA,andprimaryend-to-endreanastomosisof
theaorta.Clampplacementhascompromisedﬂowtotheleftsubclavianartery.
Surgical therapy
Three basic types of repair are used for correction
ofcoarctationoftheaorta:reversesubclavianpatch
angioplasty, synthetic patch angioplasty, and end-
to-end anastomosis of the aorta after resection of
thecoarctedsegment(seeFigs6.16and6.17).These
procedures are performed via a left thoracotomy.
It is necessary to cross-clamp the aorta to perform
theseprocedures.Forolderchildren,partialCPBor
ashuntfromproximaltodistalaortamaybeused
if the adequacy of the collateral circulation is in
question.
Presentation as an infant generally leads to
medicalstabilizationfollowedbysurgicalinterven-
tion. Complete excision of the area of coarcta-
tionandsurroundingductaltissuewithend-to-end
anastomosis is indicated. In the case of coarcta-
tion associated with a hypoplastic aortic isthmus
completeexcisioninconjunctionwithanextended
end-to-end or end-to-side anastomosis is recom-
mended. The descending aorta is anastomosed to
theundersideoftheaorticarchinanend-to-endor
end-to-sidefashion.
Dacron patch aortoplasty following resection of
the posterior coarctation ridge is associated with
late development of hypertension and aneurysm
formation as compared to end-to-end anastomo-
sis. Reverse subclavian patch angioplasty is rarely
utilized, as the rate of re-coarctation is high. In
adult patients placement of an interposition graft
is usually necessary as there is insufﬁcient mobil-
ity of the aorta to allow resection and end-to-end
anastomosis.
Endovascular stent placement may prove to be
analternativetherapyfortreatmentofcoarctation
in older children and adults with results superiorAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 205 — #39
CongenitalHeartDisease 205
(a)
(b)
(c)
Patent ductus
arteriosus
Phrenic nerve
Vagus nerve
Descending aorta
Phrenic nerve
Patent ducts
arteriosus
Descending aorta
Vagus nerve
Descending aorta-to-side
aorta anastomosis
Incision, inferior
surface of arch
Fig. 6.17 Anatomyofcoarctationoftheaortainvolving
alargepatentductusarteriosus(PDA)andseveretubular
hypoplasiaoftheaorticisthmus(arch).Agoodportionof
theﬂowtothedistalaortaissuppliedfromright-to-left
(R–L)shuntingthroughthePDA.Therepairshownhere
(a–c)isresectionofductaltissueandmobilizationofthe
descendingaortaandaorticarchtoperformaprimary
reanastomosis.Thisincreasesthecaliberoftheaortic
arch.Clampplacementhascompromisedﬂowtotheleft
carotidartery.
toballoondilationalone.Thistechniqueallowsfor
subsequentpercutaneousstentdilationsovertime
asnecessary.
The most devastating complication associated
withcoarctationrepairisthedevelopmentofpara-
plegiasecondarytospinalcordischemia.Theinci-
dence of paraplegia is quite low (0.14–0.40%).
Severalfactorsareassociatedwithanincreasedrisk
ofdevelopingparaplegia:hyperthermia,prolonged
aortic cross-clamp time, elevated cerebral spinal
ﬂuid(CSF)pressures,lowproximalanddistalaortic
bloodpressures,andpoorlydevelopedcollateralsto
thedescendingaorta.
Anesthetic management
Goals
1 Maintain heart rate, contractility, and preload
to maintain cardiac output. The high afterload
facedbytheLVmakesitparticularlyvulnerableto
reductionsincontractility.
2 For neonates and infants with coarctation, con-
tinuationofPGE 1 (0.01–0.05 µg/kg/min)tomain-
tain ductal patency may be necessary to prevent
cardiovascularcollapse.
3 IfthereisanassociatedASDorVSD,reductionin
thePVR:SVRratioshouldbeavoided.Suchreduc-
tions will increase pulmonary blood ﬂow and will
necessitateanincreaseincardiacoutputtomaintain
systemicbloodﬂow.
4 Avoid increases in SVR. Increased SVR will
worsen LV pressure overload, which may cause
largereductionsinLVoutput.
5 Cross-clampingoftheaortamayproduceimpres-
siveproximalhypertensionorLVdysfunction.This
is less likely in the presence of well-developed
collaterals.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 206 — #40
206 Chapter6
The arterial line should be in the right arm.
No blood pressure will be obtainable in the lower
extremities during cross-clamping. The left arm is
anunreliablebloodpressuresourceduringclamp-
ing because the proximal clamp may occlude or
compromisetheoriginoftheleftsubclavianartery.
Thisisparticularlytrueiftheleftsubclavianpatch
techniqueisutilized.
Induction and maintenance
Neonates and infants presenting for coarctation
repairgenerallyarePGE 1 dependentwithcompro-
mised distal perfusion and pulmonary congestion.
Theyarenotcandidatesforinhalationalanesthesia.
Ketamine may worsen hemodynamics by increas-
ing SVR and probably should be avoided. A tech-
nique using high-dose fentanyl or sufentanil in
combinationwithabenzodiazepineorlowinspired
concentration of an inhalation agent is well tol-
erated by these patients. In older children with
onlyproximalsystemichypertension,IVorinhala-
tional techniques are well tolerated. Regardless of
thetechniquechosen,itshouldbeappreciatedthat
proximal blood pressure response to stimulation
willbeexaggerated.
Management after cross-clamp removal
Cross-clamping of the thoracic aorta has been
shown to produce increases in both proximal aor-
tic blood pressure and CSF pressure and decreases
indistalaorticbloodpressure.Useofsodiumnitro-
prusside to normalize proximal aortic blood pres-
sureresultsinfurtherincreasesinCSFpressureand
furtherdecreasesindistalaorticbloodpressure.This
combinationofincreasedCSFpressureandreduced
aortic blood pressure reduces spinal cord blood
perfusion pressure and may place the spinal cord
at greater risk for ischemia. Therefore, vasodila-
tors should be used cautiously to control extreme
proximalhypertensionandLVdysfunction.
TEEisusefulduringcross-clamping,particularly
forinfantswithcoexistingcardiaclesions.LVfunc-
tionandtheextentofintracardiacshuntingcanbe
monitored.Insomeinstancesofseverecoarctation
in infants, particularly those with proximal tubu-
larhypoplasia,vasodilatortherapymaybeinsufﬁ-
cienttopreventLVdilatationandinotropicsupport
may be necessary. Inotropic therapy for patients
withintracardiacshuntsmayonlyservetoincrease
L–R shunting. Ventilatory control of PVR will be
complicated by the fact that the left lung must
be retracted for exposure. It is important to know
whicharchvesselsareclampedduringthesurgical
procedure.Atleastoneofthecarotidarteriesmust
bepatentforcerebralperfusion(seeFigs6.16and
6.17).TheuseofNIRSmaybehelpfulinassessing
theadequacyofcerebralbloodﬂow.
Removal of the cross-clamp will result in reac-
tive hyperemia in distal tissues with subsequent
vasodilationandtransienthypotension.Releaseof
lactic acid will increase PaCO2. Volume expansion
and hyperventilation just before clamp removal
diminishes these effects. Cross-clamp times for
these repairs are relatively short (<15minutes),
which reduces the hemodynamic consequences of
clampremoval.
Postoperatively,reboundhypertensionmayoccur
and persist for up to 1 week. Initially this is likely
due an altered baroreceptor response resulting in
veryhighcirculatinglevelsofcatecholaminesplaya
role.Later,theremaybeinvolvementoftherenin–
angiotensin–aldosteronesystem.Beta-blockersand
vasodilatorsareusedtocontrolthishypertension.
Older children without coexisting diseases are
candidatesforearlyextubationusingthetechnique
describedforPDAligation.
Tetralogy of Fallot (TOF)
Anatomy
TOF(Figs6.18and6.19a,b)isactuallymoreaccu-
rately described as TOF with pulmonary stenosis
(TOF/PS)todistinguishitfromTOFwithpulmonary
atresia (TOF/PA) and TOF with absent pulmonary
valve (TOF/APV). TOF is characterized by a VSD,
overriding of the aorta, right ventricular hyper-
trophy, and pulmonic stenosis (infundibular or
subvalvular,valvular,supravalvular,oracombina-
tion). The key malformation is underdevelopment
oftherightventricularinfundibulumanddisplace-
mentoftheinfundibularseptumresultinginright
ventricular outﬂow tract stenosis. Patients with
TOF have displacement of the infundibular sep-
tuminananterior,superior,andleftwarddirection.
The posterior wall of the right ventricular outﬂow
tractisformedbytheinfundibularseptumandthisAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 207 — #41
CongenitalHeartDisease 207
Right aortic
arch
Subpulmonary
stenosis
VSD
Ao PA
RA
RV
LV
LA
Fig. 6.18 AnatomyintetralogyofFallot(TOF).The
followingfeaturesarenotable:malalignmentventricular
septaldefect(VSD),overridingaorta(Ao),infundibular
pulmonicstenosis,andsmallpulmonaryarteries.There
isarightaorticarchwithmirrorimagearchvessel
branchingasoccursin25%ofpatientswithTOF.LA,left
atrium;LV,leftventricle;PA,pulmonaryartery;RA,
rightatrium;RV,rightventricle.
RV
(a) (b)
LV
MV RV
MPA
MV
LV
Fig. 6.19 (a)Long-axisviewofheartillustratingthe
normalrelationshipoftheinfundibularseptum
(stippled)andthetrabecularseptum(striped).(b)Long
axisviewofheartintetralogyofFallot.Lackof
connectionbetweeninfundibularandtrabecularseptum
resultsinmalalignmentventricularseptaldefect.Right
ventricularoutﬂowtractisnarrowedbyupward,anterior
tiltofinfundibularseptum.LV,leftventricle;MPA,main
pulmonaryartery;MV,mitralvalve;RV,rightventricle.
abnormaldisplacementresultsinnarrowingofthe
right ventricular outﬂow tract. In addition, this
displacement of the infundibular septum creates
a large malalignment VSD with the aorta overrid-
ing the intraventricular septum. Abnormalities in
the septal and parietal attachments of the outﬂow
tract further exacerbate the infundibular stenosis
(Fig.6.20a–c).Seventy-ﬁvepercentofTOFpatients
will have both infundibular and valvular stenosis.
A small proportion of patients will have multiple
muscularVSDs.
The pulmonary valve is almost always bileaﬂet.
AtoneendofthespectrumofTOFthepulmonary
valve may be mildly hypoplastic (reduced annu-
lus size) with minimal fusion of the pulmonary
valve leaﬂets. At the other end of the spectrum
the pulmonary annulus may be very small with
nearfusionofthevalveleaﬂets.Inaddition,there
are varying degrees of main PA and branch PA
hypoplasia.
The most common associated lesion, present in
25% of patients is a right aortic arch with mirror
image arch vessel branching (innominate artery
gives rise to left carotid and left subclavian, right
carotidandrightsubclavianariseseparately).
Physiology
TOF is a complex shunt in which a communica-
tion(VSD)andapartialobstructiontoRVoutﬂow
are present. In most patients with TOF, there is
a ﬁxed and a dynamic component to RV out-
ﬂowobstruction.Theﬁxedcomponentisproduced
by the infundibular, valvular, and supra valvular
pulmonarystenoses(SVAS).Thedynamiccompo-
nent(subvalvularPS)isproducedbyvariationsin
thecaliberoftheRVinfundibulum.
In patients with TOF, the arterial saturation
is a direct reﬂection of pulmonary blood ﬂow.
The typical TOF patient has ﬁxed and variable
components that create severe right ventricular
outﬂow obstruction. This produces a right-to left
shuntandcyanosis.AsmallsubsetofTOFpatients
(“pinktet”)haveminimalobstructiontopulmonary
blood ﬂow at the right ventricular outﬂow and
PAlevelandmayhavenormaloxygensaturation.
Some of these patients have a L–R shunt with
increased pulmonary blood ﬂow and symptoms
ofCHkkdDinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 208 — #42
208 Chapter6
Pulmonic valve
Crista
supraventricularis
Tricuspid
orifice
Viewed from septum Frontal view
PB
SB
PBPB
SBSB PB
SB
RV
VSD
Infundibular chamber
PB
SB
RV
Infundibular chamber
VSD
RV
PB SB
RV
PB
SB
(a) (b)
(c)
PB
SB
Fig. 6.20 Spectrumofinfundibularstenosisproduced
byabnormalitiesinseptalandparietalbandsofcrista
supraventricularis.(a)Normalanatomyofcrista
supraventricularis.(b)Moderateinfundibularstenosis
andcreationofaninfundibularchambersecondaryto
hypertrophyandanterior,superiordisplacementof
parietalband.(c)Severeinfundibularstenosiswith
creationofinfundibularchambersecondaryto
hypertrophyandanterior,superiordisplacementof
bothseptalandparietalbands.PB,parietalband;
RV,rightventricle;SB,septalband;VSD,ventricular
septaldefect.
Hypoxic or hypercyanotic episodes
(“Tet spells”)
TheoccurrenceofhypoxicepisodesinTOFpatients
may be life-threatening and should be anticipated
ineverypatient,eventhosewhoarenotnormally
cyanotic. Spells occur more frequently in cyanotic
patientswiththepeakfrequencyofspellsbetween
2 and 3months of age. The onset of spells usually
prompts urgent surgical intervention, so it is not
unusualfortheanesthesiologisttocareforaninfant
whoisatgreatriskforspellsduringthepreoperative
period.
The etiology of spells is not completely under-
stood, but infundibular spasm or constriction may
play a role. Crying, defecation, feeding, fever,
and awakening all can be precipitating events.
Paroxysmalhyperpneaistheinitialﬁnding.Thereis
anincreaseinrateanddepthofrespiration,leading
to increasing cyanosis and potential syncope, con-
vulsions, or death. During a spell, the infant will
appearpaleandlimpsecondarytopoorcardiacout-
put. Hyperpnea has several deleterious effects in
maintainingandworseningahypoxicspell.Hyper-
pnea increases oxygen consumption through the
increased work of breathing. Hypoxia induces a
decrease in SVR, which further increases the R–L
shunt. Hyperpnea also lowers intrathoracic pres-
sure and leads to an increase in systemic venous
return.Inthefaceofinfundibularobstruction,this
resultsinanincreasedRVpreloadandanincrease
in the R–L shunt. Thus, episodes seem to be asso-
ciated with events that increase oxygen demandAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 209 — #43
CongenitalHeartDisease 209
while simultaneous decreases in Pao2 and pHand
anincreaseinPaco 2 areoccurring.Treatmentofa
“Tetspell”includesthefollowing:
• Administrationof100%oxygen.
• Compression of the femoral arteries or placing
the patient in a knee–chest position transiently
increasesSVRandreducestheR–Lshunt.Manual
compressionoftheabdominalaortaisparticularly
effectivefortheanesthetizedpatient.Afterthechest
is open, the surgeon can manually compress the
ascending aorta to increase impedance to ejection
throughtheLV.
• Administration of morphine sulfate
(0.05–0.10mg/kg), which sedates the patient and
may have a depressant effect on respiratory drive
andhyperpnea.
• Administration of 15–30mL/kg of a crystalloid
solution.Enhancingpreloadwillincreaseheartsize,
whichmayincreasethediameteroftheRVoutﬂow
tract.
• Administrationofsodiumbicarbonatetotreatthe
severemetabolicacidosisthatoccurduringaspell.
Correctionofthemetabolicacidosiswillnormalize
SVR and reduce hyperpnea. Bicarbonate adminis-
tration(1–2mEq/kg)intheabsenceofabloodgas
determinationiswarrantedduringaspell.
• Phenylephrine in relatively large doses
(5–10 µg/kg IV as a bolus or 2–5µg/kg/min as an
infusion) increases SVR and reduces R–L shunt-
ing.InthepresenceofsevereRVoutﬂowobstruc-
tion,phenylephrine-inducedincreasesofPVRwill
have little or no effect in increasing RV outﬂow
resistance. It is important to point out that treat-
mentwith α-adrenergicagentstoincreaseSVRdoes
nothing to treat the underlying cause of the spell
althoughthedecreaseinunstressedvenousvolume
inducedbytheseagentsmayaugmentpreload.
• Beta-adrenergic agonists are absolutely con-
traindicated. Increasing contractility will further
narrowthestenoticinfundibulum.
• Administration of propranolol (0.1mg/kg) or
esmolol (0.5mg/kg followed by an infusion of
50–300 µg/kg/min)mayreduceinfundibularspasm
by depressing contractility. In addition, slowing of
heart rate may allow for improved diastolic ﬁlling
(increased preload), increased heart size, and an
increaseinthediameteroftheRVoutﬂowtract.
• Extracorporealmembraneoxygenation(ECMO)
resuscitationinrefractoryepisodeswhenimmediate
operativeinterventionisnotpossible.
Surgical therapy
Palliative shunts
Palliative shunt procedures to increase pulmonary
blood ﬂow can be used for patients with TOF
in whom complicated surgical anatomy precludes
deﬁnitive repair at the time of presentation. In
addition,someinstitutionsdelayelectivecomplete
repairuntil12–18monthsofagewithplacementof
apalliativeshuntifcyanosisoccurspriortothattime
interval.Thedisadvantagesofapalliativeshuntin
TOFpatientscanbesummarizedasfollows:
• The volume load imposed on the LV by these
shunts parallels the increases in pulmonary ﬂow
produced.Therewillbeprogressivehypertrophyof
the body and infundibulum of the RV during the
intervalfromshuntplacementtodeﬁnitiverepairas
right ventricular outﬂow tract (RVOT) obstruction
willnotberelieved.
• Shunt placement may distort PA anatomy and
impairsubsequentgrowthmakingdeﬁnitiverepair
moredifﬁcult.
• A large shunt with high pulmonary blood ﬂow
putsthepatientatriskfordevelopmentofPVOD.
Thepalliativeshuntproceduresinvolvecreation
of a systemic-to-pulmonary arterial shunt, essen-
tially a surgically created PDA. Ideally, these sur-
gical shunts should be mildly restrictive simple
shunts. In the presence of a proximal obstruction
to pulmonary blood ﬂow, these shunts produce a
L–R shunt and an increase in pulmonary blood
ﬂow. The shunts can be summarized as follows
(Fig.6.21a–d):
• Waterston and Potts shunts.TheWatersonshuntis
a side-to-side anastomosis between the ascending
aortaandtherightPA.Thisprocedureisperformed
via a right thoracotomy without CPB. The Potts
shuntresultsisaside-to-sideanastomosisbetween
thedescendingaortaandtheleftPA.Thisprocedure
is performed via a left thoracotomy without CPB.
WaterstonandPottsshuntsareofhistoricinterest
only.Itisdifﬁculttosizetheoriﬁceoftheseshunts
correctly.ToosmallanoriﬁcewilllimitpulmonaryAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 210 — #44
210 Chapter6
RSCA
RPA
Ao PA
RSCA
TG
RPA
Ao PA
RSCA
Ao
RPA
PA PA
TG
RPA
RSCA
Ao
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
Fig. 6.21 Surgicallycreatedsystemic
topulmonaryarteryshunts.
(a)Blalock–Taussigshunt.(b)Modiﬁed
Blalock–Taussigshunt.(c)Waterston
shunt.(d)Centralshunt.Ao,aorta;
PA,pulmonaryartery;RPA,right
pulmonaryartery;RSCA,right
subclavianartery;TG,tubegraft.
bloodﬂow,whereastoolargeanoriﬁcewillcreate
pulmonaryoverperfusionandcongestionandpre-
disposetodevelopmentofunilateralPVOD.These
shunts may produce distortion of the PA, making
subsequent deﬁnitive repair difﬁcult. In addition,
they are difﬁcult to take down at the time of the
deﬁnitiveprocedure.
• Central shunt.This shunt places a synthetic tube
graft between the ascending aorta and the main
or branch PA. It often is used when prior shunt
procedureshavefailed.
• Blalock–Taussig shunt (BTS). As originally
described, this involves creation of an end to-
side anastomosis of the right or left subclavian
artery to the ipsilateral branch PA. Currently,
a modiﬁcation of this procedure known as the
modiﬁed Blalock–Taussig shunt (MBTS) is used.
It involves interposing a length of Gore-Tex tube
graft (3.5–4.0mm in infants) between the sub-
clavian or innominate artery and the branch PA.
These shunts are performed on the side oppo-
site the aortic arch. This shunt can be performed
withorwithoutCPBviaathoracotomyormedian
sternotomy(seeFig.6.18).
Deﬁnitive repair
Currently,mostpatientswithTOFhaveanelective
fullcorrectionbetweentheagesof2–10monthsof
age. In some centers surgery is delayed as long as
possible within this time interval with the precise
timing of repair dictated by the onset of cyanotic
episodes.DeﬁnitiverepairforTOFisbeingaccom-
plished in neonates in some centers if favorable
anatomyispresent.Surgeryisaimedatrelievingthe
outﬂowobstructionbyresectionofhypertrophied,
obstructingmusclebundlesandaugmentationand
enlargementoftheoutﬂowtractwithapericardial
patch. Unless the pulmonic annulus is near nor-
mal size, and the pulmonary valve is only mildly
stenotic,enlargementoftheoutﬂowtractinvolves
extensionofthepatchacrossthepulmonaryvalve
annulusandintothemainPA.Becauseatransan-
nularpatchcreatespulmonicinsufﬁciencyitisbest
avoidedwhenpossible.IfstenosisofthePAextendsAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 211 — #45
CongenitalHeartDisease 211
to the bifurcation, the pericardial patch can be
extendedbeyondthebifurcationofthepulmonary
arteries.Finally,theVSDisclosed.Inneonatesthis
is usually done through the right ventriculotomy
createdforresectionofRVOTobstructionandplace-
mentofthetransannularpatch.Ininfantsandolder
childrentheVSDcanbeclosedviaatrans-tricuspid
valveapproach.
An important surgical consideration for patients
with TOF/PS is the occurrence of coronary artery
abnormalities.Approximately8%ofpatientshave
either the left main coronary artery or the left
anteriordescendingarteryasabranchoftheright
coronary artery. In these cases, a right ventriculo-
tomytoenlargetherightventricularoutﬂowtract
willendangertheleftcoronaryartery.Insuchcases,
an extracardiac conduit (RV to main PA) may be
necessary to bypass the outﬂow tract obstruction
andavoidinjurytothecoronaryartery.
Anesthetic management
Goals
1 Maintainheartrate,contractility,andpreloadto
maintaincardiacoutput.Euvolemiaisimportantto
preventexacerbationofdynamicRVOTobstruction
fromhypovolemiaandreﬂexincreasesinheartrate
andcontractility.
2 Avoid increases in the PVR:SVR ratio. The less
severetheRVoutﬂowobstructivelesions,themore
important this becomes. Increases in PVR relative
toSVR,anddecreasesinSVRrelativetoPVR,will
increase R–L shunting, reduce pulmonary blood
ﬂow,andproduceorworsencyanosis.
3 Use ventilatory measures to reduce PVR. Care
must be taken to minimize mean airway pressure
soastoavoidmechanicalobstructionofpulmonary
bloodﬂow.
4 Maintain or increase SVR. This is particularly
important when RV outﬂow obstruction is severe
andchangesinPVRwillhavelittleornoeffecton
shuntmagnitudeanddirection.
5 Aggressivelytreatepisodesofhypercyanosis.
6 Maintain contractility. Depression of contractil-
ity, particularly in the face of severe RV outﬂow
obstruction, may produce RV afterload mismatch
(see Chapter 2) and drastically reduce pulmonary
bloodﬂow.Theexceptiontothisispatientinwhom
thedynamiccomponentofinfundibularobstruction
is active. Reducing contractility in these patients
may reduce RV outﬂow obstruction via relaxation
oftheinfundibulum.
Creation of surgical shunts to increase pul-
monary blood ﬂow presents the anesthesiologist
withseveraladditionalmanagementproblems:
1 Whenathoracotomyapproachisused,unilateral
lung retraction will be required for surgical expo-
sure. The resulting atelectasis may severely com-
promiseoxygenationandcarbondioxideremoval.
Intermittent reinﬂation of the lung may be neces-
sary during the operative procedure. These rein-
ﬂations should be coordinated with the surgeon.
For all the shunts described, the main or branch
PA will have to be partially occluded by a clamp
to allow creation of the distal anastomosis. The
resulting increase in physiological dead space
may compromise oxygenation and carbon diox-
ide removal and will increase the arterial–ETCO2
gradient.
2 Efforts to increase pulmonary blood ﬂow by
reducingPVRwithventilatoryinterventionsandby
increasingL–Rshuntingshouldbeinitiatedbefore
PAocclusion.
3 Partialocclusionoftheaortawithaclampwillbe
necessaryduringcreationofWaterston,Potts,and
centralshunts.TheresultingincreaseinLVafterload
maycompromisesystolicfunction.
4 Allofthepalliativeshuntsimposeavolumeload
on the LV. Inotropic support may be necessary to
ensure systemic and shunt perfusion after shunt
creation.
5 Palliative shunts are mildly restrictive simple
shunts.ItisimportanttomaintainSVRandreduce
PVRtomaintainpulmonarybloodﬂowinpatients
withsurgicalshunts.
6 Bepreparedtotreatanepisodeofhypercyanosis.
Induction and maintenance
Regardless of the mode of induction, aggressive
volume expansion with 10–15mL/kg of 5% albu-
men or normal saline should be initiated once
IV access is obtained. This is particularly true in
patients who have been NPO for a long interval
priortoinduction.ThisisthemosteffectiveﬁrstlineAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 212 — #46
212 Chapter6
therapyinpreventingandtreatingdynamicRVOT
obstruction.
An IV induction is desirable but most infants
and children will tolerate a mask induction with
eithersevoﬂuraneorhalothaneasthereisaparallel
decreaseinPVRandSVR.Halothanemaybebetter
at attenuating the dynamic component of RVOT
obstruction than sevoﬂurane given halothane’s
more potent negative inotropic effect. Systemic
hypotensionshouldbeavoidedortreatedpromptly.
Systemichypotensionisparticularlylikelytocause
orincreaseR–LshuntingwhenRVoutﬂowobstruc-
tion is severe as anesthesia-induced decreases in
PVR have little effect on decreasing RV outﬂow
resistance. Reduced SVR can be normalized with
phenylephrine(0.5–1.0 µg/kg).
Ketamineisausefulinductionagentinpatients
with TOF. Ketamine has been shown to cause no
signiﬁcant alteration inQP:QS in these patients.
Fentanyl or sufentanil will provide very stable
induction and maintenance hemodynamics and
will blunt stimulation induced increases in PVR.
Maintenanceofanesthesiawithfentanylorsufen-
tanil, a muscle relaxant, and a benzodiazepine or
inhalationagentisappropriate.
Post-CPB management
Goals
1 Maintain heart rate (preferably sinus rhythm)
atanage-appropriaterate.Cardiacoutputislikely
to be more heart-rate-dependent during the post-
CPBperiod.Atrialpacingmaybenecessaryinthe
presenceofjunctionalectopictachycardia(JET).
2 ReducePVRthroughventilatoryinterventions.
3 Inotropic support of the RV may be neces-
sary. Dobutamine (5–10µg/kg/min) or dopamine
(5–10 µg/kg/min)isusefulinthisinstancebecause
they provide potent inotropic support without
increasing PVR. Milrinone (0.5–1.0µg/kg/min fol-
lowing a loading dose of 50µg/kg) should be
considered for its inotropic and lusitrophic effects
anditseffectonPVR.
4 InpatientswithRVsystolicordiastolicfunction
and an atrial fenestration a PaO2 of 40–50mmHg
is acceptable in the presence of adequate cardiac
output.
AfterdeﬁniterepairforTOF,severalfactorsmay
contribute to impaired RV systolic and diastolic
function:
• Creationofarightventriculotomyandplacement
of the RV outﬂow patch produces a segment of
dyskineticRVfreewall.
• Protection of the RV from ischemia during
aortic cross-clamping is difﬁcult in patients with
ahypertrophiedRVasoccursinTOF.
• Enlargement of the RV outﬂow tract with a
transannular patch will create pulmonary regur-
gitation, which imposes a volume load on
theRV.
• Stenosis or hypoplasia of the distal pulmonary
arteries or residual RV outﬂow obstruction will
imposeapressureloadontheRV.
• A residual VSD will impose a volume load on
theRV.
A residual VSD is likely to very poorly toler-
ated in the patient with TOF with the most likely
manifestation being low cardiac output syndrome
associatedwithelevatedCVP,LAP,andPAP.RVOT
obstructionwillbecompletelyornearlycompletely
eliminatedpost-repair.PVRislikelytobelowand
the pulmonary vasculature very compliant. As a
result,therewillbepotentialforalargeL–Rintrac-
ardiac shunt with a residual VSD. This will place
a large volume load on the LV and RV. An acute
volume load will not be well tolerated by the RV
that is likely to be concentrically hypertrophied
and poorly compliant in response to the chronic
pressure overload that existed preoperatively. The
presence of pulmonary insufﬁciency will further
exacerbate RV dysfunction by imposing an addi-
tional volume load. Any distal PA stenoses, high
mean airway pressures, and elevated PVR will all
increasetheregurgitantvolumeandsubsequentRV
volumeload.
FollowingcompleterepairofTOFwithnoresid-
uallesionsandminimalintrapulmonaryshuntthe
SaO2shouldbe100%.Ininfantsandsmallchildren,
particularlythoseleftwithpulmonaryinsufﬁciency
as the result of a transannular patch and those
expected to have restrictive RV diastolic function
as a result of a ventriculotomy and/or extensive
RV hypertrophy the surgeon may choose to leave
a “pop-off” valve by leaving the PFO open or byAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 213 — #47
CongenitalHeartDisease 213
creatingasmall(3–4mm)atriallevelfenestration.
ThiswillallowphysiologicintracardiacR–Lshunt-
ing with the ability to augment systemic cardiac
outputattheexpenseofsystemicoxygensaturation
inthesettingofRVdysfunction.Therewillbedirect
delivery of some desaturated venous blood to the
LA. In these patients, a PaO2 of 40–50mmHg and
aS aO2 of 70–80% is acceptable until RV function
improvesoverthecourseofdays.
TEEisinvaluableinassessingforresiduallesions,
ventricular function and the direction of shunt-
ing across the atrial fenestration. As described in
Chapter2,hemodynamicandsaturationdatacanbe
used to identify and quantify residual intracardiac
shunts.
Postoperative JET is a transient tachyarrhyth-
mia that occurs immediately following congeni-
tal heart surgery. The incidence of JET following
TOF repair may be as high as 20%. JET is likely
secondary to surgical trauma in the area of the
AV node secondary to the retraction necessary to
exposetheVSDandRVOTfromacrossthetricuspid
valve.
JET typically manifests with a junctional rate
onlyslightlyfasterthanthesinusnoderateandis
theonlynarrowcomplextachycardiainwhichthe
atrialrateislessthantheventricularrate(A:Vratio
<1:1). Much less commonly (10%), there may be
retrograde activation of the atrium with inverted
pwavesnotedandanA:Vratioof1:1.Ineithercase,
there is loss of AV synchrony (loss of atrial kick).
At a heart rate<160–170b/min this arrhythmia
maybewelltolerated.Itisunlikelytobetolerated
in the presence of restrictive diastolic function at
any rate. JET with heart rate>170b/min is asso-
ciatedwithhemodynamicinstabilityandincreased
postoperativemortality.
Neither cardioversion nor adenosine is effec-
tive. Treatment of JET is atrial pacing at a rate
slightly faster than the junctional rate reinitiating
A–V synchrony. This therapy is effective unless
the junctional rate is very fast (>160–170b/min)
at which point atrial pacing at a faster rate is
unlikely to improve hemodynamics because the
reinitiationofA–Vsynchronyisoffsetbythereduc-
tion in diastolic ﬁlling time present at these
rates.
Transposition of the great arteries
Anatomy
In transposition of the great arteries (TGA) there
is concordance of the atrioventicular connections
associated with discordance of the ventriculoarte-
rial connections. The most common manifestation
ofthisanatomyoccursinpatientswith[S,D,D]seg-
mental anatomy (Fig. 6.22). That is, there is atrial
situs solitus, D-loop ventricles, and D-loop great
arteries.Aright-sidedRAconnectsviaaright-sided
tricuspid valve and RV to a right sided and ante-
rioraorta.AleftsidedLAconnectsviaaleftsided
mitralvalveandLVtoaleftsidedandposteriorPA.
Asaresult,thereisﬁbrouscontinuitybetweenthe
mitral and pulmonic valves with a lack of ﬁbrous
continuity between the tricuspid and aortic valves
(conus). This anatomy is most commonly referred
toasD-TGA.
The coronary arteries in D-TGA arise from the
aorticsinusesthatfacethePA.Innormallyrelated
vessels, these sinuses are located on the anterior
portionoftheaortawhileinD-TGAtheyarelocated
posteriorly. In the majority of D-TGA patients
(70%),therightsinusistheoriginoftherightcoro-
naryartery,whereastheleftsinusistheoriginofthe
leftmaincoronaryartery.Intheremainderofcases,
thereisconsiderablevariability(Fig.6.23).
Ao
PA
LA
LV
RA
RV
Fig. 6.22 Anatomyofdextro-transpositionofthegreat
arteries(D-TGA).Ao,aorta;LV,leftventricle;PA,
pulmonaryartery;RA,rightatrium;RV,rightventricle.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 214 — #48
214 Chapter6
LAD LAD
LCx
LCxSingle RCA Single LCA
RCA
Usual Circumflex from RCA
RCA
RCA
RCA
LAD
LAD
LCx
LCx
LCx
Inverted coronaries Inverted circumflex
and RCA
LCx
LCx
RCA RCA
LAD
LAD
LAD
RCA
Intramural LCA Intramural LAD
RCA
LAD
LCx
A
P
LR
A
P
LR
A
P
LR
A
P
LR
Fig. 6.23 Mostcommoncoronaryarterypatternsin
transpositionofthegreatarteries(TGA).Theaortais
anteriorandrightwardofthepulmonaryartery.LAD,left
anteriordescending;LSA,leftcoronaryartery;LCx,left
circumﬂex;RCA,rightcoronaryartery.(FromMayerJE,
et al.Coronaryarterypatternandoutcomeofarterial
switchoperationfortranspositionofthegreatarteries.
Circulation1990;82(supplIV):144,withpermission.)
In patients with D-TGA, the most commonly
associatedcardiacanomaliesareaVSD,andsubpul-
monic stenosis. In D-TGA subpulmonic stenosis is
leftventricularoutﬂowtractobstruction(LVOTO).
Approximately 50% of patients with D-TGA will
presentwithaPDA.TheFOisalmostalwayspatent,
butatruesecundumASDexistsinonlyabout5%
of patients. Although angiographically detectable
VSDsmayoccurin30–40%ofpatients,onlyabout
one third of these defects are hemodynamically
signiﬁcant. Thus, for practical purposes, 75% of
patients have an intact ventricular septum (IVS).
LVOTO is present in about 30% of patients with
VSDandismostoftenduetoanextensivesubpul-
monaryﬁbromuscularringorposteriormalposition
oftheoutletportionoftheventricularseptum.Only
5%ofpatientswithIVShavesigniﬁcantLVOTO.In
thesepatients,thereisadynamicobstructionofthe
LVOTduringsystoleduetotheleftwardbulgingof
theventricularseptumandtheanteriormovement
oftheanteriormitralvalveleaﬂet.Theseptalshift
necessarytoproducethisobstructionisuncommon
in neonates due to the presence of elevated PVR.
Valvular PS is rare in patients with TGA. Other
less commonly seen lesions are tricuspid or mitral
regurgitation(4%ofeach)andacoarctationofthe
aorta(5%).
Bronchopulmonary collateral vessels (aorta to
PA proximal to the pulmonary capillaries) are
visible angiographically in 30% of patients with
D-TGA. The larger and more extensive collaterals
generally involve the right lung. These collaterals
provideasiteforintercirculatorymixingandhave
been implicated in the accelerated development
ofPVOD.
Physiology
D-TGA produces two parallel circulations with
recirculation of systemic and pulmonary venous
blood. Survival depends on one or more com-
munications between the two circuits to allow
intercirculatory mixing (see Fig. 6.4). The sites
available for intercirculatory mixing in D-TGA
can be intracardiac (PFO, ASD, VSD) or extracar-
diac(PDA,bronchopulmonarycollaterals).Several
factorsaffecttheamountofintercirculatorymixing.
Thenumber,size,andpositionofanatomiccommu-
nications are important. One large, nonrestrictive
communication will provide better mixing than
two or three restrictive communications. Reduced
ventricular compliance and elevated systemic and
PVR tend to reduce intercirculatory mixing byAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 215 — #49
CongenitalHeartDisease 215
impeding ﬂow across the anatomic communica-
tions. The position of the communication is also
important. Poor mixing occurs even with large
anterior muscular VSDs due to their unfavorable
position.
PatientswithPSwillhavelowpulmonaryblood
ﬂow and may be hypoxemic despite a relatively
largeintercirculatorycommunication.Patientswith
highpulmonarybloodﬂow,particularlythosewith
a VSD in whom systemic pressures are transmit-
ted to the pulmonary vasculature, are at risk of
developing PVOD. In the presence of a good-sized
intercirculatorycommunication,thesepatientswill
initially not be hypoxemic. However, the progres-
sive development of PVOD will eventually reduce
pulmonary blood ﬂow and produce hypoxemia.
Finally, all patients with TGA and increased pul-
monary blood ﬂow will have a large volume load
imposedontheLAandLV.
In TGA with VSD some intercirculatory mixing
occursattheventricularlevelbutthereispredomi-
nantlyanatomicR–Lshunting(effectivepulmonary
bloodﬂow)attheVSD(RVtoLVtoPA)andPDA
(RVtoAOtoPA)andanatomicL–Rshunting(effec-
tivesystemicbloodﬂow)atthePFOorASD(LAto
RA to RV to AO). Obviously, the more severe the
LVOTO the more dependent effective pulmonary
bloodﬂowwillbeonthepresenceofaPDA.
In TGA with IVS the anatomic mixing sites are
usuallyaPDAandaPFO.Thedynamicsofintercir-
culatorymixinginTGA/IVSarecomplex.Anatomic
shuntingattheatriallevelisultimatelydetermined
by the size of the atrial communication and the
cyclical pressure variations between the left and
rightatria.Thevolumeandcomplianceoftheatria,
ventricles,andvascularbedsineachcircuit,aswell
asheartrateandphaseofrespirationallinﬂuence
thisrelationship.ShuntingisfromtheRAtotheLA
duringdiastoleastheresultofthereducedventric-
ularandvascularcomplianceofthesystemiccircuit.
Insystole,shuntisfromtheLAtotheRAprimarily
because of the large volume of blood returning to
theLAasaresultofthehighvolumeofrecirculated
pulmonarybloodﬂow.
ThedirectionofshuntingacrossthePDAlargely
depends on the PVR and the size of the intra-
atrialcommunication.WhenthePVRislowandthe
intra-atrialcommunicationisnonrestrictive,shunt-
ing is predominantly from the aorta to the PA
viathePDA(effectivepulmonarybloodﬂow)and
predominantlyfromtheL–Ratriumacrosstheatrial
septum(effectivesystemicbloodﬂow).WhenPVR
iselevated,shuntingacrossthePDAislikelytobe
bidirectional,whichwouldinturnencouragebidi-
rectional shunting across the atrial septum. When
PVRishighandPApressureexceedsaorticpressure,
shuntingatthePDAwillbepredominantlyfromthe
PAtotheaorta.Thiswillcreatereversedifferential
cyanosis. In this physiology the preductal arterial
saturationislowerthanthepostductalarterialsatu-
ration.Thisisusuallytheresultofarestrictiveatrial
communication producing left atrial hypertension
and is associated with low effective blood ﬂows
(poormixing)andhypoxemia.Aballoonatrialsep-
tostomy (BAS) can be lifesaving in this setting.
Decompression of the LA promotes mixing at the
atrial level and also reduces PVR and PA pressure
promotingmixingatthePDA.
ThemajorityofneonateswithD-TGAandIVSwill
behypoxemic(arterialsaturation ≤60%)withinthe
ﬁrstdayoflife.Aproportionofthesepatientswill
haveseverelyreducedeffectivepulmonaryandsys-
temic blood ﬂow resulting in a PaO2 <20mmHg,
hypercarbia,andanevolvingmetabolicacidosissec-
ondary to the poor tissue oxygen delivery. PGE1
(maintenance 0.01–0.05 µg/kg/min) is adminis-
tered to dilate and maintain the patency of the
DA. This will be effective in increasing effective
pulmonaryandsystemicbloodﬂow,andinimprov-
ing PaO2 and tissue oxygen delivery if PVR < SVR
and there is a nonrestrictive or minimally restric-
tive atrial septal communication. In some cen-
ters, all neonates stabilized on PGE1 alone have
a BAS to enlarge the atrial septal communication
so that PGE1can be stopped and surgery sched-
uled on a semi-elective basis. PGE1 infusion is
associated with apnea, pyrexia, ﬂuid retention,
andplateletdysfunction.Recentinvestigationslink-
ing BAS to subsequent embolic neurologic injury
must be considered in the risk-beneﬁt analysis of
nonemergentBAS.
IfPGE1 doesnotimprovetissueoxygendelivery
thenanemergentBASisperformedinthecatheteri-
zationlaboratoryutilizingangiographyorintheICUAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 216 — #50
216 Chapter6
utilizing echocardiography. These patients require
tracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation.
ThisallowsreductionofPVRviainductionofarespi-
ratoryalkalosisandeliminationofpulmonary V /Q
mismatch. Sedation and muscle relaxation reduce
oxygen consumption thereby increasing mixed
venous oxygen saturation. For a given amount of
intercirculatory mixing and total systemic blood
ﬂow,anincreaseinsystemicvenousorpulmonary
venous saturation will result in an increase in
arterialsaturation.
InrareinstancesthecombinationofPGE 1,aBAS,
andmechanicalventilationwithsedationandmus-
cle relaxation may be ineffective. In this circum-
stance,ECMO(eitherveno–arterialorveno–veno)
support to improve tissue oxygenation and to
reverseend-organinsultandlacticacidosispriorto
surgeryisindicated.
Surgical therapy
Intra-atrial physiologic repair: Mustard and
Senning procedures
BoththeMustardandtheSenningproceduresare
atrial switch procedures that surgically create dis-
cordant atrioventricular (AV) connections in the
presenceofthepreexistingdiscordantventriculoar-
terialconnections.Therefore,afterrepair,systemic
venousbloodisroutedtotheLV,whichisincon-
tinuity with the PA. Likewise, pulmonary venous
bloodisroutedtotheRV,whichisincontinuitywith
the aorta. This arrangement results in physiologic
but not anatomic correction of D-TGA. Following
theseprocedurestheRVremainsthesystemicven-
tricleandthetricuspidvalveremainsthesystemic
AVvalve.
TheMustardprocedureredirectspulmonaryand
systemic venous return via an intra-atrial bafﬂe
after excision of the interatrial septum. The baf-
ﬂeismadefrompericardiumorsyntheticmaterial
to preserve atrial contractility and optimize atrial
growthpotential.IntheSenningprocedure,autol-
ogous tissue from the right atrial wall and IAS is
used in place of pericardium or synthetic material
to preserve atrial contractility and optimize atrial
growth potential. Following both procedures, pul-
monary venous blood is directed over the top of
Ao
PA
Atrial baffle
RV
LV
Fig. 6.24 SchematicofcompletedMustardoperation.
Therehasbeencreationofanatriotomy,enlargementof
atrialseptaldefect,andcreationofanintra-atrialbafﬂe.
Oriﬁcesofsuperiorandinferiorvenacavaeareencircled
bydistalendsofthebafﬂesuchthatsystemicvenous
bloodisdirectedunderthebafﬂe,acrosstheenlarged
atrialseptaldefectintomitralvalve,leftventricle,and
pulmonaryartery.Pulmonaryvenousbloodremains
abovethebafﬂetobedirectedacrossthetricuspidvalve
intotherightventricleandaorta.Ao,aorta;LV,left
ventricle;PA,pulmonaryartery;RV,rightventricle.
thebafﬂetocrossthetricuspidvalvewhilesystemic
venousbloodisdirectedbeneaththebafﬂetocross
themitralvalve(Fig.6.24).
Long-termexposureoftheRVandtricuspidvalve
tosystemicpressureresultsinprogressiverightven-
triculardysfunction.Bothsystemicandpulmonary
venousobstructionmayoccurastheresultofboth
procedures. The incidence of dysrhythmias after
theseproceduresishigh:64%ofpatientshavedys-
rhythmias,28%ofwhichareserious(bradycardia,
sick-sinussyndrome,atrialﬂutter).
Anatomic repair or the arterial (Jatene)
switch procedure
The arterial switch operation (ASO) anatomically
corrects the discordant ventriculoarterial connec-
tions. After repair, the RV is connected to the PA
andtheLVisconnectedtotheaorta.Clinicalsuc-
cess with the ASO, summarized in Fig. 6.25(a–f),
was achieved in 1975. In brief, the PA and the
aortaaretransecteddistaltotheirrespectivevalves.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 217 — #51
CongenitalHeartDisease 217
(a) (b)
(c)
(d)
(e) (f)
Fig. 6.25 Arterialswitchoperation(ASO).(a)Aortais
cross-clampedandtheaortaandpulmonaryarteryare
transected.(b)Leftandrightmaincoronaryarteriesare
excisedfromtheanterioraortausingasegmentofaortic
wallextendingfromrimofaorta.(c)Equivalent
segmentsofpulmonaryarterialwallareexcisedand
coronaryarteriesaretranslocatedposteriorlytothe
pulmonaryartery(neoaorta).(d)Distalpulmonary
arteryisbroughtanteriortoascendingaorta(Lecompte
maneuver),andproximalpulmonaryartery(neoaorta)is
anastomosedtodistalaorta.(e)Sitesofcoronary
explantationarerepairedusingpericardium.(f)Proximal
aortaissuturedtodistalpulmonaryartery.
The coronary arteries are initially explanted from
the ascending aorta with 3–4mm of surround-
ing tissue. The explant sites are repaired either
with pericardium or synthetic material. The coro-
naryarteriesarereimplantedintotheproximalPA
(neoaorta). The great arteries are then switched
with the distal PA brought anterior (LeCompte
maneuver)tobereanastomosedtotheoldproximal
aorta(rightventricularoutﬂow)andthedistalaorta
reanastomosedtotheoldproximalPA(LVoutﬂow).
Most patients with D-TGA have coronary
anatomy that is suitable for coronary reimplan-
tation. Patients with certain types of coronary
anatomy (inverted coronaries, single right coro-
naryartery)areatriskforpostoperativemyocardial
ischemia and death because reimplantation can
result in distortion of the coronary ostia or nar-
rowing of the artery itself. The emergence of two
parallelcoronaryarteriesabovebutincontactwith
the posterior valve commissure or the intramural
origin of the coronaries also presents a technical
challenge.Thesepatientsmayrequireresuspension
oftheneopulmonaryvalveafterthecoronariesand
asurroundingtissuecuffhavebeenexcised.
In order for the ASO to be successful, the origi-
nalpulmonaryventricle(LV)musthavesufﬁcient
masstobecapableofbecomingthesystemicventri-
cle.Patientselectionandthetimingofthesurgical
procedure are important variables in determining
the success of this procedure. Two-dimensional
echocardiography is used to noninvasively assess
the LV:RV pressure ratio and to determine the
extenttowhichLVmasshasregressed.
The ASO was originally described in patients
with D-TGA and a large VSD or a large PDA.
In these patients, the pulmonary ventricle (LV)
remains exposed to systemic pressures and the LV
mass remains sufﬁcient to support the systemic
circulation. For such patients, the ASO must be
performed within the ﬁrst 2–3months of life to
prevent intractable CHF or irreversible PVOD. In
these patients, the ASO is generally performed
withintheﬁrstfewweeksoflife.ClosureoftheVSD
ispreferentiallyperformedtransatriallythroughthe
tricuspidvalve.Itisdesirabletoavoidapproaching
a VSD through the RV because an incision in the
RVmaycontributesubstantiallytopostoperativeRV
dysfunction.
In patients with D-TGA and IVS, there is pro-
gressive reduction in LV mass as the physio-
logic pulmonary hypertension present at birth
resolvesprogressivelyovertheﬁrstdaysafterbirth.
Adequate LV mass to support the systemic circu-
lation exists in these patients for only the ﬁrst
2–3monthsafterbirth.InpatientswithD-TGAandAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 218 — #52
218 Chapter6
IVS,theASOcanbeperformedprimarilyorasthe
secondphaseofastagedprocedure.AprimaryASO
is generally suitable for D-TGA and IVS patients
within the ﬁrst 2months of life and is usually
performedwithintheﬁrstweekoflife.
Thetwo-stagerepairforD-TGAwithIVSisused
for neonates in whom there has been signiﬁcant
regressionofLVmass.Thesearegenerallyneonates
in whom surgery cannot be performed during the
ﬁrstseveralweeksoflifesecondarytoprematurity,
sepsis, low birth weight (<1.5kg), or late referral.
TheLVispreparedtoacceptthesystemicworkload
byplacementofaPAband.Inaddition,anaortopul-
monary shunt with entry to the PA distal to the
bandisnecessarytopreventhypoxemia.Theband
mustbetightenoughtoincreasepressureinthepul-
monary ventricle (LV) to approximately one-half
to two-thirds that in the systemic ventricle (RV).
This will increase afterload sufﬁciently to prevent
regressionofLVmass.However,ifthebandistoo
tight, there may be LV decompensation secondary
toafterloadmismatch.
Generallyarapidtwo-stagerepairisperformed.
The ASO is performed as early as 1week after
preparatoryPAbanding,oftenduringthesamehos-
pitalization.Thisapproachisbasedonthefactthata
doublingofLVmassisseenafter1weekofPAband-
ing.Thestagedprocedureiscomplicatedbythefact
thatplacementofthePAbandtothepropertight-
nessisnotaneasytaskandthatthePAbandand
systemictoPAshuntmayresultindistortionofthe
PA,makingthedeﬁniteASOdifﬁcult.
TheASOisgenerallynotperformedonpatientsin
whom mechanical LVOTO (subpulmonic stenosis)
exists. Correction of the LVOTO is difﬁcult, and
without complete correction of the LVOTO, these
patientswillbeleftwithaorticorsubaorticstenosis.
Ontheotherhand,patientswithdynamicLVOTO
havebeenshowntohavenogradientacrosstheLV
outﬂowtractaftertheASO.
Rastelli procedure
ForpatientswithD-TGA,VSD,andsevereLVOTO
(subpulmonary stenosis), a Rastelli procedure is
performed. Closure of the VSD is performed
througharightventriculotomy.TheVSDisclosed
so that LV blood is directed through the aorta.
(a) (b)
Ao
PA
RV LV
Fig. 6.26 SchematicofRastelliprocedureforrepairof
transpositionofthegreatvesselsassociatedwith
pulmonicstenosisandventricularseptaldefect(VSD).
(a)VSDisclosedwithpatchsuchthatleftventricular
outputisdirectedacrosstheaorticvalve.(b)Proximal
mainpulmonaryarteryisligatedandvalvedconduitis
placedfromrightventricletomainpulmonaryartery.
Ao,aorta;LV,leftventricle;PA,pulmonaryartery;RV,
rightventricle.
The proximal PA is ligated and a valved conduit
is placed from the right ventriculotomy to the
PA, thereby bypassing the subpulmonic stenosis
(Fig. 6.26a,b). Subaortic stenosis may result from
placement of the VSD patch. Replacement of the
valved conduit may be necessary in later years
secondarytocalciﬁcation.
Anesthetic management
Goals
1 Maintain heart rate, contractility, and preload
to maintain cardiac output. Decreases in cardiac
outputdecreasesystemicvenoussaturationwitha
resultantdecreaseinarterialsaturation.
2 Maintain ductal patency with PGE 1
(0.01–0.05 µg/kg/min) in ductal-dependent
patients.
3 AvoidincreasesinPVRrelativetoSVR.Increases
in PVR will decrease pulmonary blood ﬂow and
reduce intercirculatory mixing. For patients with
PVOD, ventilatory interventions should be used
to reduce PVR. For patients with LVOTO that is
notsevere,ventilatoryinterventionstoreducePVR
increasepulmonarybloodﬂowandintercirculatory
mixing.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 219 — #53
CongenitalHeartDisease 219
4 Reductions in SVR relative to PVR should be
avoided. Decreased SVR increases recirculation
of systemic venous blood and decreases arterial
saturation.
Induction and maintenance
In prostaglandin dependent neonates the PGE1
infusion should be continued until CPB to assure
anadequateintercirculatorymixing.Theincreased
pulmonarybloodﬂowwilllimitthecardiacreserve
of these patients and the immature myocardium
will be sensitive to anesthetic-induced myocardial
depression. Anesthesia is generally induced and
maintained using a synthetic opioid (fentanyl or
sufentanil) based technique. A high-dose fentanyl
orsufentaniltechniquewillprovidehemodynamic
stabilitywithoutadverselyaffectingintercirculatory
mixing.
In infants older than 6–8months, premedita-
tion may be necessary to facilitate the separation
from the parents. In the absence of IV access oral
midazolam(0.5–1.0mg/kg)isuseful.Older,better-
compensated children, such as those presenting
for a Rastelli repair with a functioning systemic
to PA shunt, may require a more substantial oral
premedication.
Inpatientswithreducedpulmonarybloodﬂowor
poorintercirculatorymixing,effortstoreducePVR
shouldbemadetoincreasepulmonarybloodﬂow
andintercirculatorymixing.InpatientswithPVOD,
ventilatory measures to reduce PVR are useful if
PVR is not ﬁxed. An inhalational induction or an
IMketamineinductionfollowedbyplacementofan
IVandconversiontoahigh-dosefentanylorsufen-
tanil technique may be suitable for these patients.
Asimilarapproachmaybetakenforolderchildren
withsubpulmonicstenosis.Ahigh-dosefentanylor
sufentaniltechniqueisusefulinbluntingthestress-
inducedincreasesinPVRthataresodetrimentalto
thesepatients.
Hypercarbia, acidosis, and hypoxemia further
increasePVRandshouldbeavoidedbecauseofthe
limitedmyocardialreserveofneonatesandinfants.
ThisisparticularlytrueinneonateswithTGVand
IVS, where systemic oxygen delivery is tenuous,
and in infants with TGV and VSD, in whom left
ventricularvolumeoverloadispresent.Inaddition,
reactiveincreasesinPVRarecommonlyseeninthe
immaturepulmonaryvasculatureandmayseverely
compromisepulmonarybloodﬂow.
Post-CPB management
Goals
1 Maintainheartrate(preferablysinusrhythm)at
anage-appropriaterate.Cardiacoutputislikelyto
bemoreheart-rate-dependentduringthepost-CPB
period.Forpatientshavingundergoneatrialbafﬂe
procedures, anti-dysrhythmic therapy or pacing
maybenecessary.
2 Myocardial ischemia after coronary reimplan-
tation should be treated aggressively and prompt
immediate re-evaluation of the anastomoses and
thepossibilityofexternalcompression.
3 Reductions in aortic and PA pressures may be
necessarytohelppreventsuturelinebleedingafter
theASO.
4 Systemic ventricular (RV after atrial bafﬂe
procedures and LV after arterial switch proce-
dures) dysfunction may necessitate inotropic and
vasodilatortherapytoterminateCPB.Dobutamine
(5–10 µg/kg/min)ordopamine(5–10 µg/kg/min)is
useful. Milrinone (0.5–1.0µg/kg/min following a
loading dose of 50µg/kg) may be a better choice
if SVR is high. Milrinone has direct SVR reducing
effectsinadditiontoinotropic,lusitrophic,andPVR
reducingeffects.
After atrial bafﬂe repairs, there may be pul-
monaryandsystemicvenousobstruction.Systemic
venous obstruction will produce systemic venous
congestion and a low RA pressure. Pulmonary
venous obstruction may result in pulmonary
venous and pulmonary arterial hypertension, pul-
monary edema, and hypoxemia. Efforts to reduce
SVRwillreducetheRVafterloadandhelpprevent
tricuspidregurgitation.Therapyforatrialdysrhyth-
miasalsomaybenecessary.TEEwillproveusefulin
rulingoutpulmonaryandsystemicvenousobstruc-
tion.Inaddition,largebafﬂeleaksthatmayrequire
surgicalrevisionwillbedetected.
Afterthearterialswitchprocedure,theremaybe
extensivebleedingfromtheaorticandpulmonary
suture lines. Myocardial ischemia following reim-
plantation of the coronary arteries is a potentialAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 220 — #54
220 Chapter6
problemfollowingtheASO.Insomecircumstances,
theischemiaistransientsecondarytocoronaryair
emboli. Transesophageal echocardiography is very
useful to assure adequate removal of air from the
LA and ventricle prior to the termination of CPB.
It is also useful in assessing the potency of the
reimplantedcoronaryarteries.Maintenanceofhigh
perfusionpressuresonCPBafteraorticcross-clamp
removal will facilitate the distal migration of air
emboli. In other instances, kinking of the reim-
planted artery or compromise of the implanted
coronary ostia may require immediate surgical
intervention.Externalcompressionofthecoronar-
ies by clot or surgical hemostatic packing material
should also be considered. Pharmacologic inter-
vention with traditional therapies to improve the
balanceofmyocardialoxygendemandanddelivery
suchasnitroglycerinandbeta-blockadearenevera
long-termalternativetopromptsurgicalrevisionof
theappropriateanastomosis.
Despite comprehensive preoperative evaluation,
the LV of patients undergoing an ASO may be
marginal in its ability to support the systemic cir-
culation in the post CPB period. This may occur
as the result of myocardial ischemia, inadequate
LV mass, poor protection of the LV during aortic
cross-clamping, or a combination of these vari-
ables. Transesophageal echocardiography is useful
in identifying and continuously evaluating both
global and regional LV systolic dysfunction. It also
detectsmitralregurgitation,whichmayoccursec-
ondary to papillary muscle dysfunction or to dila-
tionofthemitralvalveannulus.Inotropicsupport
of the LV and afterload reduction may be nec-
essary to terminate CPB. Initial inotropic support
isaccomplishedwithdopamine(3–10 µg/kg/min).
In rare instances where LV failure is severe,
epinephrine(0.05–0.50 µg/kg/min)mayhavetobe
added in combination with nitroprusside (starting
at0.15–0.50 µg/kg/min).
Milrinone (0.5–1.0 µg/kg/min following a
50 µg/kg loading dose) is a useful agent in these
patients as it is an inodilator. These patients are
at particular risk for LV dysfunction in the imme-
diate postoperative period secondary to afterload
mismatch (insufﬁcient contractility for the degree
of systemic afterload). While the vasodilation that
accompaniesmilrinoneadministrationininfantsis
substantiallylessthanthatseeninadultpatientsit
is nonetheless advisable to administer the loading
doseofmilrinoneover10–15minutes.
A unique cycle of LV dilation initiating and
exacerbatingmyocardialischemiaexistsinpatients
having undergone the arterial switch. Myocardial
ischemia, afterload mismatch, or overzealous vol-
ume infusion can result in LV distension and LA
hypertension.Thiswillbeparticularlylikelyifthere
ismitralinsufﬁciencyfromeitherpapillarymuscle
dysfunctionordilationofthemitralvalveannulus.
LVdistensionmayresultintensiononandkinking
of the coronary re-anastomosis sites. LA hyper-
tension produces elevations in PA pressure and
distension of the PA. Since the LeCompte maneu-
ver (see Fig. 6.25) brings the distal PA anterior to
theascendingaortadistensionofthePAmayactu-
allycompressorplacetensiononthecoronaryostia.
Theresultingmyocardialischemiaproducesfurther
LV dilation, progressive elevations in LA and PA
pressures,andcontinuingcompromiseofcoronary
bloodﬂow.
TEE usually allows visualization of the reim-
planted coronary arteries and allows patency to
be assessed. In addition, TEE will provide online
assessmentofLVfunction,whichmayallowearly
detection of a kinked or compromised coronary
anastomosis.InotropicsupportoftheLValsocanbe
guidedbytheuseofTEE.
Total anomalous pulmonary venous
return
Anatomy
Totalanomalouspulmonaryvenousreturn(TAPVR)
ischaracterizedbydrainageofallofthepulmonary
veinsintothesystemicvenoussystemratherthan
directly into the left atrium. In this lesion there is
usually a single common pulmonary venous con-
ﬂuence with no direct connection to the LA. The
pulmonary vein conﬂuence then drains into the
systemic venous circulation via one of four of the
followingdrainagepatterns(Fig.6.27a–d):
• Supracardiac(type1). In46%ofpatients,drainage
ofthepulmonaryveinconﬂuenceisintoasuprac-
ardiacstructure.MostcommonlydrainageistotheAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 221 — #55
CongenitalHeartDisease 221
SVC
LA
RA
RA
LA
Portal
vein
IVC
LA
RA
LA
RA
Coronary
sinus
Common
pulmonary vein
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
Fig. 6.27 Typesoftotallyanomalouspulmonaryvenous
return(TAPVR).(a)Supracardiac.Averticalvein
connectstheconﬂuenceofpulmonaryveinstothe
innominatevein.(b)Infracardiac.Averticalvein,which
transversesthediaphragm,connectstheconﬂuenceof
pulmonaryveinstotheportalveinwhichherehasa
stenoticconnectiontotheIVC.Pulmonaryvenousreturn
willbeobstructed.(c)Cardiac.Theconﬂuenceof
pulmonaryveinsdrainsdirectlyintothecoronarysinus.
(d)Mixed.Theleftpulmonaryveinsdrainviaavertical
veinintotheinnominateveinwhiletherightpulmonary
veinsdraindirectlyintotherightatrium.
SVCviaaverticalveinthatconnectsthepulmonary
vein conﬂuence with the innominate vein, which
thenemptiesintotheSVC.
• Intracardiac (type 2).In24%ofpatients,drainage
of the pulmonary vein conﬂuence is directly into
theRAviatheCS.
• Infracardiac (type 3).In22%ofpatients,drainage
is into an infracardiac structure such as the IVC,
portal vein, or hepatic vein. A vertical pulmonary
vein passes through the esophageal hiatus of
the diaphragm to connect the pulmonary vein
conﬂuencetooneoftheseinfracardiacvessels.
• Mixed (type 4). In 8% of patients, pulmonary
venous drainage is some combination of types 1,
2,and3.
Ingeneral,thegreaterthedistancetheverticalvein
travelsthegreaterthelikelihoodthatthispathway
will be stenotic or compressed and that there will
be pulmonary venous obstruction. For this reason
infracardiacdrainageismostcommonlyassociated
withpulmonaryvenousobstruction.Somepatients
with supracardiac TAPVR have compression of
the vertical vein between the left main stem
bronchus and left PA. As PA pressure rises due
to obstruction of pulmonary venous return the
connecting vein may become further compressed
between the left main stem bronchus and left
PA leading to near complete compression of the
connectingvein.
Physiology
Thedeliveryofallpulmonaryvenousbloodtothe
RAresultsinalargephysiologicL–Rshunt. There
is complete mixing of systemic and pulmonary
venousbloodintheRA.Theremustbeananatomic
R–Lshuntanddeliveryofeffectivesystemicblood
ﬂow if there is to be ﬁlling of the left heart and
survival outside the uterus. Normally, an ASD or
patent FO exists as the communication with the
left heart. The magnitude and direction of shunt-
ing across the ASD or FO is determined by the
principles of simple shunting. Normally a non or
mildlyrestrictiveatriallevelcommunicationexists
inthesepatients.Deliveryofbloodacrosstheatrial
septum can be impeded by the poor compliance
of the LA and LV, as these structures tend to be
smallduetoreducedbloodﬂowtotheleftsideof
the heartin utero. As a result, in the absence of
obstructionneonateswillhavea QP:QScloseto1:1.
As PVR falls following birth there will preferen-
tialdeliveryofthemixedsystemicandpulmonary
venousbloodtothepulmonarycircuit.Pulmonary
artery pressures will be near systemic because
althoughPVRisnearnormalthe QP:QSwillbehigh
(>2–3:1).
Compression or stenoses along the vertical vein
pathway will produce obstructed TAPVR leading
topulmonaryvenoushypertension,elevatedPVR,
andsystemicorsuprasystemicRVandPApressures.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 222 — #56
222 Chapter6
SomeofthesepatientsmaydevelopPVOD in utero
aswell.Inaddition,pulmonaryvenousobstruction
will produce pulmonary edema further elevating
PVR, much as it does with mitral stenosis. These
patientshaveasmallheartandcongestedlungﬁelds
onchestradiograph.
Cardiac output can be severely compromised in
thesepatients.SystemicorsuprasystemicRVpres-
sures will result in a leftward septal shift that
“pancakes” the LV thereby further reducing the
compliance of the small LV. This will impede
deliveryofbloodacrosstheatrialseptum.Thereis
likelytobeRVafterloadmismatchwithRVdisten-
sionandTR.Systemiccardiacoutputwillbelargely
dependant on a physiologic R–L shunt across the
DAsuppliedbyafailingRV.
Thesepatientswillbehypoxemicbecauseallthe
determinatesofSa O2 withcompletemixingwillbe
reduced:
• Pulmonary edema will induce intrapulmonary
shuntand V /QmismatchleadingtolowSpv O2.
• QP:QS will be reduced by the presence of
highPVR.
• LowcardiacoutputwillreduceSv O2.
Efforts to increase pulmonary blood ﬂow in
these patients will only worsen the pulmonary
edemaandNO(aswellasotherinhaledpulmonary
vasodilators) is clearly contraindicated. In patients
with severe pulmonary venous obstruction lead-
ingtosuprasystemicRVandPApressuresandR–L
shunting across the DA ductal patency is neces-
sary to maintain cardiac output. In patients with
lesssevereobstructionandsubsystemicRVandPA
pressures ductal ﬂow will be bidirectional or L–R.
In these patients ductal patency may exacerbate
pulmonaryedema.PatientswithobstructedTAPVR
presentatbirthwithhypoxemiaandpoorsystemic
perfusion. In many there is an ongoing metabolic
acidosis and evidence of end-organ (hepatic and
renal)dysfunction.ObstructedTAPVRisasurgical
emergency,oneofthefewremainingintheeraof
PGE1 therapy.
Surgical therapy
Deﬁnitive repair involves anastomosis of the pul-
monary venous conﬂuence to the posterior LA,
ligationoftheverticalvein,andclosureoftheASD.
Anesthetic management
Goals
1 Maintain heart rate, contractility, and preload
to maintain cardiac output. Decreases in cardiac
output will reduce systemic venous saturation. In
a complete mixing lesion, this will reduce arterial
saturation.
2 For patients with TAPVR and pulmonary
venous obstruction, emergency surgery is neces-
sary. Efforts to increase pulmonary blood ﬂow
through ventilatory interventions and pulmonary
vasodilatorswillworsenpulmonaryedema.
3 For patients with increased pulmonary blood
ﬂow, decreases in the PVR:SVR ratio should be
avoided. The increase in pulmonary blood ﬂow
that accompanies a reduced PVR:SVR ratio neces-
sitates an increase in cardiac output to maintain
systemicbloodﬂow.
4 For patients with increased pulmonary blood
ﬂow and right ventricular volume overload, ven-
tilatory interventions should be used to increase
PVR, reduce pulmonary blood ﬂow, and decrease
thevolumeloadontheRV.
Induction and maintenance
Neonateswithpulmonaryvenousobstructiongen-
erally arrive in the operating room intubated,
ventilated,andoninotropicsupport.Thesepatients
arebestanesthetizedwithahigh-dosenarcotictech-
nique using fentanyl or sufentanil. Older patients
without obstruction and compensated RV volume
overload may be candidates for an inhalational
induction.PatientswithTAPVR,particularlythose
withvenousobstruction,haveahighlyreactivepul-
monary vasculature. High doses of fentanyl and
sufentanil will be useful for blunting increases in
PVRassociatedwithsurgicalstimulation.
Post-CPB management
Goals
1 Maintain heart rate (preferably sinus rhythm)
atanage-appropriaterate.Cardiacoutputislikely
to be more heart-rate-dependent in the post-CPB
period.
2 In the presence of postoperative pulmonary
venous obstruction, efforts to increase pulmonaryAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 223 — #57
CongenitalHeartDisease 223
bloodﬂowmayworsenpulmonaryedema.Surgical
revisionmaybenecessary.
3 ForpatientswithPVODandreactivepulmonary
vasculature,bluntingofstress-inducedincreasesin
PVRwithnarcoticsiswarranted.
4 ForpatientswithPVODandreactivepulmonary
vasculatureventilatoryinterventionstoreducePVR
anduseofselectivepulmonaryvasodilatorssuchas
NOarewarranted.
5 Inotropic support of the RV may be necessary,
even in the face of aggressive therapy to reduce
PVR. Dobutamine (5–10µg/kg/min) or dopamine
(5–10 µg/kg/min)isusefulinthisinstancebecause
both agents provide potent inotropic support
without increasing PVR. In the absence of sys-
temic hypotension milrinone (0.5–1.0µg/kg/min
following a 50 µg/kg loading dose) can be
considered.
RV and PA hypertension are the most common
problems encountered post-CPB. This may be the
resultofoneormoreofthefollowing:
• Residual pulmonary venous obstruction may
exist due the technical difﬁculty of constructing a
nonrestrictivesurgicalanastomosis.
• In the presence of a nonrestrictive surgical
anastomosisanappropriatecardiacoutputmaypro-
duceLAhypertensionduetothepresenceofasmall,
noncompliantLAandLVorLVdysfunction.
• Reactive pulmonary vasoconstriction (capillary
and pre-capillary) may cause labile increases
inPVR.
• Pre-existingPVOD.
The use of TEE and of surgically placed PA and
LAlinesishelpfulinsortingouttheseetiologies.The
presenceofhighPApressures,anelevatedLAP,and
a PA diastolic pressure<5mmHg above the LAP
suggests that LA hypertension is the cause of PA
hypertension. The presence of high PA pressures,
a low or normal LAP, and a PA diastolic pres-
sure > 15–20mmHg above the LAP suggests that
reactivepulmonaryvasoconstriction,PVOD,orpul-
monaryvenousobstructionexists.Inthepresence
of reactive pulmonary vasoconstriction or PVOD
thePAOP(wedgepressure)shouldnotexceedthe
LAP by >3–5mmHg. A PAOP that exceeds the
LAP by more than 5–10mmHg suggests that pul-
monaryvenousobstructionexists.TEEisvaluable
in assessing the patency of the pulmonary venous
to LA anastomosis and in assessing ventricular
function.
Obstruction to LV ﬁlling
Anatomy
SeveralcongenitalcausesofobstructiontoLVﬁlling
exist:
• Valvular mitral stenosis.Isolated congenital mitral
stenosisisveryrareandusuallyiscausedbyshort,
fusedchordaetendineae.
• Parachute mitral valve.In this lesion, two mitral
valveleaﬂetsareattachedtoshortenedchordaethat
insertonthesamepapillarymuscle.
• Supravalvular mitral stenosis. In this lesion, an
obstructiveringofthickenedendocardiumisfound
abovethemitralvalvedownstreamfromtheatrial
appendage.
• Cor triatriatum. In this lesion, an obstructive
membrane is located upstream of the atrial
appendage.
Physiology
Alloftheselesionshavethesamephysiologiccon-
sequencesasvalvularmitralstenosis:obstructionto
LV diastolic ﬁlling and pulmonary venous conges-
tion.Thephysiologyofmitralstenosisisdiscussed
indetailinChapter5.
Surgical therapy
Resection of a supravalvular ring or of the mem-
brane in cor triatriatum normally sufﬁces. Repair
of the mitral valve is a superior alternative to
mitral valve replacement in infants and chil-
dren. If a valve replacement is done a low-
proﬁle valve must be used to prevent LV out-
ﬂow tract obstruction. A mechanical valve gener-
ally is chosen over a porcine or homograft valve
becauseoftheshort in situhalf-lifeofthesevalves.
Mechanical valves require long-term anticoagula-
tion,whichmaybeproblematicforgrowing,active
children.
The anesthetic and post-CPB management of
patients with mitral stenosis is discussed in detail
inChapter5.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 224 — #58
224 Chapter6
Left ventricle outﬂow tract obstruction
Anatomy
Several categories of congenital LV outﬂow tract
obstructionexist:
• Valvular aortic stenosis. This is most commonly
caused by a bicuspid aortic valve. Most of these
patientswillremainasymptomaticuntilthefourth
or ﬁfth decade of life. In infants presenting
with valvular aortic stenosis, the LV may be
small.Thesepatientsmayrepresentamilderform
ofHLHS.
• Subaortic stenosis.This may occur secondary to a
discretemembranousringlocated1–2cmbelowthe
aortic valve or to a ﬁbromuscular overgrowth of
the LV outﬂow tract that produces a tunnel-like
stenosis.
• Congenital SVAS.This is most commonly caused
by Williams–Beurin syndrome as the result of a
microdeletion in the q11.23 region of chromo-
some7.Thisdeletioninvolvesseveralgenes,includ-
ing the elastin gene. As a result there develops a
characteristic hourglass narrowing of the aorta at
thesinotubularjunction;inasmallerpercentageof
cases(approximately30%)thereisdiffusetubular
narrowingoftheascendingaortaoftenextendingto
thearchandtheoriginofthebrachiocephalicves-
sels.Inapproximately40%ofSVASpatientssevere
pulmonarystenosesandrightventricularpressure
overloadexistinconjunctionwithSVAS.
Physiology
Infants with aortic stenosis tend to have a small
LVandvaryingdegreesofendocardialﬁbroelasto-
sissecondarytoprolongedsubendocardialischemia.
When aortic stenosis is severe in the neonatal
period, systemic blood ﬂow and survival may be
dependent on R–L shunting across a PDA. This
will result in perfusion of the periphery with sys-
temicvenousbloodproducingcyanosis.Whenthe
stenosisissevereandthereislittleantegradeaortic
blood ﬂow, the coronary arteries will be perfused
retrograde down the aortic arch with desaturated
blood. This, combined with the high left ventric-
ular end-distolic pressure (LVEDP) that accom-
panies aortic stenosis, will exacerbate myocardial
ischemia.
In Williams–Beurin syndrome, adhesion of the
right or left aortic leaﬂet edge to the narrowed
sinotubular junction can restrict coronary blood
ﬂow into the sinus of Valsalva. The thickened
aortic wall may narrow the coronary artery ori-
ﬁce itself. Coronary artery dilation and tortuos-
ity due to exposure of the coronary arteries to
high pre-stenotic pressures and coronary artery
structural changes consistent with elastin arteri-
opathy may further directly compromise coronary
ﬂow. Finally, the SVAS impairs coronary diastolic
ﬂow, as the pressure in the pre-stenotic region
is lower than in the post-stenotic region during
diastole.
Surgical therapy
These lesions usually are approached by tran-
secting or opening the ascending aorta. Subaortic
lesionsarethenapproachedacrosstheaorticvalve.
Resection of discrete subvalvular or supravalvular
membranesisrelativelystraightforward.Treatment
of ﬁbromuscular tunnel-like stenosis is difﬁcult.
Resection of the ﬁbromuscular tissue is limited by
potentialdamagetosurroundingstructuressuchas
theconductionsystem,mitralvalveandtheseptum.
In some instances, repair of a tunnel-like stenosis
mayrequirewideningoftheLVoutﬂowtractwith
a patch and an aortic valve replacement. SVAS is
bestrepairedbysymmetricalreconstructionofthe
aorticrootusingtwoorthreepatchestowidenthe
aortic sinuses. In instances where diffuse tubular
hypoplasiaoftheaortaandarchexists,symmetrical
reconstruction of the ascending aorta with exten-
sionofthepatchtotheundersideoftheaorticarch
isnecessary.Insomecircumstancessurgicalreliefof
coronaryostialstenosismaybenecessary.
Post-repairTEEcanbeusedtodetectresidualgra-
dients and to rule out damage to the mitral valve
andventricularseptum.Inparticular,thepresence
ofasmallVSDshouldberuledout.
The anesthetic and post-CPB management of
patientswithaorticstenosisisdiscussedindetailin
Chapter5.
Single ventricle lesions
As previously discussed, some single ventricle
lesions are amenable to a two-ventricle repairAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 225 — #59
CongenitalHeartDisease 225
or
(a)
(d) (e)
(b) (c)
Fig. 6.28 Diagramillustratingthesequenceofrepairs
inthesurgicalstagingofhypoplasticleftheartsyndrome
(HLHS)toafenestratedlateraltunnelFontan.
(a)Hypoplasticleftheartsyndrome(HLHS).(b)Initial
repairinvolvingatrialseptectomy,Damus–Kaye–Stansel
(DKS)anastomosisofmainpulmonaryarteryto
ascendingaorta,homograftaugmentationoftheaortic
arch,andarightmodiﬁedBlalock–Taussigshunt(BTS)
tosupplypulmonarybloodﬂow.(c)Initialrepair
involvingatrialseptectomy,DKSanastomosisofmain
pulmonaryarterytoascendingaorta,homograft
augmentationoftheaorticarch,andarightventricle
topulmonaryarteryconduittosupplypulmonary
bloodﬂow.(d)Superiorcavopulmonaryshuntor
bidirectionalGlenn(BDG).TherightmodiﬁedBTS
hasbeentakendownandligated.(e)Thecompleted
totalcavopulmonaryconnectionorFontanprocedure.
AlateraltunnelFontanwithafenestrationisshown.
Thesmallarrowsindicateﬂowfromthesystemic
venousbafﬂetothecommonpulmonaryvenous
atriumcausingasmallright-to-left(R–L)
physiologicshunt.
whileotherrequireastagedapproachtoaFontan
procedure (Fig. 6.28a–e). Single ventricle lesions
amenable to two-ventricle repair include trun-
cus arteriosus, severe neonatal aortic stenosis,
interrupted aortic arch and TOF with PA. Other
single ventricle lesions such as TA and HLHS
requireastagedapproachtotheFontanprocedure.
PA/IVS is an example of a single ventricle lesion
that is occasionally amenable to a two-ventricle
repair.
There are three phases in the single ventri-
cle pathway: the initial physiology, the superior
cavopulmonary shunt (generally a bidirectional
Glenn (BDG) shunt), and the completed Fontan
procedure that creates a total cavopulmonary
connection (TCPC). During each of these phases
threephysiologicgoalsmustbeachieved:
• Theremustbeareliablesourceofanappropriate
quantity of pulmonary blood ﬂow. The appropri-
ate quantity is the quantity that is sufﬁcient toAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 226 — #60
226 Chapter6
prevent hypoxemia but not so large as to cause
PVOD.ThepresenceofPVODisacontra-indication
tocompletionoftheFontanprocedure.
• There must be unobstructed delivery of
pulmonaryvenousbloodtothesystemicventricle.
• Theremustbeanunobstructedpathwayfromthe
systemicventricletoallsegmentsoftheaorta.
Single ventricle pathway,
initial procedures
Theinitialpalliativeproceduresdescribedhereare
applicabletoanypatientwithsingleventriclephys-
iology. Most patients require multiple initial pro-
cedures; rarely a patient may not require any
initial procedure before proceeding to a superior
cavopulmonaryshunt.
Initial procedures to optimize pulmonary
blood ﬂow
Thefollowingdescribestheinitialapproachtoopti-
mizing pulmonary blood in patients with single
ventriclephysiology:
• Patientswithductaldependantpulmonaryblood
ﬂowwillrequirestabilizationonPGE 1 followedby
placement of a surgical aortopulmonary shunt as
described in the section on TOF. In most cases a
MBTSwillbeplacedandthePDAligated.Asuperior
cavopulmonaryshunt(BDG)cannotbeusedinthe
neonatalperiodasPVRiselevatedtopointwherea
supraphysiologicSVCpressurewouldbenecessary
to provide adequate pulmonary blood ﬂow. More
than 70% of patients with tricuspid atresia (TA)
haveductaldependantpulmonarybloodﬂowand
requireashuntinthenewbornperiod(Fig.6.29a,b
andTable6.10).
• Patientswithunrestrictedpulmonarybloodﬂow
areatriskforcompromiseofsystemicoxygendeliv-
eryduetohighpulmonarybloodﬂowinthesetting
ofﬁxedcardiacoutputandultimatelyfordevelop-
ment of PVOD. These patients need restriction of
pulmonarybloodﬂow:
a Inpatientswithhighpulmonarybloodﬂowand
signiﬁcantintracardiacsourcesofpulmonaryblood
ﬂow(type1Cor2CTA;seeFig.6.29andTable6.10)
thePDAcanbeallowedtoclose.Insomeinstances
thiswillappropriatelylimitpulmonarybloodﬂow.
Morecommonlyitwillbenecessarytomechanically
restrictpulmonarybloodﬂowandreduce QP:QSand
thevolumeloadonthesystemicventriclebyband-
ing the PA. The main PA is constricted with a cir-
cumferential band. This reduces pulmonary blood
ﬂowanddistalPApressurebycreationofarestric-
tive lesion. Banding is most effective when PA
pressuredistaltothebandisreducedtoone-third
toone-halfofsystemicbloodpressure.Pulmonary
arterybandingmaycausedistortionofthemainPA.
In addition, distortion of branch pulmonary arter-
iesmaybecausedbymigrationofthebanddistally.
Thisdistortionmaycomplicateorprecludedeﬁnite
repair. Pulmonary artery banding is accomplished
via a thoracotomy or a median sternotomy with-
outCPB.AnexcessivelytightPAbandwillseverely
reducepulmonarybloodﬂowandexposetheven-
tricletohighafterload.Pulseoximetryhasproved
useful during PA banding because arterial desatu-
rationprecedeshypotensionandbradycardiawhen
banding is excessive. TEE is valuable in assessing
ventricularfunctionduringPAbanding.Ventricu-
lar distension may require loosening of the band
or initiation of inotropic support. TEE also allows
the pressure gradient across the band to be deter-
mined.Thiswillhelpindeterminingthetightnessof
theband.PAbandingiscontraindicatedinpatients
whereaorticbloodﬂowisderivedfromarestrictive
intracardiacpathwayfromthesystemicventricleor
where this pathway is likely to become restrictive
oncetheventricularvolumeloadisreducedbyaPA
band.ThesepatientsrequireaDamus–Kaye–Stansel
(DKS) procedure (see below) to provide an unob-
structed pathway to the aorta from the systemic
ventricle.
b The treatment of patients with high pulmonary
blood ﬂow due to major aorto-pulmonary collat-
eral arteries (MAPCAs) is discussed in the section
onTOF/PA.
• RarelythecombinationofarestrictiveVSDand
mildPS(type2BTA;seeFig.6.29andTable6.10)
canresultintheappropriatequantityofpulmonary
bloodﬂowwithoutintervention.
Initial procedures to optimize pulmonary venous
blood ﬂow
Ininstanceswherepulmonaryvenousbloodmust
cross the atrial septum to reach the systemicAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 227 — #61
CongenitalHeartDisease 227
Ao
PDA
LA
RA
RV
LV
ΙA ΙB ΙC
ΙΙA ΙΙB ΙΙC
Ao
PA
Ao
PA
LA
RV
RA
Ao
PA
LA
RV
LA
RA
RV
LV LV LV
RA
RA
RV
LV
LAPAPAPA
Ao Ao
PA LA
RA
RV
LV
(a)
(b)
Fig. 6.29 Classiﬁcationoftricuspidatresia.(a)Type1:
tricuspidatresiawithouttranspositionofgreatvessels.
Type1A:pulmonaryatresiawithpulmonarybloodﬂow
viapatentductusarteriosusormajoraortopulmonary
collateralarteries(MAPCAs).Type1B:smallventricular
septaldefectandpulmonarystenosis.Type1C:large
ventricularseptaldefectandnopulmonarystenosis.
(b)Type2:tricuspidatresiawithdextro-transpositionof
thegreatvessels.Type2A:pulmonaryatresiawith
pulmonarybloodﬂowviapatentductusarteriosusor
MAPCAs.Type2B:pulmonarystenosis.Type2C:no
pulmonarystenosis.Ao,aorta;LA,leftatrium;LV,left
ventricle;PA,pulmonaryartery;RA,rightatrium;RV,
rightventricle.
ventricle the atrial septum must be nonrestrictive.
Creating a nonrestrictive atrial septum may occur
in the cardiac catheterization laboratory using a
Rashkind–Millerballoonatrialseptostomy.Insome
casestheseptummaybesothickastorequireplace-
mentofastent.Asurgicalatrialseptectomytocreate
anonrestrictiveatrialseptum(commonatrium)can
alsobeperformedatthetimeofinitialpalliationin
proceduresthatrequireCPB.
Initial procedures to optimize systemic blood ﬂow
When the pathway to the aorta from the sys-
temic ventricle is obstructed (type 2C or 3B TA;
see Fig. 6.29 and Table 6.10) or when the LV and
proximal/transverse aorta are hypoplastic (as with
HLHS) a DKS procedure alone or in conjunction
withanaorticarchreconstruction(aswithHLHS),
canbeused.ThePAistransectedjustproximalto
its bifurcation, and the proximal end of the PA isAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 228 — #62
228 Chapter6
Table 6.10 Classiﬁcationoftricuspidatresia.
Type Pulmonary
blood ﬂow
Frequency
(%)
Type1:NRGA 70
A No VSD, pulmonary
atresia
↓ 10
B Small VSD, pulmonary
stenosis
↓ 50
C Large VSD, no
pulmonary stenosis
↔↑ 10
Type2:D-TGA 30
A VSD, pulmonary atresia ↓ 2
B VSD, pulmonary stenosis ↔↓ 8
C VSD, no pulmonary
stenosis
↑↑ 20
Type3:L-TGA <1
A VSD, D-loop ventricles,
pulmonary or
subpulmonary stenosis
↓
B VSD, L-loop ventricles,
sub-aortic stenosis
↑
D-loop ventricles, right ventricle anterior and rightward;
D-TGA, dextro transposition of the great arteries; L-loop
ventricles,rightventricleanteriorandleftward;L-TGA,levo
transposition of the great arteries; NRGA, normally related
great arteries; VSD, ventricular septal defect.
re-anastomosed end to side or side to side to the
ascendingaorta.Thisprovidessystemicventricleto
aortic continuity (LV to proximal PA to aorta in
type3BTA;RVtoproximalPAtoaortainHLHS).
In the neonatal period, pulmonary blood ﬂow is
thensuppliedtotheoversewnendofthemainPA
byaMBTSinpatientswithtype3BTAoraMBTS
or RV to PA conduit in patients with HLHS (see
Fig.6.28).
Management of single ventricle
physiology
The primary goal in the management of patients
with single ventricle physiology is optimization of
systemic oxygen delivery and perfusion pressure.
This is necessary if end-organ (myocardial, renal,
hepatic, splanchnic) dysfunction and failure are
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
02468 1 0
QP:QS
O2 delivery (mL/kg/min)
300 mL/min/kg
450 mL/min/kg
Fig. 6.30 Graphofsystemicoxygen(O 2)delivery
(mL/kg/min)versus QP:QS fortwodifferentsystemic
ventricularoutputs(300mL/kg/minand450mL/kg/min)
insingleventriclephysiology.Inthisexampleoxygen
consumptionisassumedtobe9mL/kg/minand
Spvo2 =95%.Itisclearthatsystemicoxygendelivery
peaksjustbelowa QP:QS of1:1(lineacrossgraph)and
declinesrapidlyaboveorbelowthisnarrowpeak.
to be prevented. This goal is achieved by balanc-
ing the systemic and pulmonary circulations. The
term “balanced circulation” is used because both
laboratoryandclinicalinvestigationshavedemon-
stratedthatmaximalsystemicoxygendelivery(the
product of systemic oxygen content and systemic
blood ﬂow) is achieved for a given single ventri-
cleoutputwhen QP:QS isatorjustbelow1:1.This
relationship is illustrated in Fig. 6.30. Increases in
QP:QSinexcessof1:1areassociatedwithaprogres-
sive decrease in systemic oxygen delivery because
the subsequent increase in systemic oxygen con-
tentismorethanoffsetbytheprogressivedecrease
in systemic blood ﬂow. Decreases inQP:QS just
below1:1areassociatedwithaprecipitousdecrease
in systemic oxygen delivery because the subse-
quentincreaseinsystemicbloodﬂowismorethan
offsetbythedramaticdecreaseinsystemicoxygen
content.
Since QP:QS is not readily measurable parame-
ter in a clinical setting SaO2 is commonly used as
surrogatemethodofassessingtheextenttowhichAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 229 — #63
CongenitalHeartDisease 229
abalancedcirculationexists.Anarterialsaturation
of75–80%isfelttobeindicativeofabalancedcircu-
lation.Itisimportanttopointouthoweverthatan
arterialsaturationof75–80%isindicativeofa QP:QS
atornear1:1onlyifthepulmonaryvenoussatura-
tionis95–100%andthemixedvenoussaturation
is 50–55%. In fact, based on these assumptions
the equation used to calculateQP:QS in patients
with univentricular physiology: (SaO2–SmvO2)/
(SpvO2–SaO2) can be simpliﬁed to: 25/(95–SaO2).
InthissimpliﬁedequationSpv O2 isassumedtobe
95% and the A–V oxygen saturation difference is
assumed to 25%. Use of this simpliﬁed equation
requires that the FiO2 be at or near 0.21 in order
thatthedissolvedoxygencontentofthepulmonary
venous blood can be ignored and an SpvO2of
95%used.Unfortunately,anarterialsaturationof
75–80%canexistattheextremesof QP:QSdepend-
ingonpulmonaryandsystemicvenoussaturation.
Speciﬁcally, in the presence of a highQP:QS it
is possible for there to be inadequate systemic
oxygen delivery (systemic venous desaturation, a
wide Sa–vO2 difference, metabolic acidosis) in the
presence of what is considered to be an adequate
arterial saturation of 75–80%. In addition, clini-
cally unrecognized episodes of pulmonary venous
desaturation (SpvO2 < 90%) further confound
assessmentof QP:QS basedonSa O2.
Mathematic modeling of univentricular phys-
iology reveals that systemic oxygen delivery
(CaO2 ×QP)isacomplexfunctionofcardiacoutput
(CO),pulmonaryvenousoxygencontent(Cpv O2),
systemic oxygen consumption (CVO2), andQP:QS
describedbytheequation:
CaO2 ×QS = CO ×CpvO2
1 + (QP/QS) − CVO2
QP/QS
Given the complex relationships of the multiple
variables that determineQP:QS and oxygen deliv-
eryinpatientswithuniventricularphysiology,itis
not surprising that neither SaO2 nor the equation
25/(95–SaO2)reliablypredicts QP:QS.
In fact, SaO2 correlates poorly withQP:QS and
the measurement of SpvO2 and SsvCO2 substan-
tially improves estimation of QP:QS. Regression
analysis demonstrates that SaO2 accounts for 8%
of the error in estimatingQP:QS while SsvCO2
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
02468 1 0
QP:QS
SvO2
300 mL/min/kg
450 mL/min/kg
Fig. 6.31 GraphofsystemicSv o2 versus QP:QS fortwo
differentsystemicventricularoutputs(300mL/kg/min
and450mL/kg/min)insingleventriclephysiology.In
thisexampleoxygen(O 2)consumptionisassumedtobe
9mL/kg/minandSpv o2 =95%.ItisclearthatSv o2
peaksata QP:QS of1:1anddeclinesrapidlyaboveor
belowthisnarrowpeak.Sv o2 <30isnotcompatible
withmitochondrialoxygendeliverymakingtheclinically
relevantrangeevennarrower.
and SpvO2 contribute 48% and 44% respectively.
Figures6.30and6.31illustratetheeffectofcardiac
output(450vs.300mL/min/kg)onoxygendelivery
and SvO2 as QP:QS varies with SpvO2 = 95% and
oxygen consumption = 9mL/min/kg. Figure 6.32
illustratestherelationshipbetweensystemicoxygen
delivery and SaO2. It is clear that while SaO2
remains satisfactory over a wide range ofQP:QS,
SvO2decreasesprecipitouslyoutsideanarrowrange
of QP:QS near 1.0. Furthermore, Sa–vO2 increases
dramaticallyonce QP:QS > 1.0.Itisalsoclearthat
ahighercardiacoutputallowsmaintenanceofsat-
isfactoryoxygendeliveryandSsv CO2 overawider
rangeof QP:QS.
Any combination of variables which produces a
SsvCO2<30%islikelytoresultinthedevelopment
of anaerobic metabolism. A modiﬁcation of the
oxygen delivery equation can be used to take this
intoaccountwhereathresholdlevelofcapillarysat-
uration(SatThresh)isdeﬁned.Anycontributionsto
oxygendeliverybysaturationsbelowthisthreshold
areignored,astheydonotprovidephysiologically
useful oxygen delivery. As a result a new termAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 230 — #64
230 Chapter6
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
0 2 04 06 08 0 1 0 0
SaO2
O2 delivery (mL/kg/min)
300 mL /min/kg
450 mL /min/kg
Fig. 6.32 Graphofsystemicoxygen(O 2)delivery
versusSaO2 fortwodifferentsystemicventricular
outputs(300mL/kg/minand450mL/kg/min)insingle
ventriclephysiology.Inthisexampleoxygen
consumptionisassumedtobe9mL/kg/minand
Spvo2 =95%.Solidlineoncurveis QP:QS of1:1.Itis
clearthatsystemicoxygendeliveryismaximalatornear
aSao2 of75–80%.Howeversystemicoxygendelivery
fallsoffprecipitouslyasSa o2 increasesbyimperceptible
incrementsabovethislevelas QP:QS increases.Itisclear
thatSao2 alonecanneverserveasasurrogatemeasureof
systemicoxygendelivery.Figure6.5illustratesthe
minisculeincreasesinSa o2 thatoccuras QP:QS exceeds
1:1insingleventriclephysiology.
“useful oxygen delivery to the body” deﬁned as
D(u)O2 = [(CaO2)(1 – SatThresh)](QS) is utilized
rather than the tradition oxygen delivery DO2 =
(CaO2)(QS).ArealisticSat Threshwouldbe30–35%.
The oxygen excess factor (Ω) is calculated as
SaO2/(Sa–vO2); it is the inverse of the oxygen
extraction ratio. A direct linear relationship
between Ωand oxygen delivery exists. This direct
linear relationship is independent of SpvO2 and
cardiacoutput;howevertheslopeofthisrelation-
ship increases as oxygen consumption increases.
Nonetheless, interventions to improve systemic
oxygendeliverywillbeassociatedwithanincrease
inmeasured Ω.Thisisaclinicallyusefulparameter
asitcanbeobtainedwithasystemicsaturationfrom
anarterialbloodgasorapulseoximeterandanSVC
saturationobtainedfromavenousbloodgasdrawn
fromacentralvenouscatheterpositionedjustator
abovetheSVC/RAjunction.
These patients are at risk for subendocar-
dial ischemia because volume overload increases
ventricular end diastolic volume and pressure and
because run-off of blood into the lower resistance
pulmonary circuit reduces aortic diastolic blood
pressure. Under these conditions a small increase
in heart rate may reduce subendocardial perfu-
sion enough to induce ischemia and ventricular
ﬁbrillation.
Anesthetic management,
pre-initial repair
Goals
1 AcontinuousinfusionofPGE 1 isusedtomain-
tain ductal patency in patients with ductal depen-
dent blood ﬂow (either systemic or pulmonary).
PGE1canbediscontinuedinanypatientdetermined
by echocardiogram to have a reliable nonduc-
tal source of systemic or pulmonary blood ﬂow.
Ductal patency generally produces unrestrictive
pulmonarybloodﬂow.
2 A target PaO2 of 40–45mmHg and a SaO2 of
70–80%isreasonableandislikelytobeassociated
withadequatesystemicoxygendelivery.
3 Insingleventricle(SV)patientswithunrestricted
pulmonary blood ﬂow control and manipulation
ofPVRandsubsequentlyof QP:QS isaccomplished
most reliably through ventilatory interventions.
Clinically,bothhypercarbiaincombinationwitha
21%FiO2 toachieveapHof7.30–7.35andnormo-
carbia in combination with a 17% FiO2 (inspired
N2) can be utilized to increase PVR and reduce
QP:QS.Bothstrategiesreduce QP:QStoacomparable
degreeversusbaseline(21%Fi O2andnormocarbia)
but hypercarbia results in better systemic oxygen
delivery(asdeterminedbyanarrowerA–Voxygen
saturationdifferenceandahigherSa O2/(Sa–vO2)),
ahighermeanarterialpressure,andahighercere-
braloxygensaturation(asdeterminedbyNIRS).
4 Hypercarbia (PaCO2 of 45–55mmHg) can be
reliably obtained via alveolar hypoventilation or
via increased inspired carbon dioxide (3% FiCO2).
Hypercarbiacanbeobtainedutilizinghypoventila-
tion without use of inspired carbon dioxide. Care
istakentoassureadequatetidalvolumeswithmain-
tenance of FRC and avoidance of atelectasis so as
not to induce intrapulmonary shunting andV /Q
mismatch resulting in inadvertent hypoxemia. An
appropriatedegreeofhypercarbiacanbeobtainedAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 231 — #65
CongenitalHeartDisease 231
withatidalvolumeof8–12mL/kg,PEEPof3–5cm
H2O and a respiratory rate of 4–8breaths/min.
Additional PEEP and larger tidal volumes can be
used to mechanically limit excessive pulmonary
blood ﬂow. The lower rates are required as the
infantcoolsandmetabolicratedecreases.
5 AvoidahighFi O2unlessthePa O2 <35–40mmHg
andintrapulmonary V /Qmismatchissuspected.
6 Because ventilatory interventions are incapable
ofreducing QP:QSmuchbelow2:1increasedcardiac
output is often necessary to ensure adequate sys-
temicoxygendeliveryandCPPinthethesepatients.
The ability to recruit stroke volume with preload
augmentation in very limited in these patients
withvolumeoverloadedventricles.Increasingheart
rate >140–150b/minhasthepotentialofinitiating
myocardialischemiainpatientswithaorticdiastolic
blood pressures in the 20–30mmHg range. This is
a particular risk in patients with HLHS. Inotropic
support may be necessary; dopamine in doses of
3–5 µg/kg/min is usually sufﬁcient to accomplish
thesegoals.
7 Oncethechestisopenthesurgeoncanmechani-
callylimitpulmonarybloodﬂowandreduce QP:QS
by placing a vessel loop around a PA (usually the
right).Thiswilloftendramaticallyimprovehemo-
dynamics.ETCO2 willfallastheET CO2–PaCO2 gra-
dient increases. It is not appropriate to decrease
minuteventilationatthistime;infactitmayneed
to be increased slightly because of the increase in
alveolar deadspace. A small increase in FiO2 may
alsobenecessary.
8 Infants with single ventricle physiology who
arrive in the operating room un-intubated from
the ICU require special attention. These patients
may clinically have a balanced circulation but
this occurs in the setting of several factors that
increasePVRincludinglowlungvolumes,increased
interstitial lung water, and hypoxia pulmonary
vasoconstriction. Following induction, intubation
andmechanicallungexpansionthesepatientsmay
have a precipitous drop in PVR and immedi-
ate compromise of systemic circulation. Despite
this,denitrogenationwith100%oxygenisrecom-
mended prior to laryngoscopy and tracheal intu-
bation so as to prevent hypoxemia during this
interval.OncetheairwayissecuredtheFi O2canbe
reduced.
Induction and maintenance
These patients have tenuous cardiovascular sta-
tuswithlimitedcardiovascularreserve.Ventricular
ﬁbrillation can be seen in association with light
anesthesia or during routine maneuvers, such as
opening the pericardium. Many of them arrive in
the operating room intubated receiving inotropic
support and PGE1. In the absence of an accu-
rateprenataldiagnosismanyundergooneormore
daysofmedicalstabilizationfollowinganepisodeof
shockorcardiopulmonaryarrest.
AnIVinductionusingahigh-dosesyntheticnar-
cotictechniqueincombinationwithamusclerelax-
ant is recommended. A benzodiazepine (usually
midazolam) can be added as tolerated. Inhalation
agentsaregenerallypoorlytolerated.Pancuronium
isnormallyutilized.However,inpatientswithalow
aortic diastolic blood pressure and a high baseline
heart rate consideration should be given to use of
oneofthemusclerelaxantsthatdonotaffectheart
rate such as vecuronium or cisatracurium so as to
avoidiatrogenicsubendocardialischemia.
Post-CPB management,
post-initial repair
Goals
After the initial repair single ventricle physiol-
ogy persists and the same principles described for
pre-CPBmanagementholdtruewithafewnotable
exceptions:
1 After CPB, it is not uncommon for a high PVR
to result in reduced pulmonary blood ﬂow and
hypoxemia.
2 The MBTS or RV to PA conduit may be
too large or too small for prevailing physiologic
conditions.
3 Ventricular dysfunction may exist due to the
long CPB and DHCA or regional low ﬂow perfu-
sionintervalsthatarenecessarytocompletethese
complicatedrepairs.
4 Myocardialandtissueedemamaybesigniﬁcant
precludingchestclosure.
5 Bleeding from long arterial suture lines may be
signiﬁcant.
6 Inhaled pulmonary vasodilators such as NO
may be necessary to improve SaO2 or reduce the
transpulmonarygradientinthispatientpopulation.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 232 — #66
232 Chapter6
Thisisparticularlytrueinthesubgroupofpatients
who have repair of partially obstructed pul-
monaryvenousdrainageatthetimeoftheirinitial
repair.
Managementofthefourclinicalscenariospresent
afterinitialrepairandtheappropriateinterventions
necessaryaresummarizedinTable6.11.
Single ventricle pathway; superior
cavopulmonary shunt, or bidirectional
Glenn (BDG)
TheBDG(Figs6.28,6.33a,b–6.35)directssystemic
venous blood from the SVC directly to the pul-
monary circulation. The BDG is normally under-
takenat3–6monthsofageatwhichpointthePVR
hasdecreasedtopointwherepulmonarybloodﬂow
can be provided with systemic venous pressure as
the driving pressure. Patients who have outgrown
theirPAband,RVtoPAconduit,orMBTSandhave
alowSa O2 andpatientswhoarenottoleratingthe
additionalvolumeontheirventriclewithaloosePA
bandorlargeMBTSwillbestagedtoaBDGearlier
inthisinterval.
TheoriginalGlennshuntinvolvedanend-to-side
anastomosisofthecranialendofthetransectedSVC
tothedistalendofthetransectedrightpulmonary
artery(RPA).BoththeproximalSVCandRPAwere
oversewn.Thisprocedurewasperformedthrougha
rightthoracotomywithoutCPB.Currentlythebidi-
rectional Glenn is used in which the cranial end
of the transected SVC is anatomosed end-to-side
to the RPA (which is in continuity with the main
and left PAs) and the cardiac end of the SVC is
over sewn. This creates SVC continuity with both
the left and right pulmonary arteries and bidirec-
tionalpulmonarybloodﬂow.ThemainPAisover
sewnifitisnotatretic.UnlesstheIVCisinterrupted
withazygouscontinuationtheazygousveinislig-
atedsothattheSVCdoesnotdecompressretrograde
to the IVC thereby reducing the quantity of blood
delivered to the PAs. This procedure is performed
on CPB through a median sternotomy. The previ-
ousaortopulmonaryshuntisligatedorthePAband
takendown.
Normallyallupperextremityandcerebralvenous
drainage reaches the SVC. In some patients with
CHD(particularlythosewithheterotaxysyndrome)
there may be bilateral SVCs that are not in conti-
nuityviaaconnectingvein.Inthiscaseabilateral
BDGmustbedonewithoneSVCanatomosedend-
to-sidetotheRPAandtheotherSVCanatomosed
end-to-side to the LPA. LPA to RPA continuity is
maintained.
The differences between an aortopulmonary
shuntandaBDGaresummarizedinFig.6.33.The
mostobviousdifferencebetweenthetwoisthatfor
agivencardiacoutput,Sa O2,SpvO2,andSv O2 the
volumeloadonthesystemicventriclewillbetwice
aslargewithanaortopulmonaryshuntasitiswith
aBDG.Effectivepulmonarybloodﬂowintheaor-
topulmonaryshuntandBDGcirculationsareequal.
However,intheaortopulmonaryshuntcirculation
thereisrecirculatedpulmonaryblood(physiologic
L–Rshunt)whileintheBDGcirculationthereisno
recirculated pulmonary blood ﬂow. As a result, a
childwithaBDGwillhavethesameSa O2asachild
with an aortopulmonary shunt but with a signiﬁ-
cantreductioninthevolumeloadonthesystemic
ventricle.
Modiﬁcations of the BDG have been devised to
potentiallysimplifytheconversiontoaFontan.The
hemi-Fontan refers speciﬁcally to a procedure in
which atriopulmonary anastomosis is constructed
betweenthedomeoftheRAattheRA/SVCjunc-
tionandtheinferiorsurfaceoftheRPA.AGore-Tex
bafﬂe or dam is used to supplement the central
PAareaandtoisolatethecavopulmonaryconnec-
tionfromtheRA.Anothermodiﬁcation(incorrectly
calledahemi-Fontan)involvescreationofadouble
cavopulmonaryanastomosis.Thecranialendofthe
dividedSVCisanastomosedtothesuperiorsurface
of the RPA. The cardiac end of the divided SVC is
anastomosedtotheinferiorsurfaceoftheRPA.The
internaloriﬁceoftheSVCisclosedwithaGore-Tex
patch(seeFig.6.35).
Anesthetic management, pre-superior
cavopulmonary shunt
Goals
Theprinciplesoutlinedinsectiononmanagement
of single ventricle physiology before and after the
initialrepairapplyhere(seeTable6.11).Bytheage
of3–6monthswhentheseinfantspresentfortheirAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 233 — #67
CongenitalHeartDisease 233
Table 6.11 Managementofsingleventriclephysiology.
Clinical presentation Physiology Management
SaO2 75–80%
Sa-vO2 25–30%
BP > 60/30
Balanced ﬂow
QP:QS = 0.7–1.5:1
No intervention
SaO2 > 85–90%
Sa-vO2 35–40%
BP < 60/30
Diastolic BP< 15–25 with
MBTS; likely higher with
RV–PA conduit
Overcirculated
QP:QS > 2–3:1
Causes:
Low PVR
Large MBTS or RV–PA conduit
Residual arch obstruction
RaisePVR:
Controlled hypoventilation
Mild acidosis
Low FiO2 (0.17–0.19)
IncreasesystemicO 2 delivery:
Afterload reduction
Inotropic support
Hematocrit >40%
Surgicalintervention:
Clip MBTS or RV–PA conduit
Revise arch
SaO2 < 65–75%
Sa–vO2 25–30%; but SvO2 likely
less than critical value of 30%
BP > 70/40
Diastolic BP> 40
Undercirculated
QP:QS < 0.7:1
Causes:
High PVR
Small MBTS or RV–PA conduit
Pulmonary venous
desaturation with
underestimation of actual
QP:QS
LowerPVR:
Controlled hyperventilation
Alkalosis
Sedation/paralysis
Aggressively treat atelectasis
(pulmonary venous
desaturation)
Consider NO
IncreasesystemicO 2 delivery:
Inotropic support
Surgicalintervention:
Revise MBTS or RV–PA conduit
SaO2 < 70–75%
Sa-vO2 35–40% and SvO2 likely
less than critical value of 30%
BP < 60/30
Low cardiac output
Causes:
Ventricular dysfunction
• Myocardial ischemia
• Depressed contractility
• Afterload mismatch
(residual arch obstruction)
• AV valve regurgitation
MinimizeO 2 consumption:
Sedation/paralysis
Inotropic support/afterload
reduction
Surgicalintervention:
Repair AV valve
Revise arch
Considermechanicalsupport:
• Post-cardiotomy support
• Bridge-to-transplantation
AV, atrioventriculat; BP, blood pressure; MBTS, modiﬁed Blalock–Taussig shunt; PVR, pulmonary
vascular resistance; RV–PA, right ventricle–pulmonary artery.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 234 — #68
234 Chapter6
Flow
(L/min/m 2)
Flow
(L /min/m2)
Pulmonary veins Vena cavae
98
2 2
4
80
80
LA RA
65
65
RVRVRV
8080
= Saturation (%)
PA
22
Ao–PA
Shunt
LV
Flow
(L/min/ m 2)
Flow
(L/min/ m 2)
Pulmonary veins IVC
98
11
2
80
80
LA RA
65
65
RVRV
SVC
65
80
= Saturation (%)
PA
12
LV
Ao
Ao
RV
(a) (b)
Fig. 6.33 (a)Depictionofsaturationsandbloodﬂows
intricuspidatresiawithanonrestrictiveatrialseptal
defect(ASD),ahypoplasticrightventricle(RV),and
pulmonaryatresiapalliatedwithanaortopulmonary
shunt.Completemixingoccursattheatriallevel.Theleft
ventricle(LV)isvolumeoverloadedinthisparallel
circulationtoprovidepulmonarybloodﬂow. QS and QP
are2L/min/m 2 andthearterialsaturationis80%
(QP:QS =1:1.)(b)Depictionofsaturationsandblood
ﬂowsintricuspidatresiawithanonrestrictiveASD,
ahypoplasticRV,andpulmonaryatresiapalliatedwitha
bidirectionalsuperiorcavopulmonaryshunt.Complete
mixingoccursattheatriallevel.TheLVisnotvolume
overloadedinthisseriescirculation. QS is2L/min/m 2,
and QP is1L/min/m 2; QP:QS =0.5:1.0.Nonetheless,
cardiacoutputandarterialsaturationareidenticaltothe
patientpalliatedwiththeaortopulmonaryshunt.Thisis
becausearterialsaturationincompletemixingis
determinedbytherelativevolumesandsaturationsof
systemicandpulmonaryvenousblood.Inthisinstance,
QS andthevolumeofsystemicvenousbloodreaching
therightatrium(RA)arenotequalbecausehalfof QS
hasbeendivertedtobecomepulmonaryvenousblood.
Asaresult, QP:QS isdeceptivehere.Ao,aorta;IVC,
inferiorvenacava;LA,leftatrium;LV,leftventricle;
PA,pulmonaryartery;RA,rightatrium;RV,right
ventricle;SVC,superiorvenacava.
cavopulmonary shunt they have generally grown
andgainedweightsuchthattheir QP:QS islikelyto
be1.0–1.5:1.Asaresultthesepatientsaremuchless
prone to compromise of systemic oxygen delivery
byanexcessofpulmonarybloodﬂow.
Induction and maintenance
An IV induction is preferred in these patients.
Vascular access may be difﬁcult, as many of these
patientshaveprolongedICUstaysaftertheirinitial
repair.Inaddition,manyofthesepatientsaretoler-
anttoopioidsandbenzodiazepinesfollowingtheir
ICUstay.Thisshouldbeconsideredifpremedication
isplannedpriortoIVplacement.
Post-CPB management, post-superior
cavopulmonary shunt
Goals
1 Maintain heart rate, contractility, and preload
to maintain cardiac output. Decreases in cardiac
output will reduce IVC saturation. In BDG physi-
ologywherethereismixingofIVCandpulmonary
venousbloodinacommonatriumthiswillreduce
arterialsaturation.
2 Low PpvO2 saturation will produce a low SaO2.
Maneuvers to reduce V /Q mismatch and intra-
pulmonary shunt should be undertaken. A high
FiO2maybenecessaryinthepresenceofsigniﬁcant
V /Qmismatch.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 235 — #69
CongenitalHeartDisease 235
Fig. 6.34 Theanatomyofacompletedbidirectional
superiorcavopulmonaryshunt.Thecephaladportionof
thesuperiorvenacava(SVC)isanastomosedend-to-side
totherightpulmonaryartery.Therightpulmonary
arteryisincontinuitywiththeleftpulmonaryartery.
ApreviouslymodiﬁedBlalock–Taussigshunt(right
subclaviantorightpulmonaryarterywithinterposed
Gore-Texgraft)isligatedandthesubclavianarteryis
beingretracted.Theazygousveinisalsoligated.The
cardiacportionoftheSVCisoversewn.
3 Normocarbia should be maintained. Mean air-
waypressureshouldbekeptattheminimalcompat-
iblewithdeliveryofanadequatetidalvolumeand
lung expansion. High mean airway pressure will
mechanically limit the nonpulsatile pulmonary
bloodﬂow.Thiscanusuallybeaccomplishedwith
arelativelylargetidalvolume(10–12mL/kg),slow
respiratory rates (10–15breaths/min), and short
inspiratory times (I:E of 1:3–1:4). PEEP should be
usedwithcaution.
4 Acentrallineplacedintheinternaljugular(IJ)
will measure SVC pressure, which equals mean
pulmonary artery pressure (mPAP) following a
BDG. A surgically placed atrial line will mea-
sure common atrial pressure. The transpulmonary
pressure gradient (TPG) (mPAP – common atrial
pressure) is usually<10mmHg with appropriate
ventilation.AmPAPof12–18mmHgisusuallyseen
inpresenceofgoodsystemicventricularfunction.
Azygos vein
Patch
Fig. 6.35 Theanatomyofadoublecavopulmonary
anastomosiswithinternalpatchclosureofthecardiac
anastomosis.Boththecardiacandcephalicportionsof
thesuperiorvenacava(SVC)areincontinuitywiththe
rightpulmonaryartery.Therightpulmonaryarteryisin
continuitywiththeleftpulmonaryartery,andthemain
pulmonaryarteryisdividedandoversewn.Inferior
venacava(IVC)bloodispreventedfromreachingthe
pulmonaryarteriesduetoapatchoccludingtheright
atrium(RA)–SVCjunction.Thephysiologyisidentical
tothatinFigs6.31and6.32.
5 Inotropic support of the systemic ventricle
may be necessary due to ventricular dysfunction
induced by chronic volume overload and CPB.
Dopamine (3–5µg/kg/min) is useful. Milrinone
(0.5–1.0 µg/kg/min)isusefulforthosepatientswho
havehighSVRandhypertension.
6 Inhaled pulmonary vasodilators such as NO
generally do not improve SaO2 or reduce the
transpulmonary gradient in this patient popula-
tion. The exception to this may be the subgroup
ofpatientswhohaverepairofpartiallyobstructed
pulmonary venous drainage at the time of
theirBDG.
7 The most likely cause of a low SaO2 follow-
ing a BDG is low cardiac output with a lowAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 236 — #70
236 Chapter6
IVC saturation. TEE will help delineate the cause
(ventricular dysfunction, hypovolemia, AV valve
dysfunction).IfalowSa O2persistsdespiteoptimiza-
tionofventricularfunction,considerationshouldbe
given to causes of reduced pulmonary blood ﬂow
such as a stenotic anastomosis or the presence of
decompressing venous collaterals from the SVC to
theIVC.
These patients will have a SaO2 of 75–80%,
similartothatpriortotheirBDG.The QP:QSranges
from0.5–0.7:1andasaresulttherewillbetheacute
reductioninvolumeloadonthesystemicventricle
asshowninFig.6.33.Thereisanacuteincreasein
SVCpressureandpresumablyinintracranialpres-
sure(ICP).Thevolumeloadreductionandelevated
SVCpressurearebelievedtocontributetotheinitial
systemic hypertension and postoperative irritabil-
ity that is commonly seen in these patients. The
majorityofpulmonarybloodﬂowwillbesupplied
via venous blood from the brain; the largest con-
tributor to venous drainage from the upper body.
Hyperventilation and hypocarbia, while beneﬁcial
inreducingPVRwillalsoreducecerebralbloodﬂow
andcerebralvenousdrainage.Maintainingnormo-
carbia following BDG has been demonstrated to
provide maximalQP:QS and SaO2. These patients
tend to have a large ETCO2–PaCO2 gradient due to
increasedphysiologicdeadspace.Anincreasedpor-
tion of the lung in these patients is ventilated but
not perfused due to the low PA driving pressure
(SVCpressure).
AttentionisfocusedontheTPGthat,innormal
patients, is deﬁned as the mPAP–LAP. In BDG
patients,themPAP =SVCpressure.InBDGpatients
theequivalentofaLAPorpulmonaryvenousatrial
pressureisthecommonatrialpressure.Acommon
atrium exists in these patients because the atrial
septectomycreatesanonrestrictivecommunication
betweentheLAandRA.
Deﬁnitive repair: the Fontan
procedure or total cavopulmonary
connection (TCPC)
Fontan physiology
The Fontan procedure is generally performed
in staged patients at 2–3years of age. Fontan
physiology is a series (“normal”) circulation that
canbedescribedasfollows:
• There is one ventricle with sufﬁcient diastolic,
systolic,andAVvalvefunctiontosupportsystemic
circulation.Thisventriclemustinturn:
a Be in unobstructed continuity with the
aorta.
b Be in unobstructed continuity with pulmonary
venousblood.
• There is unobstructed delivery of systemic
venous blood to the pulmonary circulation (total
cavopulmonarycontinuity).
In the absence of any residual physiologic
intracardiacorintrapulmonaryR–Lshuntingthese
patients should have a normal SaO2. It is often
stated that pulmonary blood ﬂow is passive and
gradientdriven(systemicvenouspressure >mean
PA pressure>pulmonary venous atrial pressure).
Infact,thesystemicventriclegeneratestheenergy
necessary to provide ﬂow through the pulmonary
capillarybedbecausethesystemicvascularbedand
pulmonary vascular bed are in continuity without
aninterveningatriaandventricletoprovidereser-
voir and pumping capacity. As a result, the single
ventricleinaseriesFontancirculationisfacedwith
higher afterload then the systemic ventricle in a
two-ventricleseriescirculation.
The Fontan procedure was ﬁrst performed in
1968 and was applied to patients with TA. The
original operation included a Glenn shunt, which
drained the SVC directly into the distal right PA.
TheproximalendoftheRPAwasjoinedtotheright
atrialappendageviaanaorticvalvehomograftand
a pulmonary valve homograft valve was placed at
theIVC–RAjunction.ThemainPAwasligatedand
theASDwasclosed.Subsequently,creationofthe
Glennshuntandplacementofhomograftvalvesat
theRA–PAandIVC–RAjunctionswereeliminated
resulting in creation of a direct atriopulmonary
connection.
Since then, many modiﬁcations have been
described.Despitethemodiﬁcations,thegoalofthe
procedure remains the same: to provide delivery
of all systemic venous blood directly to the pul-
monaryarterieswithoutthebeneﬁtofthereservoir
or pumping capability of a ventricle. This requires
total cavopulmonary continuity either directly orAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 237 — #71
CongenitalHeartDisease 237
Fig. 6.36 Totalcavopulmonaryconnectionusingan
intra-atriallateraltunnelorbafﬂe.Thetunnelis
prostheticgraftmaterialsuchasGore-Tex.Afenestration
hasbeenplacedinthisprostheticmaterialallowinga
physiologicright-to-left(R–L)shunttoexistwhen
bafﬂepressureexceedscommon(pulmonaryvenous)
atrialpressure.
viathesystemvenousatrium.Currently,themost
commonly performed procedures are the lateral
tunnel and extracardiac Fontan (Figs 6.28, 6.36
and 6.37). The lateral tunnel procedure avoids
incorporating any substantial volume of atrium in
the cavopulmonary pathway while the extracar-
diac procedure does not incorporate any atrium.
These procedures are referred to as TCPCs. Over
time in atriopulmonary connections elevated sys-
temicvenouspressureleadstoatrialdilatation.The
atriumoftenexpandstoavolumeaslargeas300–
500mL.Thisisasourceofstasisandanidusforatrial
arrhythmias.Intheory,theextracardiacprocedure
mayofferadditionalprotectionfromdevelopment
ofatrialarrhythmiasduetoalackofsuturelinesin
atrium.
Contraindications to the Fontan procedure
include: early infancy, PVR> 4Woodunits/m2,
severe PA hypoplasia, an ejection fraction (EF)<
25–30%, and a ventricular diastolic pressure>
25mmHg. The majority of lesions felt in the past
toberelativecontraindicationstotheFontanpro-
cedure such as AV valve regurgitation/stenosis or
Fig. 6.37 Totalcavopulmonaryconnectionusingan
extracardiacconduitorbafﬂe.Theconduitisprosthetic
graftmaterialsuchasGore-Tex.Asmallside-to-side
anastomosisbetweenafenestrationintheconduitand
afenestrationintheatrialwallcanbeplacedallowing
aphysiologicright-to-left(R–L)shunttoexistwhen
bafﬂepressureexceedscommon(pulmonaryvenous)
atrialpressure.
focally narrowed or distorted pulmonary arteries
can now be corrected at the time of the Fontan
procedure.
Use of the staged single ventricle pathway
resultsinreducedmorbidityandmortalityascom-
pared to the acute transition from single ventri-
cle to Fontan physiology. As previously described,
the staged pathway makes use of a bidirectional
cavopulmonaryshuntprocedurebeforetheFontan
procedure. Use of the cavopulmonary shunt at
3–6months of age allows early reduction in the
volume overload that accompanies univentricular
physiology.Thisallowssystemicventricularvolume
loadtobereducedtonormalandallowsremodeling
oftheventricleatlowerend-diastolicvolume.
Acute reduction of systemic ventricular volume
intheuniventricularheartresultsinimpairedven-
tricular compliance because wall thickness does
not regress as quickly as ventricular volume. The
resultisimpairedventriculardiastolicfunctionand
elevated end-diastolic pressure. This will impede
pulmonaryvenousreturn,whichisaliabilityinthe
Fontan procedure, because this will subsequentlyAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 238 — #72
238 Chapter6
reducepulmonarybloodﬂow.Alowcardiacoutput
statewillresultbecausesystemicventricularoutput
canonlyequalthequantityofbloodthattransverses
thepulmonaryvascularbed.Theimpairedventric-
ulardiastolicfunctionthataccompaniesacuteven-
tricularvolumereductionisbettertoleratedinBDG
or hemi-Fontan physiology than in Fontan phys-
iology. When there is impairment of pulmonary
venous return after the BDG or hemi-Fontan,
blood from the IVC will continue to provide sys-
temic ventricular ﬁlling and cardiac output at a
lower pressure than that required to traverse the
pulmonarybed.
Ariskofthestagedproceduresisthedevelopment
of pulmonary arteriovenous malformations. These
aretheresultofdiversionofhepaticvenousblood
ﬂow(IVC)bloodtoasystemiccapillarybedbefore
delivery to the pulmonary capillary bed as occurs
in the bidirectional cavopulmonary shunts. This is
generallynotaproblemwhentheBDGiseventually
convertedtoaFontan.
Fenestrated Fontan
With Fontan physiology, increased impedance to
systemic venous blood ﬂow across the pulmonary
capillary bed will result in decreased delivery of
blood to the pulmonary venous atrium, systemic
ventricle, and aorta producing a low cardiac out-
putstatewithanormalornearnormalSa O2.This
increasedimpedanceisnotuncommonintheinitial
daysandweeksfollowingFontansurgery.Attempts
to increase cardiac output by increasing systemic
venous pressure may result in development of
refractory pleural effusions and ascites. In many
institutions a 4mm hole or fenestration is inten-
tionally left in cavopulmonary pathway or bafﬂe.
This allows systemic venous blood to “pop-off”
into the pulmonary venous atrium and ultimately
into the systemic ventricle and aorta. This physi-
ologic R–L shunt allows maintenance of systemic
cardiacoutputattheexpenseofSa O2.Thisfenestra-
tioncanbeeasilyclosedinthecardiaccatheteriza-
tionlaboratorywithanocclusiondeviceatlaterdate
followingdemonstrationofadequatehemodynam-
ics,gasexchange,andcardiacoutputwithballoon
occlusionofthefenestration.
Anesthetic management, pre-Fontan
Goals
The principles outlined in the section on manage-
mentofBDGphysiologyafterCPBgenerallyapply
here. At 2–3years of age patients with a supe-
riorcavopulmonaryshunt(BDG)generallyhavea
stablecardiovascularsystemwithaSa O2of75–80%
unless there are signiﬁcant decompressing venous
collateral vessels from the SVC to either the IVC
or pulmonary venous system. These are usually
addressedbycoilocclusioninthecardiaccatheter-
izationlaboratorypriortotheFontan.Whilethese
patientswilltolerateaninhalationinductionfrom
acardiovascularstandpointitshouldberecognized
that several factors might make a pure inhalation
inductiondifﬁcult:
• Venouscongestionoftheheadandtonguedueto
arelativelyhighSVCpressure.
• Coughing,breathholding,oranyothercauseof
highintrathoracicpressurewillcausealmostcom-
plete cessation of pulmonary blood ﬂow. Almost
immediatearterialhypoxemiawilloccur.
• With a QP:QS of 0.5–0.7:1.0 the speed of an
inhalationinductionwillbeslow.
Induction and maintenance
AnIVinductionispreferred.Considerationshould
be given to premedication as these patients and
theirfamiliesgenerallyhavehadmultiplehospital
exposures for check-ups and procedures. In addi-
tion,manyofthesepatientsaretoleranttoopioids
and benzodiazepines following neonatal and sub-
sequent exposure. This should be considered if
premedicationisplannedpriortoIVplacement.
Post-CPB management,
post-Fontan procedure
Goals
1 Maintainheartrate,contractility,andpreloadto
maintain cardiac output. In Fontan patients with
a fenestration or intrapulmonary shunt decreases
incardiacoutputwillreduceSv O2 andSaO2.SvO2
canbeeasilydeterminedusingasampledrawnfrom
acentralvenouscatheter.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 239 — #73
CongenitalHeartDisease 239
2 Lowpulmonaryvenoussaturationwillproduce
a low SaO2. Maneuvers to reduceV /Q mismatch
and intrapulmonary shunt should be undertaken.
A high FiO2 may be necessary in the presence of
signiﬁcant V /Qmismatch.
3 Ventilation and acid-base management should
beoptimizedtokeepPVRlow.Meanairwaypres-
sure should be kept at the minimal compatible
with delivery of an adequate minute ventilation
and lung expansion. High mean airway pressure
willmechanicallylimitthenonpulsatilepulmonary
bloodﬂow.Thiscanusuallybeaccomplishedwith
arelativelylargetidalvolume(10–12mL/kg),slow
respiratory rates (10–15breaths/min), and short
inspiratory times (I:E of 1:3–1:4). PEEP should be
usedwithcaution.
4 AcentrallineplacedintheIJwillmeasurecaval
(bafﬂe) pressure which equals mPAP following a
Fontan.Asurgicallyplacedatriallinewillmeasure
commonatrialpressure.TheTPG(mPAP–common
atrialpressure)isusually <10mmHgwithappropri-
ateventilation.AmPAPof15–18mmHgisusually
seen in the presence of good systemic ventricular
function.
5 Inotropic support of the systemic ventricle
may be necessary due to ventricular dysfunction
induced by chronic volume overload and CPB.
Dopamine (3–5µg/kg/min) is useful. Milrinone
(0.5–1.0 µg/kg/min) is useful for those patients
who have high SVR and afterload/contractility
mismatch.
6 Inhaled pulmonary vasodilators such as NO
generally do not improve SaO2 or reduce the
transpulmonary gradient in this patient popula-
tion. The exception to this may be the subgroup
ofpatientswhohaverepairofpartiallyobstructed
pulmonary venous drainage at the time of their
Fontan.
ThemanagementgoalsfollowingtheFontanpro-
cedurearesummarizedinTable6.12.AswithaBDG
patient,attentionisfocusedonthetranspulmonary
gradient(TPG).InFontanpatientsthemPAP =CVP.
A CVP in a Fontan patient will measure pres-
sure in the caval portion of the cavopulmonary
connection and is commonly called a bafﬂe pres-
sure. As with a BDG patient in Fontan patients
the equivalent of a LAP is the common atrial
pressure. In Fontan patients the pressure in the
cavopulmonary connection can be obtained via a
percutaneouslyplacedcentralvenouscatheterora
surgically placed transthoracic bafﬂe catheter. The
commonatrialpressureisobtainedviaasurgically
placedtransthoraciccatheter.Thusinpatientswith
aFontan,theTPG =CVP–commonatrialpressure.
Low pulmonary blood ﬂow produces low car-
diac output in this series circulation. The systemic
ventricle can only pump the volume of blood
thatisdeliveredtoitacrossthepulmonaryvascu-
larbed.Thisdiffersfromthesituationaftersuperior
cavopulmonary shunts because, in these patients,
there is a source of blood supply (IVC blood) to
the systemic ventricle that does not cross the pul-
monary bed. It should be emphasized that in a
Fontan patient, low cardiac output will not result
inalowSa O2 unlesstherearesigniﬁcantsourcesof
intrapulmonaryorintracardiac(fenestration,bafﬂe
leak)physiologicR–Lshunting.Whenlowcardiac
output is due to ventricular dysfunction, common
(pulmonary venous) atrial hypertension will lead
to development of pulmonary edema and physio-
logic R–L intrapulmonary shunting. This situation
isanalogoustoanormalpatientwithseriescircula-
tionandnointracardiaclesions.Lowcardiacoutput
inanormalpatientwillresultinalowSa O2 onlyif
asigniﬁcantquantityofintrapulmonaryR–Lshunt
existsandlowcardiacoutputproducesalowSv O2.
The presence of a fenestration or bafﬂe leak will
exacerbatethisSa O2decreaseintheFontanpatient.
It is commonly stated that early tracheal extu-
bation and spontaneous ventilation enhance pul-
monarygasexchangeandhemodynamicsinFontan
patients.Itmustbeemphasizedthatlowlungvol-
umes,hypercarbia,andhypoxemiawillnegateany
advantageobtainedbyspontaneousventilation.
Tricuspid atresia
Anatomy
In Tricuspid atresia (TA), there is agenesis of the
tricuspid valve and no communication between
the RA and the hypoplastic RV (the tricuspid
valveisembryologicallypartoftheRV).AnatomicAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 240 — #74
240 Chapter6
Table 6.12 ManagementofFontanphysiology.
Physiology Clinical presentation Management
Low pulmonary blood ﬂow and
inadequate preload delivery to
systemic (common) atrium
TPG ≫ 10mmHg
Causes:
Bafﬂe obstruction
Pulmonary artery obstruction
Pulmonary vein obstruction
Premature bafﬂe fenestration closure
No fenestration or premature
fenestration closure
SaO2 95–100%
Sa-vO2 > 35–40%
Bafﬂe pressure> 20mmHg
Common atrial
pressure < 10mmHg
Hypotension
Tachycardia
Poor distal perfusion
Metabolic acidosis
Fenestration patent or bafﬂe
leak present
SaO2 75–80%
Sa-vO2 > 35–40%
Bafﬂe pressure> 20mmHg
Common atrial
pressure < 10mmHg
Hypotension
Tachycardia
Poor distal perfusion
Metabolic acidosis
Volume replacement to keep bafﬂe
pressure stable
Reduce PVR
Correct acidosis
Inotropic support
Afterload reduction
Consider catheterization intervention to
open or create bafﬂe fenestration
Systemic ventricular dysfunction
TPG = 5–10mmHg
Causes:
Systolic dysfunction
Diastolic dysfunction
AV valve regurgitation/stenosis
Loss of AV synchrony
Afterload/contractility mismatch
No fenestration or premature
fenestration closure
SaO2 85–90%
Sa-vO2 > 35–40%
Bafﬂe pressure> 20mmHg
Common atrial
pressure > 15mmHg
Pulmonary edema
Hypotension
Tachycardia
Poor distal perfusion
Metabolic acidosis
Fenestration patent or bafﬂe
leak present
SaO2 70–75%
Sa-vO2 > 35–40%
Bafﬂe pressure> 20mmHg
Common atrial
presure > 15mmHg
Pulmonary edema
Hypotension
Tachycardia
Poor distal perfusion
Metabolic acidosis
Volume replacement to keep bafﬂe
pressure stable
Correct acidosis
PEEP may be necessary for pulmonary
edema
Inotropic support
Afterload reduction
Provide AV synchrony
(antiarrhythmics/pacing)
Mechanical support (post-cardiotomy
support or bridge to transplantation)
Surgical intervention (takedown to BDG)
AV, atrioventricular; BDG, bidirectional Glenn procedure; PVR, pulmonary vascular resistance; TPG, transpulmonary
pressure gradient.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 241 — #75
CongenitalHeartDisease 241
classiﬁcationisbasedonthepresenceorabsenceof
TGA,theextentofPSoratresia,andthesizeofthe
VSD.Thisclassiﬁcationandthefrequencyofthedif-
ferentlesiontypesaresummarizedinFig.6.29and
Table6.10.Approximately70%ofpatientswithTA
are type 1 and 30% are type 2. Type 3 lesionsare
veryrare.FiftypercentofallTApatientsaretype1B.
Physiology
TA is single ventricle physiology lesion. These
patients are staged to a Fontan procedure. TA is
a complex shunt with complete obstruction to RV
inﬂow and variable obstruction to RV outﬂow.
There is a communication (ASD or patent FO)
which results in an obligatory R–L shunt at the
atrial level with complete mixing of systemic and
pulmonary venous blood in the LA. When the
ASD or FO is restrictive, there will be a large
rightatrialtoLAPgradient.Thiswillresultinpoor
decompressionoftheRAandsystemicvenouscon-
gestion. Pulmonary blood ﬂow can be provided
by a downstream shunt from one or both of the
followingsources:
• Intracardiac. The pathways are described in
Table 6.1. This downstream shunt may be simple
(VSDwithoutPS),complex(VSDwithPS),orcom-
plexwithcompleteobstruction(pulmonaryatresia
withorwithoutaVSD).
• Extracardiac.ThisisgenerallyaPDAbutinolder
patientsMAPCAsmayhavedeveloped.Whenpul-
monary atresia exists (types 1A and 2A) these
simple shunts are the sole source of pulmonary
bloodﬂow.
Thequantityofpulmonarybloodﬂowassociated
witheachtypeofTAissummarizedinTable6.10.
Insingleventriclelesionsthedegreeofcyanosis
will be determined largely byQP:QS. Therefore,
patientswitha QP:QS <1duetostenoticoratretic
pulmonaryoutﬂowtracts,restrictiveVSDs,orboth
willbemorecyanoticthantheircounterpartswith
normal or increased pulmonary blood ﬂow. TA
imposesavolumeloadontheLV,andincreasedpul-
monarybloodﬂowproducesanevenlargerLVvol-
umeload.Therefore,patientswithTAandincreased
pulmonary blood ﬂow are likely to present
with CHF. Furthermore, patients with increased
pulmonarybloodﬂowareatrisktodevelopPVOD.
Surgical therapy
More than 70% of neonates with TA have ductal
dependant pulmonary blood ﬂow and require a
MBTS in association with PDA ligation. This can
often be done off-CPB through a median ster-
notomy. Following initial repair, TA patients pro-
ceed to a superior cavopulmonary connection or
BDG at age 3–6months and then on to the
Fontanprocedureat1–2yearsofageaspreviously
described.
Anesthetic management
Goals
These patients are initially managed according
to the principles described in the section on
Management of single ventricle physiology, pre-
initial repair (see Table 6.11). Subsequent man-
agement for the superior cavopulmonary shunt
andFontanprocedureisdescribedinlaterportions
of the section on Management of single ventricle
physiology.
Post-CPB management
Thesepatientsaremanagedaccordingtotheprin-
ciples described in the section on Management of
singleventriclephysiology,post-CPBmanagement
(see Table 6.11). Subsequent management for the
superior cavopulmonary shunt and Fontan proce-
dureisdescribedinlaterportionsofthesectionon
Managementofsingleventriclephysiology.
Hypoplastic left heart syndrome
Anatomy
Patients with hypoplastic left heart syndrome
(HLHS)havehypoplasiaofallleftheartstructures.
In the most severe form, mitral and aortic atresia
withhypoplasiaoftheLA,LV,ascendingaorta,and
aorticarch(includingcoarctation)arepresent.Dis-
talaorticbloodﬂowoccursviathePDA.Proximal
aortic blood ﬂow and coronary blood ﬂow occur
by retrograde ﬁlling of a tiny ascending aorta via
the PDA (Figs 6.28 and 6.38). This unique varia-
tionofsingleventriclephysiologyinHLHSpatients
puts them at increased risk for development of
myocardialischemia.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 242 — #76
242 Chapter6
Ao
LA
LVRA
RV
Fig. 6.38 Anatomyofhypoplasticleftheartsyndrome
(HLHS).Thereisseveremitralstenosis/atresia,left
ventricularhypoplasia,aorticvalveatresia,and
hypoplasiaoftheascendingaortaandtransverse
aorticarch.Pulmonaryandsystemicbloodﬂowsare
bothdeliveredviatherightventricle.Aorticbloodﬂow
isprovidedviaalargeductusarteriosus.Thereis
antegradeﬂowfromthepatentductusarteriosus(PDA)
tothedescendingaorticandretrogradeﬂowtothe
proximalaorticarchandcerebralcirculation.The
coronaryarteriesareperfusedretrogradeviathetiny
ascendingaorta.Theleftventricle(LV)isdiminutive.Ao
aorta;LA,leftatrium;LV,leftventricle;RA,rightatrium;
RV,rightventricle.
Physiology
The HLHS is a ductal dependant single ventri-
cle physiology lesion. These patients are staged
to a Fontan procedure. HLHS is a complex shunt
with complete obstruction to outﬂow. There is a
communication (ASD or patent FO) and a com-
plete or near complete obstruction to LA outﬂow
(mitralatresiaorseveremitralstenosis)andLVout-
ﬂow (aortic atresia or severe aortic stenosis). This
resultsinanobligatoryL–Rshuntattheatriallevel
with complete mixing of systemic and pulmonary
venous blood in the RA and ventricle. When the
ASD or FO is restrictive, there will be a large left
atrial to right atrial pressure gradient. This will
resultinpoordecompressionoftheLA,pulmonary
venous congestion and pulmonary hypertension.
These patients need emergency decompression of
the LA (pulmonary venous chamber) and medical
stabilization prior to surgery. This requires trans-
atrialstentplacementinthecardiaccatheterization
laboratory.
Systemic blood ﬂow is provided by a simple
downstreamshunt(PDA).Theshuntatthelevelof
thePDAisadependentshuntwithnetsystemicand
pulmonary blood ﬂow determined by the ratio of
systemictoPVR.LowPVRrelativetoSVRwillallow
run-offofbloodintothepulmonarycircuitcompro-
mising systemic perfusion. Flow to the ascending
aorta, coronary arteries, and arch vessels are sup-
plied entirely (aortic atresia) or almost entirely
(severemitralandaorticstenosis)retrogradefrom
thePDA.Flowtothedescendingaortaisantegrade
from the PDA. Closure of the PDA in infants with
HLHSterminatescoronaryandsystemicbloodﬂow
and results in immediate cardiovascular collapse.
PGE1 therapyislifesavingforthesepatients.
Surgical therapy
PatientswithHLHSarestagedalongthesingleven-
triclepathwaytoaFontanprocedure(seeFig.6.28).
The initial procedure utilizing a MBTS is com-
monlyreferredtoasaNorwoodstage1.Theinitial
procedure utilizing an RV to PA conduit is com-
monly referred to as a modiﬁed Norwood stage 1
or a Sano procedure. As discussed previously it
must incorporate procedures to meet the objec-
tive necessary at each stage in the single ventricle
pathway:
• A DKS anastomosis in conjunction with an
aorticarchreconstruction/coarctationrepairutiliz-
ing homograft or pericardial tissue is necessary to
provideanunobstructedsystemicventricle(RV)to
aorticconnection.
• Anatrialseptectomyisperformedtoallowunob-
structeddeliveryofpulmonaryvenousbloodfrom
theLAtothesystemicRVviatheRA.
• A MBTS (usually 3.5mm Gore-Tex conduit) or
RV to PA conduit (usuallya5o r6m m valveless
Gore-Texconduit)iscreatedtoprovidepulmonary
bloodﬂow.
ThephysiologyoftheMBTSandoftheRVtoPA
conduitasasourceofpulmonarybloodﬂowdiffer
insomeimportantaspects:
• With a MBTS blood is distributed to the pul-
monarycirculationafterithasenteredthesystemicAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 243 — #77
CongenitalHeartDisease 243
arterialtree(fromtheinnominatearterytothePA)
while with a Sano conduit blood is distributed to
the pulmonary circulation before it has entered
the systemic arterial tree (from the RV to the PA;
much like a double outlet RV). As a result, for a
given cardiac output andQP:QS, the pulse pres-
sureiswiderandtheaorticdiastolicbloodpressure
lowerinpatientswithaMBTS.Thehigherdiastolic
bloodpressureobtainedwiththeSanoshuntmay
provide better cerebral, coronary and splanchnic
perfusion.
• TheSanoshuntrequirescreationofasmallright
ventriculotomy. The RV is the systemic ventricle
andthelong-termfunctionalconsequencesofthis
ventriculotomyareunknown.
• TheSanoconduitisvalvelessaresultinginsome
pulmonary insufﬁciency. The volume load on the
RV induced by this is small and probably off-
set by the fact that Sano shunt patients have a
slightly lowerQP:QS and volume load than MBTS
patients.
Following stage 1 repair, HLHS patients pro-
ceed to what is often called stage2–a superior
cavopulmonaryconnection(BDGorhemi-Fontan)
at age 3–6months – and then on to the Fontan
procedureat1–2yearsofage.PatientswithanRVto
PA conduit generally have their superior cavopul-
monaryconnectionatanearlieragethanchildren
withaMBTSastheyhavealower QP:QS andtend
to“outgrow”theirshuntsooner.
Anesthetic management
Goals
These patients are managed according to the
principlesdescribedinthesectiononManagement
of single ventricle physiology, pre-initial repair
(seeTable6.11).Thesepatientshaveductaldepen-
dant systemic blood ﬂow. Patients with HLHS
are particularly vulnerable to myocardial ischemia
because the coronary arteries are supplied retro-
gradefromthePDAdownasegmentofhypoplastic
ascendingaorta(often1–2mmindiameter).Subse-
quentmanagementforthesuperiorcavopulmonary
shunt and Fontan procedure is described in later
portions of the section on Management of single
ventriclephysiology.
Post-CPB management
Thesepatientsaremanagedaccordingtotheprin-
ciples described in the section on Management of
singleventriclephysiology,post-CPBmanagement
(see Table 6.11). Subsequent management for the
superior cavopulmonary shunt and Fontan proce-
dureisdescribedinlaterportionsofthesectionon
Managementofsingleventriclephysiology.
Thereareafewsubtledifferencesinmanagement
ofpatientswithaMBTSasopposedtoaSanoRVto
PAconduitintheinitialpostoperativeperiod:
• In patients with a MBTS, high SVR tends
to increase QP:QS, increase aortic diastolic run-
off, and promote pulmonary overcirculation with
compromise of systemic oxygen delivery. After-
loadreductionwithphenoxybenzamineisusedin
some institutions while in others a less aggressive
approachutilizingmilrinoneisundertaken.
• High SVR is less disadvantageous to a patient
withaSanoRVtoPAconduitbecausepulmonary
bloodﬂowisderivedfromtheRVpriortodistribu-
tion to the arterial circulation and because of the
inherenthighresistancethroughthelongRVtoPA
conduit. In these patients afterload reduction and
reducedRVpressuremayresultinalow QP:QSand
hypoxemia.
Tetralogy of Fallot with pulmonary
atresia
Anatomy
TetralogyofFallotwithpulmonaryatresia(TOF/PA)
involvesthefeaturesofTOFandinfundibularand
pulmonary valvular atresia in conjunction with
varyingdegreesofpulmonaryarterialatresia.Four
groupsaresaidtoexist.Group1patientshaveiso-
latedinfundibularandpulmonaryvalveatresiawith
amainPAanddistalpulmonaryarteriesofnearnor-
malsizeandarchitecture.Insomeofthesepatients,
the main PA may extend to the atretic infundibu-
lum.Inothers,thereisshortsegmentatresiaofthe
mainPA(Fig.6.39a,b).Patientsinthisgrouphave
pulmonarybloodﬂowsuppliedfromaPDA.Group
2patientshaveabsenceofthemainPAbutthePAs
are in continuity and supplied by a PDA. Group 3
patients have severely hypoplastic native PAs; the
left and right PA may not be in continuity. ThereAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 244 — #78
244 Chapter6
(a) (b)
Fig. 6.39 (a)Anatomyoftetraologyof
Fallot/pulmonaryartery(TOF/PA)
group1withshortsegmentpulmonary
atresia,good-sizedPAsincontinuity
suppliedbyarightsidedpatentductus
arteriosus(PDA)andonelargemajor
aortopulmonarycollateralartery
(MAPCA)fromtheleftsubclavian
artery.Thereisarightaorticarchwith
mirrorimagearchvesselbranching.
(b)IllustrationofTOF/PAgroup3with
nomainPA,smallbranchPAsin
continuitysuppliedbyMAPCAs.Some
lungsegmentsaresuppliedbythe
nativePAswhileothersaresupplied
directlybyMAPCAs.Thereisaright
aorticarchwithmirrorimagearch
vesselbranching.
aremajoraortopulmonarycollateralvessels(vessels
from the aorta to the PA) known as MAPCAs. A
PDAmaybepresentaswell.Somesegmentsoflung
maybesuppliedonlybybloodfromMAPCAs,some
onlybythenativePAs,andothersbybothsources
(see Fig. 6.39). Group 4 patients have no native
PAs and all pulmonary blood ﬂow is derived from
MAPCAs.
TheanatomyofMAPCAsinTOF/PAcanalmost
never be clearly delineated by two-dimensional
echocardiography alone. Cardiac catheterization
and/or MRI/MRA are necessary to delineate
collateralanatomyandtodetermine QP:QS.
Physiology
TOF/PA is single ventricle physiology lesion. This
lesion is generally amenable to a two-ventricle
repair. TOF/PA is a complex shunt in which a
communication(VSD)andtotalobstructiontoRV
outﬂow (PA) are present. This results in oblig-
atory R–L shunting across the VSD with com-
plete mixing of systemic and pulmonary venous
blood in the LV. Pulmonary blood ﬂow is pro-
vided by a downstream simple shunt (PDA or
MAPCAs).Forinfants,inwhomthePDAprovides
most of the pulmonary blood ﬂow, PGE1 infusion
(0.01–0.05 µg/kg/min)willbenecessarytoensure
ductalpatency.
Surgical therapy
Surgeryingroup1and2TOF/PApatientsisaimed
atestablishingareliablesourceofpulmonaryblood
ﬂow in the neonatal period, as these patients are
dependent on PGE1 to maintain a PDA and pul-
monary blood ﬂow. These patients may undergo
a palliative shunt procedure (usually a MBTS as
described above) or a deﬁnite procedure. The def-
inite procedure would be creation of continuity
between the RV and the main PA via placement
of a RV to PA conduit with VSD closure generally
performedviatheventriculotomyusedfortheprox-
imalendoftheconduit.Incaseswhereshortseg-
mentatresiaexists,itmaybepossibletoobtainRVto
PAcontinuitywithadirectanastomosisaugmented
withhomograftmaterialorpericardium.
Patientsingroups3and4presentdifﬁcultman-
agementproblems.Asarulethesepatientspresent
with univentricular physiology with a tendency
for pulmonary blood ﬂow to become excessive
(QP:QS > 2–3:1)asthePVRdropsfollowingbirth.
In group 3 patients neonatal repair with place-
ment of a RV to PA conduit is undertaken to
place the PAs in continuity with the RV in an
effort to promote native PA growth. In this cir-
cumstancetheVSDisleftopenasasourceofR–L
shunting and delivery of desaturated blood to the
systemic circulation as it would be impossible forAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 245 — #79
CongenitalHeartDisease 245
the RV to deliver an adequate cardiac output to
the LA across the hypoplastic pulmonary vascular
bed. These infants then undergo multiple cardiac
catheterizationproceduresinorderto:
• Dilateandstentthehypoplasticnativepulmonary
arteries.
• Coil embolize MAPCAs which provide pul-
monarybloodﬂowwhichiscompetitivewithblood
ﬂow supplied by native PAs. MAPCAs that pro-
videpulmonarybloodﬂowtosegmentsoflungnot
suppliedbynativePAsmustbeunifocalizedtothe
proximalpulmonarycirculation.
Unifocalizationinvolvesremovalofthecollateral
vessel from the aorta with subsequent reanasto-
mosis to the RV to PA conduit or a proximal PA
branch.Althoughthetraditionalapproachhasbeen
throughathoracotomymorerecentlymostgroups
havefavoredacentralapproachworkingthrougha
mediansternotomy.Itisonlywhen80–90%ofthe
pulmonaryvascularbedisdirectcontinuitywiththe
RV that closure or fenestrated closure of the VSD
can be considered. Usually this will mean that at
least 10–12 bronchopulmonary segments are now
indirectcontinuitywiththeRV.
In group 4 patients it may be necessary to uni-
focalize several large collaterals to the distal end
of conduit from the RV as the initial intervention.
Alternatively several large collaterals could be
unifocalized to an MBTS or central shunt. These
procedures serve to promote pulmonary vascular
growth, prevent the development of PVOD, and
controlthe QP:QS.
Anesthetic management
Thesepatientsaremanagedaccordingtotheprin-
ciples described in the section on Management of
single ventricle physiology, pre-initial repair (see
Table6.11).
Post-CPB management
The management issues in patients with types 1
and 2 TOF/PA having undergone deﬁnitive repair
withRVtoPAconduitandVSDclosurearesimilar
to those encountered in care of the patient hav-
ingundergonerepairforTOF/PS.Afewdifferences
merit discussion. These TOF/PA patients will not
have pulmonary insufﬁciency due to the presence
of a competent valve in the conduit. The place-
mentofaconduitwillhoweverrequirealargerright
ventriculotomyandpotentialforsigniﬁcantRVfree
wallhypo-anddyskinesis.
Themanagementissuesinpatientswithtypes3
and 4 TOF/PA having undergone palliative
aortopulmonary shunt placement or RV to PA
conduitplacementwithoutVSDclosurewillbesim-
ilartothosedescribedforpatientswithalarge,non-
restrictiveVSDand/orPDA.Thiswillbeparticularly
true for patients with a large number of residual
MAPCAs.Inthesepatientspostoperativeemboliza-
tionofsomeMAPCAsinthecardiaccatheterization
laboratorymaybenecessarytocontrolpulmonary
bloodﬂow.
Pulmonary atresia with intact
ventricular septum
Anatomy
There is complete obstruction to RV outﬂow in
pulmonary atresia with intact ventricular septum
(PA/IVS)(Fig.6.40).Thecompleteoutﬂowobstruc-
tion is at the level of the pulmonary valve due
to fusion of the valve cusps. The main PA trunk
and PA branches are generally of normal or near
normal size. The normal RV is tripartite with an
inﬂowregion(tricuspidvalve),abody(thetrabec-
ulated apical component), and an outﬂow region
(infundibulum). In PA/IVS, the RV tends to be
hypoplasticandtricuspidvalvesizegenerallyparal-
lelsRVcavitysize.Inmild-to-moderatehypoplasia,
the apical trabeculated component of the RV is
poorlydevelopedorevenabsent.Withmoresevere
degrees of hypoplasia the infundibulum may be
absent as well. Occasionally the RV is miniscule.
Approximately25%ofpatientshavemildhypopla-
sia,40%havemoderatehypoplasia,and35%have
severehypoplasia.Finally,thereisanASDorpatent
FOandaPDA.
Physiology
PA/IVS is a single ventricle physiology lesion that
may be amenable to a two-ventricle repair but in
many instances patients are staged down the sin-
gle ventricle pathway. PA/IVS is a complex shunt
with complete obstruction to outﬂow. There is aAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 246 — #80
246 Chapter6
Normal
Atretic
pulmonary
valve
Small
(hypoplastic)
right ventricle
Patent (open)
ductus
arteriosus
Pulmonary valve
atresia with
intact ventricular
septum
Fig. 6.40 Anatomyofpulmonary
atresiawithintactventricularseptum
(PA/IVS).Therightventricle(RV)is
hypoplasticwithcompleteobstruction
tooutﬂowduetofusionofthe
pulmonaryvalveleaﬂets.Pulmonary
bloodﬂowissuppliedbythepatent
ductusarteriosus(PDA).Thereis
tricuspidregurgitationandright-to-left
(R–L)shuntingattheatriallevel.
communication(ASDorpatentFO)andacomplete
obstruction to RV outﬂow (PA). RV pressures
may be 2–3times systemic and RA pressure is
elevated. RV ﬁlling volume in diastole is essen-
tially equal to the volume of blood that is regur-
gitated back across the tricuspid valve in systole.
Consequently, there is an obligatory physiologic
R–L shunt at the atrial level, with complete mix-
ingofsystemicandpulmonaryvenousbloodinthe
LA.WhentheASDorFOisrestrictive,therewillbe
alargerightatrialtoLAPgradient.Thiswillresultin
poordecompressionoftheRAandsystemicvenous
congestion. Pulmonary blood ﬂow is provided by
adownstreamshunt(PDA).
Persistently high RV pressures in the prenatal
and neonatal period may result in enlargement
of the Thesbesian veins leading to the develop-
mentofanomalousﬁstulousconnectionsbetween
theRVandtheepicardialcoronaryarteries.Retro-
gradecoronarybloodﬂowthroughtheseventricu-
locoronary connections predisposes the coronary
circulation to development of proximal obstruc-
tive lesions from ﬁbrous myointimal hyperplasia.
As a result of these changes, myocardium distal
toanyproximalcoronaryocclusionwillbedepen-
dent on a high RV pressure to provide retrograde
perfusionviaventriculocoronaryconnections.This
physiologyisdescribedasright-ventricledependent
coronarycirculation(RVDCC).
Surgical therapy
Coronary angiography is performed in all patients
PA/IVS to assess RV and tricuspid valve function
and to assess for the presence of RVDCC. Surgical
therapy has two objectives: provision of enough
pulmonary blood ﬂow to replace the PDA, and if
possible,reliefofRVoutﬂowobstructionsuchthat
forwardﬂowthroughthetricuspidvalve,RV,and
PAisestablished.DecompressionoftheRViscon-
traindicatedinthepresenceofRVDCC.Myocardial
ischemia or infarction distal to coronary lesions
may occur when perfusion pressure via ventricu-
locoronary connections is reduced by RV decom-
pression. Fistulous connections between the RV
andtheepicardialcoronaryarteriesintheabsence
of proximal coronary obstructive lesions are not a
contraindicationtoRVdecompression.
Forward ﬂow through the RV may promote
continued growth of the RV. If the RV is large
and only pulmonary valvular atresia exists, a pul-
monary valvulotomy or a RV outﬂow transannu-
lar patch may be all that is necessary. In some
cases, balloon dilation of the pulmonary valve in
the cardiac catheterization laboratory is sufﬁcient.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 247 — #81
CongenitalHeartDisease 247
BecausedecompressionoftheRAandRVwilloccur
as long as the ASD or FO is open, the ASD or
FO cannot be closed unless the RV is capable of
providing all of the pulmonary blood ﬂow with-
out failing. If the RV is hypoplastic and the valve
is severely atretic, a MBTS in combination with a
RV outﬂow tract transannular patch may be nec-
essarytoprovideadequatepulmonarybloodﬂow.
Because the infundibulum may be very hypertro-
phiedandtheinfundibularmuscleusuallyisquite
ﬁbrotic the incision for the transannular patch is
carriedwelldownintothebodyoftheRV.ThePDA
is almost always ligated at the time of the initial
procedure.
Following neonatal intervention one of the
followingoptionsexistdependingonthepresence
or absence of RVDCC and the size of the RV and
tricuspid valve. In all of the repairs described the
MBTS,ifpresentisligated.
• Fontan procedure (TCPC). Staging to the fenes-
tratedFontanviaasuperiorcavopulmonaryshunt
isreservedforpatientswithRVDCCorforpatients
withseverelyhypoplasticRVs.
• One-and-a-quarter ventricle repair. In patients
with non-RVDCC and some RV mass this repair
which consists of a BDG and an atriopulmonary
connection between the roof of the RA and
theundersurfaceoftherightPAoppositetheBDG
anastomosis in conjunction with an RV outﬂow
patchandafenestratedASD(R–L“pop-off”)orASD
closurecanbeconsidered.Thisrepairallowsasmall
amountofSVCandIVCbloodtocrossthetricuspid
valveandbeejectedbytheRVantegradeintothe
pulmonarybed.
• One-and-a-half ventricle repair. In patients with
non-RVDCC and mild to moderate RV hypoplasia
thisrepair,whichconsistsofaBDGinconjunction
with an RV outﬂow patch and a fenestrated ASD
(R–L“pop-off”)orASDclosure,canbeconsidered.
This repair allows IVC blood to cross the tricuspid
valveandbeejectedbytheRVantegradeintothe
pulmonarybed.
• Two-ventricle repair.Inpatientswithnon-RVDCC
andmildRVhypoplasiathisrepair,whichconsists
ofaRVoutﬂowpatchandafenestratedASD(R–L
“pop-off”)orASDclosure,canbeconsidered.This
repairallowsallornearlyallsystemicvenousblood
tocrossthetricuspidvalveandbeejectedbytheRV
antegradeintothepulmonarybed.
InalloftheserepairsthefenestratedASDcanbe
closedatalaterdateinthecardiaccatheterization
laboratory if there is minimal R–L shunting and
RAhypertensionisnotpresentfollowingtemporary
balloonocclusion.
Anesthetic management
Goals
Thesepatientsaremanagedaccordingtotheprin-
ciples described in the section on Management of
single ventricle physiology, pre-initial repair (see
Table6.11).Subsequentmanagementforthesupe-
rior cavopulmonary shunt and Fontan procedure
is described in later portions of the section on
Managementofsingleventriclephysiology.
Thesepatientshaveductaldependantpulmonary
blood ﬂow. Patients with PA/IVS are particularly
vulnerabletomyocardialischemiabecauseevenin
the absence of RVDCC the coronary arteries are
supplied in part retrograde from the body of the
RV.Myocardialdepressionispoorlytoleratedboth
becauseitmayreducepulmonarybloodﬂowacross
arestrictivePDAandbecausecoronarybloodﬂow
may be compromised if aortic pressure and RV
pressurefalls.
Post-CPB management
Mostofthesepatientsaremanagedaccordingtothe
principlesdescribedinthesectiononManagement
of single ventricle physiology, post-CPB manage-
ment(seeTable6.11).Subsequentmanagementfor
thesuperiorcavopulmonaryshuntandFontanpro-
cedure if necessary is described in later portions
of the section on Management of single ventricle
physiology.
OnlythosepatientswithanRVlargeenoughto
require only a transannular patch will not exhibit
single ventricle physiology. For a given cardiac
output and QP:QS patients with a transannular
patch and a MBTS will have less of a volume
load on the LV. Following decompression of the
RV PA/IVS patients are vulnerable to myocardial
ischemia because even in the absence of RVDCCAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 248 — #82
248 Chapter6
thecoronaryarteriesaresuppliedinpartretrograde
fromthebodyoftheRV.
Truncus arteriosus
Anatomy
A single great vessel arising from the base of the
heart and giving rise to the pulmonary, coronary,
and systemic arteries characterizes truncus arte-
riosus. There is a single semilunar valve, which
is usually abnormal, and invariably a large (non-
restrictive) conoventricular septal VSD is present.
The truncus straddles this large VSD (Fig. 6.41).
Truncus arteriosus is classiﬁed based on the origin
of the pulmonary arteries. In type 1, a short pul-
monarytrunkoriginatesfromthetruncusandgives
rise to both pulmonary arteries. In type 2, both
pulmonary arteries arise from a common oriﬁce
of the truncus, whereas in type 3, the right and
left pulmonary arteries arise separately from the
lateral aspect of the truncus. The VSD usually is
oftheinfundibularorperimembranousinfundibu-
lar type. The truncal valve is tricuspid in most
patients,butmultiplecusps(4–7)arecommonand
Ao
PA
LA
VSD
RA
RV
LV
Fig. 6.41 Anatomyoftruncusarteriosus.Type1
truncusarteriosusisillustratedherewithashort
pulmonarytrunkarisingfromthetruncus.Thereisa
largeconoventricularseptalventricularseptaldefect
(VSD)withtruncaloverride.Ao,aorta;LA,leftatrium;
LV,leftventricle;PA,pulmonaryartery;RA,right
atrium;RV,rightventricle.
the valve itself may be regurgitant or stenotic.
Extracardiac anomalies are seen in approximately
30%ofpatients.
Physiology
Truncus arteriosus is a single ventricle physiol-
ogylesionamenabletoatwo-ventriclerepair.The
large (nonrestrictive) VSD allows equalization of
pressures in the RV and LV. As a result, there is
bidirectionalshuntingandcompletemixingofsys-
temicandpulmonaryvenousbloodinafunctionally
common ventricular chamber. This blood is then
ejectedintothetruncalroot,whichgivesrisetothe
pulmonary,systemic,andcoronarycirculations.As
withallsimpleshunts, QP:QS isdeterminedbythe
ratioofPVRtoSVR.However,intruncusarteriosus,
the pulmonary and systemic circulations are sup-
pliedinparallelfromasinglevessel,andforagiven
ventricularoutputincreasesinﬂowtoonecircula-
torysystemwillproducereductionsinﬂowtothe
other.
As with all single ventricle lesions, a lowQP:QS
willreducearterialsaturation,whereasahigh QP:QS
will produce ventricular volume overload without
asubstantialincreaseinarterialsaturation.Shortly
afterbirththebalanceofPVRandSVRissuchthat
pulmonarybloodﬂowishighandthepatientwith
truncusarteriosushassymptomsofCHFwithmild
cyanosis.Aftercardiacreservehasbeenexhausted,
further decreases in PVR will increase pulmonary
bloodﬂowattheexpenseofsystemicandcoronary
perfusion.Thiswillproduceaprogressivemetabolic
acidosis.Iftruncalvalveinsufﬁciencyispresent,this
willobviouslyimposeanadditionalvolumeloadon
theventricles.Giventhehighpulmonarybloodﬂow
andthetransmissionofsystemicarterialpressures
tothepulmonaryvasculaturepresentinthislesion
developmentofPVODisrapid.Withdevelopment
ofPVODtherewillbeaprogressivedecreaseinpul-
monarybloodﬂowrelativetosystemicbloodﬂow
andprogressivehypoxemia.
Surgical therapy
BecauseoftheriskofearlydevelopmentofPVOD,
surgicalinterventionwithintheﬁrstmonthsoflife
isundertaken.Deﬁnitiverepairoftruncusarterio-
susrequirespatchclosureoftheVSD,detachmentAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 249 — #83
CongenitalHeartDisease 249
of the pulmonary arteries from the truncus, and
establishment of right ventricular to PA continu-
itywithavalvedhomograft.TheRVtoPAconduit
requires placement of the proximal end of the
conduitoveraventriculotomyintheRVfreewall.
Thetruncalvalvesmustbeassessedatthetimeof
surgery.Insomeinstances,valverepairorreplace-
mentisnecessarytoaddressvalvularinsufﬁciency
or stenosis. Valvuloplasty is preferred over valve
replacement. Valve replacement in a child neces-
sitatessubsequentreplacementsasthechildgrows.
Management of the systemic anticoagulation nec-
essary with a mechanical valve is also difﬁcult in
growingchildren.TheRVtoPAvalvedconduitwill
eventuallyrequirereplacementasthechildgrows.
Anesthetic management
Goals
Thesepatientsaremanagedaccordingtotheprin-
ciples described in the section on Management of
single ventricle physiology, pre-initial repair (see
Table6.11).Thisisanonductaldependantlesion.
Post-CPB management
Goals
1 Maintain heart rate (preferably sinus rhythm)
atanage-appropriaterate.Cardiacoutputislikely
to be more heart-rate-dependent in the post-CPB
period.
2 ReducePVRwhennecessarythroughventilatory
interventions.
3 Inotropic support of the left and RV may be
necessary for the reasons addressed previously.
Dobutamine (5–10 µg/kg/min) or dopamine
(5–10 µg/kg/min)isusefulinthisinstancebecause
they provide potent inotropic support without
increasing PVR. Milrinone (0.5–1.0µg/kg/min fol-
lowingaloadingdoseof50 µg/kg)shouldbeconsid-
eredforitsinotropicandlusitrophiceffectsaswell
asitsabilitytoreducePVR.
SomedegreeofRVdysfunctionislikelytoexist
duetothepresenceofaventriculotomyandalarge
VSDpatch.Thiswillbeparticularlyproblematicin
patients with high PVR or early PVOD. Left ven-
tricular volume overload may occur secondary to
truncalvalveinsufﬁciency.
Interrupted aortic arch
Anatomy
ThreetypesofInterruptedaorticarch(IAA)exist:
• Type A.The arch is interrupted distal to the left
subclavian artery at the level of the aortic isth-
mus(similartoveryseverecoarctation).Thistype
comprises15%ofIAA.
• Type B.The arch is interrupted between the left
common carotid and left subclavian arteries. The
origin of the right subclavian artery is commonly
aberrantarisingfromthedescendingaortadistalto
the interruption. This is the most common man-
ifestation of IAA and comprises 80% of all IAA
(Fig.6.42).
• Type C. The arch is interrupted between the
innominateandtheleftcommoncarotidandarter-
ies.ThisistheleastcommonmanifestationofIAA
andcomprises5%ofallIAA.
In all cases the aorta distal to the interrup-
tion is supplied by the DA. There is invariably
1
2
3
Fig.6.42 Anatomyofinterruptedaorticarch(IAA)with
associatedventricularseptaldefect(VSD).TypeBIAAis
illustratedherewiththeinterruptionbetweentheleft
carotidandleftsubclavianarteries(1).Thereisalarge
conoventricularseptaldefect(3)withoutsigniﬁcant
posteriormalalignmentoftheconalseptum.Thedistal
aorta(2)andleftsubclavianarteryaresuppliedbythe
patentductusarteriosus(PDA).Asaresulttherewillbe
differentialcyanosiswithalowerSa O2 inthelowerbody
andleftarmthanintherightarmandcerebral
circulation.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 250 — #84
250 Chapter6
alargeconoventricularseptaldefectwithposterior
malalignment of the conal septum. The posterior
malalignment can produce subaortic LV outﬂow
tract obstruction. The aortic valve is commonly
bicuspidwithcommissuralfusion.
Physiology
IAAissingleventriclephysiologylesionwithduc-
tal dependent systemic blood ﬂow amenable to a
two-ventricle repair. IAA is a complex shunt with
completeobstructiontoaorticoutﬂowatthelevel
of the interruption. A simple downstream shunt
(PDA)providesaorticﬂowdistaltotheinterruption.
Flowtotheaortaproximaltotheobstructionissup-
pliedbytheLV.Inadditionthereisasimpleshunt
(VSD) and there may be ﬁxed obstruction to LV
outﬂow(subaorticstenosis).Thereisaphysiologic
L–RshuntattheleveloftheVSD.Inthepresence
ofsigniﬁcantLVOTOtheremaybecompromiseof
proximalaorticperfusionduetoalargeL–Rshunt.
ThereispredominantlyaphysiologicR–Lshuntat
thelevelofthePDA.Asaresulttherewillbediffer-
entialcyanosiswithalowerSa O2inthelowerbody
and arch vessels distal to the interruption than in
thearchvesselsproximaltotheinterruption.
The shunt at the level of the PDA is a depen-
dentshuntwithnetsystemicandpulmonaryblood
ﬂow determined by the ratio of systemic to PVR.
LowPVRrelativetoSVRwillallowrun-offofblood
into the pulmonary circuit (increased physiologic
L–RshuntingatthePDA)compromisingdistalaor-
tic perfusion. Closure of the PDA in infants with
IAAterminatesdistalaorticﬂowseverelycompro-
mising splanchnic perfusion and usually results in
immediatecardiovascularcollapse.PGE 1 therapyis
lifesavingforthesepatients.
Surgical therapy
DeﬁnitivesurgicaltherapyforIAAinvolvesprimary
re-anastomosis of the proximal and distal aorta,
PDAligation,VSDclosure,andresectionofsubaor-
ticstenosisifpresent.ArterialcannulationforCPB
requirestheuseoftwoarterialcannula.Cannula-
tionisobtaineddirectlyintheascendingaortaand
in the descending aorta via the PDA. In order to
reduce tension on the arch anastomosis it may be
necessary to divide and ligate the left subclavian
artery during repair of type B IAA. In addition, it
may be necessary to divide and ligate an aberrant
rightsubclavianarteryifpresenttoreducetension
onthedescendingaorticportionoftheanastomosis.
Anesthetic management
Goals
Thesepatientsaremanagedaccordingtotheprin-
ciples described in the section on Management of
single ventricle physiology, pre-initial repair (see
Table6.11).Thesepatientshaveductaldependant
distalaorticbloodﬂow.Thediastolicbloodpressure
will be lower and the pulse pressure wider in the
distalascomparedtoproximalaorta.Arterialmon-
itoring sites must be chosen carefully. Right radial
artery pressure will reﬂect distal aortic pressure in
thepresenceofanaberrantrightsubclavianartery.
If the left subclavian artery is divided and ligated
duringrepair,aleftradialarteriallinewillbeoflittle
usepost-repair.
Post-CPB management
Goals
1 Maintain heart rate (preferably sinus rhythm)
atanage-appropriaterate.Cardiacoutputislikely
to be more heart-rate-dependent in the post-CPB
period.
2 ReducePVRwhennecessarythroughventilatory
interventions.
3 Inotropic support of the left and RV may be
necessary for the reasons addressed previously.
Dobutamine (5–10 µg/kg/min) or dopamine
(5–10 µg/kg/min)isusefulinthisinstancebecause
they provide potent inotropic support with-
out increasing PVR. Milrinone (0.5–1.0µg/kg/min
should be considered for its lusitrophic effects and
iteffectonPVR.
Determining whether there is a residual arch
obstruction is a priority following termination of
CPB.Thisrequiresaccuratesimultaneousmeasure-
mentsofbothupperandloweraorticbloodpressure
obtained with either percutaneously or surgically
placedcatheters.Asigniﬁcantgradientmayneces-
sitate surgical revision. Bleeding from the arch
suture lines may be signiﬁcant. Residual LVOTO
may produce LV contractility/afterload mismatch.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch06” — 2007/7/16 — 12:39 — page 251 — #85
CongenitalHeartDisease 251
ElevatedPVRduetoLAhypertensionandreactive
pulmonary vasoreactivity due to highQP:QS pre-
operativelymayresultinRVcontractility/afterload
mismatch as well. In addition, the long CPB and
deephypothermiccirculatoryarrest(DHCA)times
necessary to complete this procedure may fur-
thercompromiseLVandRVfunctionandproduce
myocardialedema.
Suggested reading
Barnea O, Santamore WP, Rossi Aet al. Estimation of
oxygen delivery in newborns with a univentricular
circulation. Circulation1998;98:1407–13.
Bellinger DC, Wypij D, duPlessis AJ et al. Neuro-
developmental status at 8years in children with
dextro-transposition of the great arteries: the Boston
Circulatory Arrest Trial. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg
2003;126:1385–96.
Hoskote A, Li J, Hickey Cet al. The effects of carbon
dioxideonoxygenationandsystemic,cerebral,andpul-
monaryvascularhemodynamicsafterthebidirectional
superiorcavopulmonaryanastomosis. J Am Coll Cardiol
2004;44:1501–9.
Ikemba CM, Su JT, Stayer SA et al. Myocardial
performance index with sevoﬂurane–pancuronium
versus fentanyl–midazolam–pancuronium in infants
with a functional single ventricle. Anesthesiology
2004;101:1298–305.
Laird TH, Stayer SA, Rivenes SMet al. Pulmonary-to-
systemicbloodﬂowratioeffectsofsevoﬂurane,isoﬂu-
rane, halothane, and fentanyl/midazolam with 100%
oxygeninchildrenwithcongenitalheartdisease. Anesth
Analg2002;95:1200–6.
Ramamoorthy C, Tabbutt S, Kurth CD et al. Effects
of inspired hypoxic and hypercapnic gas mixtures
on cerebral oxygen saturation in neonates with
univentricular heart defects. Anesthesiology 2002;96:
283–8.Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch07” — 2007/7/17 — 20:31 — page 252 — #1
CHAPTER 7
Anesthesia for Heart,Heart-Lung,
and Lung Transplantation
Hearttransplantation
Cardiac transplantation is now common among
patients with end-stage cardiac dysfunction that is
unresponsive to maximal medical therapy and
for which no other surgical options exist. Most
adult patients are New York Heart Association
(NYHA) functional class IV (symptoms at rest).
These patients have an expected 1-year survival
of approximately 50–60% with optimal medi-
cal therapy. A subgroup of ambulatory NYHA
functional class III patients (symptoms with lim-
ited exertion) with an impairment of exercise
tolerance (V O2max < 14 mL/kg/min) predictive of
reduced 1-year survival also can be considered for
transplantation.
For infants and children,the natural history
of end-stage cardiac dysfunction is not as well
delineated in large part because of the hetero-
geneity of the various congenital lesions. In addi-
tion,end-stage cardiac dysfunction is more difﬁcult
to deﬁne. Growth failure secondary to severe
cardiac dysfunction is useful in identifying end-
stage disease. Progressive pulmonary hypertension,
which could preclude transplantation at a later
date,also is considered an important indication for
transplantation.
Ninety percent of adult patients presenting for
cardiac transplantation have a dilated cardiomy-
opathy (DCM) secondary to ischemic heart disease.
Less commonly,patients with end-stage valvular
heart disease or with intractable,life-threatening
arrhythmias not amenable to medical therapy or
insertion of an implanted cardioverter deﬁbrillator
(ICD) are transplanted. Cardiac transplantation also
has been used for unresectable cardiac tumors,
sarcoidosis,amyloidosis,active myocarditis,hyper-
trophic cardiomyopathies,and refractory angina
not amenable to angioplasty or surgical revascu-
larization. Heart transplantation for patients with
amyloidosis and sarcoidosis is tempered by evidence
that systemic progression of these diseases may limit
the long-term effectiveness of heart transplantation.
In patients with acute myocarditis there is evidence
of higher mortality and rejection rates.
DCM and complex congenital heart disease repre-
sent the two major indications for heart transplanta-
tion for pediatric patients. In patients younger than
1 year of age,65% of transplants are for congenital
heart disease,primarily hypoplastic left heart syn-
drome (HLHS). In patients between 1 and 10 years
of age,the indications for heart transplantation are
divided equally between congenital heart disease
and DCM. Most children requiring transplantation
for congenital lesions in this age group have had
at least one previous cardiac surgical procedure. In
patients between 11 and 17 years of age,the primary
indication (60%) for heart transplantation is DCM.
Contraindications to heart transplantation are
outlined in Table 7.1. Severe osteoporosis,active
peptic ulcer,diverticular disease,active infection,
and morbid obesity all are conditions that are
252Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch07” — 2007/7/17 — 20:31 — page 253 — #2
Heart,Heart-Lung,and Lung Transplantation 253
Table7.1 Recipient selection for heart and heart-lung
transplantation.
Absolute contraindications
1 History of emotional instability, medical
noncompliance, or active substance abuse
2 Fixed pulmonary hypertension (for cardiac
transplantation, not for lung or heart-lung
transplantation)
3 Signiﬁcant cerebral vascular disease
4 Active malignancy or life-limiting co-existent disease
Relative contraindications
1 Physiological age older than 60years
2 Signiﬁcant peripheral vascular disease
3 Active peptic ulcer or diverticular disease
4 Severe bronchitis or chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (for cardiac transplantation, not for lung or
heart-lung transplantation)
5 Disease likely to recur in allograft (cardiac amyloidosis
or sarcoidosis)
6 Irreversible hepatic or renal disease (may be
considered for combined cardiac and renal or hepatic
transplantation)
7 Immunological sensitization to donor antigens
8 Severe osteoporosis
9 Morbid obesity
10 Active infection
11 Diabetes mellitus with end-organ dysfunction
likely to be worsened by the necessity of a lifelong
immunosuppressive regiment including steroids.
Corticosteroids also complicate the glucose man-
agement in diabetes. Nonetheless,carefully selected
patients with diabetes without end-organ dysfunc-
tion have been shown to have 2- to 4-year survival
similar to nondiabetics. Chronic lung disease iden-
tiﬁed as a forced expiratory volume (FEV)< 50%
predicted,a forced expiratory volume in 1 second
(FEV1)< 1 L,and a forced expiratory volume in
1 second to forced vital capacity (FEV 1:FVC) ratio
<1 is believed to predispose postoperative res-
piratory failure,reduced survival from lung dis-
ease alone,and an increased risk of infection
on immunosuppression. Survival is favorable for
elderly patients,but careful selection is necessary,
particularly for patients older than 65 years of age,
because they are at increased risk for infectious and
steroid complications.
Pathophysiologyandadaptation
ofDCM
The etiologies of DCM can be summarized as
follows:
• Idiopathic. Idiopathic cardiomyopathy is an irre-
versible form of DCM for which no clear etio-
logical factors have been identiﬁed. Familial and
genetic factors,viral and other cyotoxic insults,
immune abnormalities,and metabolic,energetic,
and contraction abnormalities all have been impli-
cated in the pathogenesis of idiopathic DCM. It is
likely that several factors interact to cause disease
in susceptible patients.
• Secondary. A variety of etiological factors,both
acquired and hereditary cause or at least pre-
dispose to development of a DCM. The majority
of secondary DCMs are irreversible and are due
to ischemic heart disease,hypertension,valvu-
lar heart disease,or congenital heart disease.
Some secondary DCMs are potentially reversible.
Toxins (including alcohol and cocaine),pregnancy,
infectious agents (including cytomegalovirus and
toxoplasmosis),and metabolic abnormalities
(including thiamine deﬁciency and hypo- and
hyperthyroidism) are all potentially reversible
forms of secondary DCM.
Regardless of the initiating cause,the alterations
in ventricular function in DCM are remarkably
consistent (Fig. 7.1). Biventricular dysfunction is
common in idiopathic and secondary DCM. In
ischemic cardiomyopathy,dysfunction may be lim-
ited to the left ventricle (LV). Loss of myocar-
dial tissue,as occurs with infarction or from
direct myocardial damage,results in overload and
subsequent hypertrophy of the remaining active
myocardium. For the postinfarction patient,this
process is known as ventricular remodeling. Hyper-
trophy of active myocardium serves to reduce
wall stress and energy consumption. However,the
process of hypertrophy results in changes that
adversely affect myocardial energy balance and
ultimately produces progressive myocardial dys-
function. Increases in capillary density do not
keep pace with replication of sarcomeres. The dis-
tance between capillaries increases resulting in poor
substrate delivery to hypertrophied myocardium.
In addition,the process of hypertrophy increasesAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch07” — 2007/7/17 — 20:31 — page 254 — #3
254 Chapter 7
Normal
heart
End-stage
DCM
250
200
150
LV pressure (mmHg)
100
50
0
50 100 150 200 250
LV volume (cc)
300 350 400 450
Fig.7.1 Pressure–volume (PV) loops from
a normal heart and a dilated
cardiomyopathic (DCM) heart. The DCM
heart is dilated,has depressed systolic
function,has reduced stroke volume at rest,
and is prone to afterload mismatch. Stroke
volume at rest for each heart is represented
by the solid PV loop. Stroke volume after an
increase in afterload with preload and
contractility held constant is represented by
the dotted PV loop. Note the marked
decrease in stroke volume in the DCM as
compared with the normal heart with
comparable increases in afterload.
the cellular ratio of myoﬁbrils to mitochondria,
creating the potential for oxygen imbalance at
the cellular level. Eventually,myocardial necrosis
results in replacement of myocardium with con-
nective tissue. This produces progressive impair-
ment of contractility,which in turn,stimulates
further hypertrophy and progression of myocardial
necrosis. Ventricular dilatation occurs as the result
of this progressive replacement of myocardium
with connective tissue. Eccentric hypertrophy in
the surviving myocardium further accelerates the
development of ventricular dilatation.
Metabolic down-regulation and uncoupling of
cardiac β-receptors is a common feature in DCM.
There is also depletion of myocardial norepine-
phrine (NE) stores. As a result,NE secretion is
enhanced in patients with low-output cardiac fail-
ure with the degree of elevation paralleling the
severity of the failure. Serum NE levels may be
two-to-three times normal due to enhanced release
and reduced reuptake of NE by adrenergic termi-
nals. The consequence of prolonged elevation of
serum NE is gradual down-regulation (reduction in
receptor density) of cardiac βl-receptors and partial
uncoupling of cardiac βl-receptors from adenylate
cyclase. Interestingly,there is a greater decrease in
the density of βl-adrenergic receptors in patients
with idiopathic cardiomyopathy as compared with
ischemic cardiomyopathy. This may be due to
long-term adrenergic over-stimulation or anti- β-
receptor antibodies in idiopathic cardiomyopathy.
Uncoupling of βl-adrenoreceptors from the effector
enzyme adenylate cyclase involves phosphorylation
of the receptors by β-adrenergic receptor kinase.
Progressive cardiac dysfunction also produces an
increase in the ratio of the inhibitory guanine
nucleotide regulatory protein (G i) to the stimula-
tory guanine nucleotide regulatory protein (G s).
Gi inhibits and G s stimulates adenylate cyclase.
Uncoupling of βl-adrenoreceptors and an increased
ratio of Gi:Gs both result in reduced levels of cyclic
adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) and reduced
movement of calcium into myocytes. The conse-
quence of down regulation of βl-receptors,uncou-
pling of βl-receptors,and an increased G i:Gs
ratio is an impaired ability of DCM hearts to
produce cAMP. Therefore,the contractile response
of the DCM heart to β-adrenergic receptor ago-
nists (epinephrine,dopamine,dobutamine,isopro-
terenol,and NE) and phosphodiesterase inhibitors
(amrinone,milrinone) is markedly impaired. The
contractile response to raising intracellular calcium
and to cardiac glycosides (digoxin) is retained. In
addition,although the depletion of myocardial NE
stores does not affect the intrinsic contractile func-
tion of the myocardium,it does result in an impaired
contractile response to indirect-acting β-adrenergic
agonists such as ephedrine.
There is persistent inappropriate activation of
the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system despite
absence of salt deprivation and intravascular
volume depletion. This induces expansion of
intravascular and extravascular volume and pro-
motes ﬁbrotic changes in the heart and kidneys.
Counterbalancing this system is the atrial natriuretic
peptide (ANP) and brain natriuretic peptide (BNP)Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch07” — 2007/7/17 — 20:31 — page 255 — #4
Heart,Heart-Lung,and Lung Transplantation 255
system. ANP and BNP are released from secretory
granules in the atria and ventricles respectively in
response to cardiac chamber distention. Both pep-
tides increase salt and water excretion,suppress the
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system,and induce
arterial and venous vasodilation. In compensated
heart failure release of ANP and BNP is sufﬁcient
to counteract the effects of the renin–angiotensin–
aldosterone release induced by mild to moderate
reductions in renal perfusion. In decompensated
heart failure ANP and BNP release is insufﬁcient
to counteract the effects of the renin–angiotensin–
aldosterone release induced by moderate to severe
reductions in renal perfusion. Elevated plasma
levels of BNP are diagnostic for heart failure and
the extent of elevation is a predictor of survival.
Therapy for patients with DCM is directed toward
treatment of neurohormonal abnormalities and
inhibiting or reversing remodeling. Diuretics in
combination with angiotensin-converting enzyme
(ACE) inhibitors (captopril,enalapril) and beta-
blockers (carvedilol,metoprolol) are ﬁrst-line ther-
apy. Beta-blockers and ACE inhibitors alone and
in combination improve symptoms and reduce
mortality. Aldosterone inhibiting drugs (spiro-
lactone,eplerenone) may be useful in patients
with aldosterone escape in whom ACE inhibition
only partially suppresses aldosterone production.
Angiotensin-receptor blockers (ARB) such as lor-
sartan,candesartan,and valsartan are generally
reserved for patients who do not tolerate ACE
inhibitors. Nesiritide,a BNP analog available in
intravenous form,shows some promise in improv-
ing symptoms and reducing hospital stay. Short-
term use however is associated with an increased
risk of renal dysfunction and post-discharge
mortality.
Chronic therapy for DCM is problematic. Digoxin
has been shown to improve ejection fraction (EF),
exercise capacity,and symptoms of heart failure
in DCM. It does not substantially improve sur-
vival however. Acute,intermittent,and long-term
administration of intravenous inotropic agents has
not proved as promising. Dobutamine,dopamine
and milrinone administration have not been
shown to consistently improve exercise capacity or
symptoms. In addition,short-term administration
of these agents is associated with increased post-
discharge mortality particularly in the subset of
patients with ischemic heart disease. Administra-
tion of these agents is recommended only in the
setting of acute hemodynamic compromise in DCM
patients unresponsive to conventional therapy.
An alternative to these cAMP mediated inotropic
agents is calcium-sensitizing agents. Levosimendan
is the only such agent currently clinically avail-
able. It increases inotropy in a cAMP-independent
fashion by inducing a conformational change in
troponin C that increases the sensitivity of tro-
ponin C to intracellular ionized calcium. This results
in a concentration–response relationship between
intracellular calcium and inotropy at lower intra-
cellular ionized calcium levels than seen with
cAMP-mediated agents. This agent shows some
promise in the chronic treatment of patients
with DCM.
Ventriculardiastolicfunctionand
theatrialtransportmechanism
Diastolic dysfunction in the form of impaired
ventricular relaxation and reduced ventricular com-
pliance is seen in DCM. There is rapid equili-
bration of left atrial and ventricular end-diastolic
pressures producing a restrictive mitral inﬂow pat-
tern with abrupt premature closure of the mitral
valve. Progressive ventricular dilatation produces
atrial enlargement due to the longstanding increase
in atrial afterload produced by an elevated ven-
tricular end-diastolic pressure. In many instances,
the atria will be dilated,hypokinetic,and ﬁlled
with spontaneous contrast on echocardiographic
examination. In these patients,the contribution of
atrial systole to ventricular ﬁlling will be minimal.
As a consequence of these changes,patients with
DCM require high mean atrial pressures to ensure
adequate ventricular ﬁlling.
Myocardialoxygenbalance
Oxygen balance is impaired in patients with an
ischemic cardiomyopathy. Myocardial blood ﬂow
abnormalities also are present in patients with
DCM despite the presence of angiography normal
coronary arteries. It has been proposed that func-
tional small-vessel abnormalities due to eitherAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch07” — 2007/7/17 — 20:31 — page 256 — #5
256 Chapter 7
increased vascular tone or endothelial abnormal-
ities account for decreased global baseline myo-
cardial blood ﬂow and impaired coronary reserve
in DCM. Regional perfusion defects also are
seen in 45% of DCM hearts without demon-
strable coronary lesions. Furthermore,myocardial
ischemia has been detected in patients with DCM
who are subjected to pacing-induced tachycardia
and to coronary vasodilation from dipyridamole
infusion.
Leftventricularsystolicfunction
When a patient presents for transplantation,an
EF of 10–20% is likely. Compensation for the
progressive reduction in contractility occurs by
use of preload reserve. As contractility decreases,
end-systolic volume (ESV) increases for a given
afterload. Increases in preload initially can be used
to normalize stroke volume (SV) under these con-
ditions. Preload reserve is exhausted when the
sarcomeres are stretched to their maximum dias-
tolic length. When this occurs,there will be no
further augmentation of the velocity of shorten-
ing by increasing diastolic ﬁber length,and the
ventricle behaves as if preload were ﬁxed. For a
given level of contractility,after preload reserve
has been exhausted,additional increases in after-
load will be accompanied by parallel decreases in
SV. This is deﬁned as a state of afterload mismatch.
Patients with end-stage DCM will have exhausted
preload reserve and will exhibit afterload mismatch
(see Fig. 7.1). In addition,patients with DCM have
a ﬁxed SV due to exhaustion of preload reserve
and an inability to decrease ESV by increasing
contractility.
The result of this compensation process is pro-
gressive ventricular dilatation. Dilatation of the
ventricle has several important consequences.
Ventricular dilatation can produce mitral insufﬁ-
ciency secondary to dilation and deformation of
the valve annulus. This type of functional mitral
insufﬁciency is common in DCM. Dilatation of
the ventricle also results in elevated wall stress
(wall stress =[ P × r]/2h) at the conclusion of
isovolumic contraction for a given left-ventricular
end-systolic pressure (LVESP). Because wall stress
is synonymous with afterload,ventricular dilatation
further compromises systolic function by producing
increased afterload at a given systolic blood
pressure.
Rightventricularfunctionand
thepulmonaryvasculature
In instances in which DCM produces biventricu-
lar dysfunction,the right ventricle (RV) will exhibit
the same alterations in systolic function,afterload
sensitivity,and diastolic dysfunction described for
the LV. The prolonged elevations of left atrial pres-
sure (LAP) seen in progressive DCM have profound
effects on the pulmonary vasculature and right ven-
tricular function. Early in the disease,elevated LAP
is transmitted to the pulmonary venous system
and there is reversible passive elevation of the pul-
monary artery pressures while pulmonary vascular
resistance (PVR) remains normal (see Fig. 5.13).
Right ventricular function remains unchanged. As
the disease progresses,reactive changes occur in
the pulmonary vasculature. Prolonged perivascu-
lar edema results in arterial intimal ﬁbroelastosis
and nonreversible elevations in PVR due to obliter-
ative changes in the distal pulmonary vasculature
known as pulmonary vascular occlusive disease
(PVOD). Progression of this process presents a large
increase in right ventricular afterload similar to
that seen in severe mitral stenosis (see Fig. 5.13).
Similar changes occur in infants and children with
congenital heart disease.
The RV is poorly adapted to generate pressures
that approach systemic. As a result,afterload mis-
match occurs,the RV fails,and RV output falls.
Peripheral edema and hepatic congestion ensue.
RV failure and dilation may lead to functional tricus-
pid regurgitation and worsening symptoms of right
heart failure. In the steady state,RV output and LV
output must be equal. Therefore,LV output is also
limited by RV failure. In cases of severe RV dys-
function or in the presence of systemic pulmonary
artery pressures,there is leftward shift of the intra-
ventricular septum further compromising LV ﬁlling
and function.
When the postischemic donor RV is acutely
exposed to the elevated PVR of the recipient,
severe right heart failure develops secondary to
afterload mismatch. Data from the Registry of the
International Society for Heart and Lung Transplan-
tation has consistently demonstrated a continuousAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch07” — 2007/7/17 — 20:31 — page 257 — #6
Heart,Heart-Lung,and Lung Transplantation 257
relationship between preoperative PVR and postop-
erative mortality. In addition pre-transplant PVR in
excess of 5 Wood units and a transpulmonary gra-
dient in excess of 15 mmHg both have been clearly
associated with increased postoperative mortality in
adults. As a result,increased irreversible PVR eleva-
tions remains an absolute contraindication to heart
transplantation (see Table 7.1).
Most centers perform provocative testing in their
patients with elevated PVR using oxygen,nitric
oxide (NO),sodium nitroprusside,prostaglandin
E1 or a combination of these drugs in patients
with a PVR > 4 Wood units or a pulmonary vas-
cular resistance index (PVRI)> 6 Wood units/m2.
It has been demonstrated that adults in whom
PVR can be reduced using sodium nitroprus-
side or prostaglandin E 1 to <2.5 Wood units while
maintaining a systolic blood pressure >85 mmHg
have a postoperative mortality similar to patients
with a resting PVR < 2.5 Wood units. Mortality in
patients with a pre-transplant PVR > 5 Wood units
and TPG > 15 mmHg who demonstrate a reversible
component to their pulmonary hypertension
do not have increased mortality. Typically a
PVR < 5 Wood units after drug therapy presents an
acceptable risk. Because aggressive postoperative
use of inodilators and selective inhaled pulmonary
vasodilators (NO,prostacyclins) is now routine and
because PVR naturally tends to drop in the period
following transplantation outcome in patients with
elevated PVR has improved.
In children,a PVRI in excess of 6–7 Wood units/m2
and a transpulmonary gradient >15 mmHg have
been associated with increased postoperative mor-
tality. Most centers will consider transplantation
if a PVRI < 4–6 Wood units/m2 and a transpul-
monary gradient <15 mmHg can be obtained
with some combination of inotropes,oxygen,NO,
sodium nitroprusside,or prostaglandin E 1 prior to
transplantation.
Effectofheart-ratealterationson
hemodynamics
Patients with DCM have a ﬁxed SV and,as a
result,are dependent on maintenance of their heart
rate to maintain cardiac output. With exhausted
preload reserve,reductions in heart rate will not
be accompanied by increases in SV as seen in the
normal heart. Therefore,reductions in heart rate
will be accompanied by cardiac output decreases.
Heart-rate increases will reduce diastolic ﬁlling time
and will reduce end-diastolic volume (EDV) and
SV. Heart rate increases generally will result in no
change in cardiac output because the reduction
in SV will be offset by the increase in heart rate.
Elevations in right and LAPs by volume infusion
to compensate for reduced diastolic ﬁlling time are
not practical because they will increase systemic and
pulmonary venous congestion. For patients with an
ischemic DCM,heart-rate increases may exacerbate
myocardial ischemia.
Effectofafterloadalterationson
hemodynamics
Reduced contractility is represented by a linear left
ventricular pressure–volume relationship that has
a less positive slope and is shifted rightward. As
the result of impaired contractile function,patients
with DCM have enhanced sensitivity to afterload
(see Fig. 7.1). Small increases in afterload result
in comparatively large increases in ESV. For a
given EDV; this results in a large reduction in
SV. Conversely,afterload reduction with mainte-
nance of EDV will produce concomitant increases
in SV. This partly explains the unequivocal suc-
cess of vasodilator therapy such as ACE inhibitors
in improving NYHA functional class and reduc-
ing mortality in patients with end-stage DCM.
Aggressive perioperative afterload reduction is dif-
ﬁcult considering the low systolic blood pressure of
most patients with DCM.
Thedonor
The following guidelines are used to select donors
after the diagnosis of irreversible brain death
has been made. Echocardiographic assessment of
donor ventricular and valvular function is routine.
The ﬁnal decision as whether to accept a donor
heart is made by the harvesting surgeon follow-
ing visual inspection of the heart and overall
assessment of donor suitability and hemodynamic
stability.
• Age less than 55 years. Most centers have become
more lenient given the shortage of suitable donors.
For a patient who has had a long waiting list intervalAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch07” — 2007/7/17 — 20:31 — page 258 — #7
258 Chapter 7
and who has been difﬁcult to cross-match the risk
of taking a heart from an older donor who is a good
cross-match may be preferable to the risk of dying
on the waiting list.
• Absence of signiﬁcant cardiac disease or trauma.
Severe myocardial contusion usually is identi-
ﬁed by a history of blunt chest trauma,CPK-MB
and troponin elevations,and echocardiographic
evidence of severe ventricular dysfunction. Patients
who have suffered cardiac arrest are not necessar-
ily excluded from consideration but require sub-
sequent evaluation of function both clinically and
echocardiographically. Generally,a desirable donor
heart is maintained with less than 10 µg/kg/min of
dopamine.
• Low probability of coronary artery disease.
Coronary angiography is not commonly employed
in evaluation of younger donors. Many centers
evaluate male donors older than 45 years of age
and female donors older than 55 years of age with
coronary angiograms.
• No active infection or malignancy with the
possibility of metastases.
• Negative serologies for human immunodeﬁ-
ciency virus/acquired immunodeﬁciency syndrome
(HIV/AIDS) or hepatitis B and C. Donors are also
tested for toxoplasmosis and cytomegalovirus (CMV).
• ABO compatibility and human lymphocyte
antigen (HLA) screen. The donor and recipient must
be ABO blood type compatible. HLA typing for
cardiac transplantation is not routine. The recip-
ient’s blood is tested against a standard panel of
blood cells containing a diverse human lymphocyte
sample. This screen is called the panel reactive
antibody (PRA) screen. If the PRA has 5–15%
reactivity,most centers will proceed with transplan-
tation based on ABO compatibility. If the PRA is
greater than 15%,then a lymphocyte cross-match
between donor and recipient blood can be per-
formed. This is a time-consuming process,as donor
blood must be transported to the transplant center.
Pre- and post-transplant therapy with intravenous
IgG or plasmapheresis may be indicated. Recently,
some success with ABO incompatible transplants
has been achieved in infants due to the imma-
turity of infant ABO isohemagglutinins. Table 7.2
outlines the transfusion strategy that must accom-
pany ABO incompatible transplantation to prevent
immunization.
• Recipient donor size match. For adult patients,
the donor’s body weight should be within 60–150%
of the recipient’s weight. For infants and children
the donor’s weight should be between 80 and 160%
of the recipient’s body weight. Hearts transplanted
into infants and children demonstrate normal car-
diac chamber dimensional growth. Most centers
prefer donors at the upper limits of size for their
adult and pediatric patients with pulmonary hyper-
tension,although data to support this practice are
lacking.
Aggressive hormone replacement therapy (HRT)
is currently utilized by many centers in the sub-
set of heart donors with depressed LV function (left
ventricular ejection fraction(LVEF)< 45%) with or
without hypotension. HRT can be summarized as
follows:
• Triiodothyronine (T 3) supplementation: 4.0 µg
bolus followed by an infusion of 3.0 µg/h.
ABOofheart
recipient
ABOoftransfusedbloodproducts
ABOof
donorheart
Plasma Redcells Platelets
OA B A B O A B
O B AB or B O AB or B
O A AB or A O AB or A
B AB AB O or B AB
B A A B Oo rB A B
A AB AB O or A AB
A B A B Oo rA A B
Table7.2 Transfusion strategy for ABO
incompatable heart transplantation.Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch07” — 2007/7/17 — 20:31 — page 259 — #8
Heart,Heart-Lung,and Lung Transplantation 259
• Vasopressin supplementation: 1.0 unit bolus
followed by 0.5–4.0 units/h infusion to treat dia-
betes insipidus and normalize systemic vascular
resistance (SVR) (800–1200 dynes/s/cm5).
• Steroid supplementation: methylprednisolone
15 mg/kg bolus.
• Insulin supplementation: 1.0 units/h minimum,
increase to keep blood sugar 120–180 mg/dL.
Anestheticmanagementof
therecipient
Goals
1 Avoid increases in afterload; afterload reduction
can be attempted with caution,but EDV must be
maintained.
2 Maintain preload.
3 Maintain or enhance contractility.
4 Maintain heart rate.
5 Avoid hypercarbia,hypoxemia,and acidosis that
tend to cause pulmonary hypertension and may
result in acute RV decompensation.
Preoperativeevaluation
Cardiac transplant patients typical1y undergo
extensive medical evaluation. A summary of this
evaluation is readily available to the anesthesiol-
ogist through the transplant coordinator. Several
unique management problems are common in
patients DCM. Use of an antiﬁbrinolytic should
be considered for patients at risk for postoperative
bleeding.
Ventriculararrhythmias
More than 70% of DCM patients have asymp-
tomatic,nonsustained ventricular tachycardia seen
on ambulatory monitoring. Antiarrhythmic ther-
apy is problematic for these patients considering
the negative inotropic and arrhythmogenic effects
of many of the agents,the altered drug pharmaco-
kinetics in heart failure,and the low efﬁcacy of these
agents for patients with severe LV dysfunction. In
addition,although therapy can reduce ventricular
arrhythmias and improve exercise tolerance and
ventricular function,reduction in the incidence of
sudden death is unproven. An ICD may be nec-
essary for patients with symptomatic ventricular
arrhythmias if medical therapy is not effective or
cannot be tolerated.
Thromboembolicphenomena
Patients with an EF less than 30% and patients
with atrial ﬁbrillation are particularly at risk for the
formation of atrial and ventricular mural thrombi
and subsequent systemic or pulmonary emboliza-
tion. In addition,patients with left ventricular
aneurysms as the result of extensive prior infarction
are also at higher risk for mural thrombus forma-
tion. Long-term oral anticoagulation,primarily with
coumadin,is common for patients with DCM. This
will complicate the management of hemostasis after
termination of cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB).
Preoperativemechanicalventricular
supportandthetotalartiﬁcialheart
At present,the limiting factor in the number of
patients who can be offered a heart transplant is the
availability of donor hearts. In the United States,it
is estimated that although 40 000 patients per year
could beneﬁt from a heart transplant,only approx-
imately 2200 heart transplants are performed
per year. Furthermore,20% of suitable transplant
candidates die before a donor heart can be found.
As a result,mechanical assist devices and the total
artiﬁcial heart are used as a bridge to cardiac trans-
plantation until suitable donor hearts arc found.
Previouscardiacsurgicalprocedures
All patients who have undergone previous car-
diac surgical procedures arc likely to have pro-
longed dissection times and are at risk for bleed-
ing. Adequate intravenous access is a necessity. All
blood products must be CMV compatible and trans-
fused through leukocyte ﬁlters. Many patients with
ischemic DCM will have undergone prior coronary
artery bypass surgery. Nicking or cutting of the
existing extracardiac conduits (internal mammary
arteries and reverse saphenous veins) can severely
compromise myocardial perfusion. Likewise,sur-
gical manipulation of these conduits may result
in embolization of atherosclerotic plaques into the
distal coronary vascular bed with subsequent trans-
mural myocardial ischemia. A determination of
how much myocardium is supplied by the conduitsAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch07” — 2007/7/17 — 20:31 — page 260 — #9
260 Chapter 7
that are patent can be made from the most recent
catheterization report.
Many children with congenital heart disease will
have undergone prior procedures. Physical exam-
ination should include an evaluation of the lim-
itations to vascular access and monitoring sites
imposed by previous surgery and catheterizations.
A child who has undergone a palliative shunt
procedure may have a diminished pulse or an
unobtainable blood pressure in the arm in which
the subclavian artery has been incorporated into
the shunt. Children who have undergone multi-
ple palliative procedures may have poor periph-
eral venous access and previous surgical cut-down
sites may exist. Children having multiple cardiac
catheterizations may have absent or compromised
femoral arterial and venous access. Such ﬁnd-
ings have obvious implications regarding arterial
and venous catheter placement,sphyingomono-
metric blood pressure monitoring,the use of pulse
oximetry,and the mode of induction.
Premedication
Most patients will have been called into the hospi-
tal on short notice and many will have eaten solid
food in the previous 6–8 hours. In addition,patients
will have taken their initial doses of oral immuno-
suppressive drugs,usually cyclosporine and aza-
thioprine or mycophenolate moftil. Cyclosporine
usually is administered with 10–20 mL of liquid. To
reduce the risk of aspiration in adults and older
children,a nonparticulate antacid such as bicitra
(30 mL) should be given in addition to intravenous
metaclopromide 10 mg and an H2-receptor blocker
such as ranitidine 50 mg. For infants and smaller
children,a period of 2–3 hours of NPO (nothing
by mouth) status is sufﬁcient and usually tran-
spires before induction. Premedication with mida-
zolam 0.03–0.05 mg/kg in divided doses works well
to reduce anxiety. In older children with previ-
ous multiple opioid and benzodiazepine exposures,
intravenous ketamine in doses of 0.5–1.0 mg/kg
may be necessary as well. In children without intra-
venous access,oral premedication as will proba-
bly be necessary. Supplemental oxygen should be
administered,because hypoxemia will exacerbate
existing pulmonary hypertension.
Preinduction
Some transplant patients will be receiving intra-
venous inotropic and vasodilator therapy when
they arrive for surgery. These agents should be con-
tinued via a reliable intravenous route. Sterility is of
the utmost importance because the patients will be
immunosuppressed. All patients should have two
large-bore peripheral intravenous lines. Electrocar-
diogram (ECG) monitoring should allow assessment
of V5,I,II,III,aV R,aV L,and aV F. Normally two
leads (II and V 5) are monitored simultaneously
intraoperatively. A radial artery catheter is placed
with local anesthesia before induction of anesthesia.
It is placed after induction in infants and chil-
dren. Patient size or the presence of complex intra-
cardiac anatomy generally precludes placement of
a pulmonary artery catheter in infants and chil-
dren. Pulmonary artery pressures are monitored
post-CPB with a surgically placed transthoracic
PA catheter. Some centers do not place a pul-
monary artery catheter in adult patients for heart
transplantation. The advantages of a pulmonary
artery catheter are discussed in Chapter 3. The
disadvantages as they apply to cardiac transplant
patients are:
• Technical difﬁculty in advancing the catheter in
patients with a dilated RV and low cardiac output.
• An increased risk of atrial and ventricular ectopy
leading to hemodynamic compromise.
• An increased risk of infection.
• The catheter must be withdrawn into the sterile
sheath during excision of the recipient’s heart.
• The catheter must be re-advanced across new
suture lines into the donor heart as CPB is
terminated.
Nonetheless,central venous access is necessary
for pressure monitoring and drug infusion in both
pediatric and adult patients. Some centers pre-
fer that the right internal jugular vein not be
used perioperatively because it is the preferred
route to obtain the endomyocardial biopsies used
to monitor rejection postoperatively. Placement of
a central large-bore venous sheath for use as a
reliable site of rapid ﬂuid administration is war-
ranted if peripheral access is poor. Multiplane
transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) is utilized
to manage pediatric and adult patients pre- andAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch07” — 2007/7/17 — 20:31 — page 261 — #10
Heart,Heart-Lung,and Lung Transplantation 261
post-CPB. After transplantation TEE is used to
assess left and right ventricular function,mea-
sure pulmonary artery pressures (using a tricuspid
regurgitation jet),and guide management of pul-
monary artery hypertension and RV dysfunction if
necessary.
Inductionandmaintenance
The choice of speciﬁc induction agents is less impor-
tant than the realization that patients with DCM
have limited contractile reserve; dependence on
preload,and limited ability to respond to acute
increases or decreases in afterload. In addition,the
circulation time will be slow given the low cardiac
output state. These patients require an induction
that will blunt the hemodynamic response to laryn-
goscopy and tracheal intubation without undue
myocardial depression,vasodilation,and hypoten-
sion. Careful titration of etomidate (0.1–0.3 mg/kg)
in combination with 5–10 µg/kg of fentanyl or
1–2 µg/kg of sufentanil is useful for induction. A full
0.3 mg/kg dose of etomidate is often not neces-
sary to induce hypnosis and loss of consciousness
in these patients. This drug combination has min-
imal direct effect on heart rate,myocardial con-
tractility,peripheral vascular resistance,or venous
capacitance. An overall diminution in central sym-
pathetic tone will also contribute to circulatory
depression. Thiopental and propofol are less well
tolerated. A nondepolarizing muscle relaxant in a
dose 2×ED95 such as vecuronium or pancuronium
0.02 mg/kg or cisatracurium 0.04 mg/kg is used to
assure prompt control of the airway. Pancuronium
is generally reserved for those patients in who a
low baseline heart rate. In infants and children the
vagolytic and sympathometic effects of pancuro-
nium can be used to counteract the vagotonic effects
of fentanyl or sufentanil. Alternatively,rocuro-
nium (1.0 mg/kg) or succinylcholine (1–2 mg/kg)
can be used to perform a modiﬁed rapid sequence
induction (cricoid pressure during positive pressure
ventilation) in the patient with questionable NPO
status.
Anesthesia can be maintained with additional
doses of opioid in conjunction with a benzo-
diazepine (usually midazolam in increments of
0.01–0.03 mg/kg) or a low inhaled concentration
(0.5–0.75 MAC) of isoﬂurane or sevoﬂurane.
Nitrous oxide (N 2O) is not a good choice as an
adjuvant agent; it has a weak myocardial depres-
sant effect that normally is counteracted by the
sympathetic outﬂow it produces. In patients with
DCM where elevated catecholamine levels,down-
regulated β-receptors,and reduced myocardial NE
stores are present,the myocardial depressant effects
will predominate.
In the instance of a child without intravenous
access a careful inhalation induction with 100%
oxygen and sevoﬂurane following oral medication
(ketamine and midazolam) can be considered. Once
intravenous access is obtained anesthesia can be
maintained as described above. An alternative for
induction and maintenance in infants and children
with intravenous access is a high-dose narcotic tech-
nique (50–75 µg/kg of fentanyl or 5.0–7.5 µg/kg of
sufentanil) in conjunction with a benzodiazepine
(usually midazolam) or a low inhaled concentration
of isoﬂurane or sevoﬂurane and pancuronium.
Caution must be used when benzodiazepines are
used in conjunction with synthetic opioids,as
they are synergistic in their effects on venous capac-
itance and SVR. This technique is a good choice
in infants and children as postoperative intubation
ventilation for at least 24 hours is usually necessary.
Regardless of the choice of induction and main-
tenance agent,episodes of hemodynamic com-
promise must be treated promptly. Bradycardia
associated with hemodynamic compromise can be
effectively treated with a small dose of pancuronium
(0.015–0.05 mg/kg) if vecuronium or cisatracurium
has been used. Atropine should be used cautiously.
Atropine administration may initiate tachycardia,
and atropine,unlike βl-adrenergic agents,increases
heart rate without any reduction in the dura-
tion of systole. Therefore,for equal increases in
heart rate,atropine will cause a greater reduction
in the duration of diastole and will compromise
subendocardial perfusion to a greater degree than
a βl-adrenergic agent. Ephedrine (a direct- and
indirect-acting β- and α-agonist) 0.03–0.07 mg/kg is
a reliable agent to increase heart rate without com-
promising diastole. In addition,the augmentation in
diastolic blood pressure obtained is beneﬁcial when
hypotension accompanies bradycardia.Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch07” — 2007/7/17 — 20:31 — page 262 — #11
262 Chapter 7
Tachycardia is detrimental for patients with
ischemic DCM and should be treated to avoid
subendocardial ischemia and hemodynamic com-
promise. The ﬁrst strategy should be to terminate
noxious stimuli and then increase the depth of
anesthesia as necessary. The use of short- or long-
acting beta-blockers is not recommended consid-
ering the presence of severely depressed systolic
function. If hypotension due to reduced SVR occurs,
small doses of phenylephrine (0.5–1.5 µg/kg) and
volume infusion (5 mL/kg) to increase preload to
preinduction levels usually will correct the problem.
Phenylephrine reliably increases SVR. Caution must
be exercised whenα-adrenergic agonists are admin-
istered to patients with severe systolic dysfunction.
The goal should be to normalize SVR. Overzealous
use of phenylephrine will increase afterload,induce
afterload mismatch,and severely reduce SV. If the
patient fails to respond with a prompt increase in
aortic blood pressure,an inotropic agent should
be started to avoid a downward spiral of ventric-
ular dilatation,increased wall stress,reduced SV
and further hypotension. Dobutamine or dopamine
3–5 µg/kg/min are reasonable choices; dopamine
increases SVR more than dobutamine. Using nox-
ious stimulation such as laryngoscopy and intuba-
tion to treat hypotension in the lightly anesthetized
patient with DCM must be avoided. These stim-
uli will produce a sudden,dramatic increase in
afterload. The subsequent afterload mismatch will
produce ventricular dilatation and may produce an
additional reduction in blood pressure.
When surgical stimulation (skin incision,ster-
notomy,sternal spreading,and aortic manipula-
tion) produces hypertension,additional doses of
sufentanil (0.5–2.5 µg/kg) or fentanyl (5–25µg/kg)
are indicated. On occasion control of hypertension
requires the use of vasodilator agents or adjuvant
anesthetic agents. Judicious use of low inspired con-
centrations of isoﬂurane or sevoﬂurane is usually
effective. Sodium nitroprusside is a ready titratable,
potent arteriolar dilator and can be used effectively
to treat hypertension. An infusion can be started
at 0.25 µg/kg/min and titrated upward. However,
because sodium nitroprusside is a potent arterio-
lar dilator,it has the potential to induce a coronary
steal in the presence of the appropriate anatomy.
This may be of concern in patients with DCM of
ischemic origin. Nitroglycerin dilates large coronary
vessels and does not dilate arterioles; therefore,it is
not implicated in the steal phenomena. Nitroglyc-
erin has it greatest dilating capacity on the venous
beds and arterial dilation occurs only at higher
doses. Despite this,when used in appropriate doses,
nitroglycerin and nitroprusside have been shown
to be equally effective in treatment of hyperten-
sion. For treatment of hypertension,nitroglycerin
is started at 0.5 µg/kg/min and may be increased
up to 5 µg/kg/min.
Operativeprocedure
Three surgical techniques exist for orthotopic
heart transplantation: the biatrial technique
(Figs 7.2–7.4),the bicaval technique,and the
total technique. These procedures are performed
through a median sternotomy with hypother-
mic CPB,bicaval cannulation,and aortic cross-
clamping. After commencement of CPB using the
biatrial technique the recipient’s heart is excised
to just above the atrioventricular groove,leaving:
a large cuff of left atrium containing all four pul-
monary veins,a large cuff of right atrium containing
the superior vena cava (SVC) and inferior vena cava
(IVC),the ascending aorta just distal to the aortic
valve,and the main pulmonary artery just distal to
the pulmonic valve.
The donor left and right atria are anastomosed
to the cuffs of the recipient left and right atria
while the donor and recipient aorta and pulmonary
artery are anastomosed. This technique creates large
atrial cavities with abnormal geometry. This results
in a less than optimal contribution of atrial sys-
tole to ventricular ﬁlling. In addition,the distorted
anatomy contributes to the development of func-
tional mitral and tricuspid regurgitation. It also is
associated with the development of atrial septal
aneurysms,atrial thrombus,and sinus node injury.
These problems have led to application of the
more anatomical bicaval and total techniques.
Currently,the bicaval technique is the most com-
mon technique used. These techniques result in bet-
ter atrial function,a lower incidence of early and late
atrial arrhythmias,and less tricuspid regurgitation.Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch07” — 2007/7/17 — 20:31 — page 263 — #12
Heart,Heart-Lung,and Lung Transplantation 263
(a)
(b)
Fig.7.2 Operative technique for biatrial orthotopic
heart transplantation. (a) The recipient heart has been
excised leaving a cuff of right atrium containing the
superior vena cava (SVC) and inferior vena cava (IVC)
and a cuff of left atrium containing all four pulmonary
veins. The beginning of the left atrial anastomosis is
depicted. The sinoatrial (SA) node of the donor heart
is depicted by the dashed oval in the right atrium. The
donor SVC is ligated. (b) Details of the anastomosis
between the recipient and donor left atria.
Whether they will result in long-term freedom from
pacemaker implantation and better cardiac function
remains to be determined.
In the bicaval technique,the recipient’s atria are
completely excised,leaving the SVC,the IVC,and
a small cuff of left atrium containing all four pul-
monary veins. In the total technique,the recipient’s
atria are completely excised,leaving the SVC,the
IVC,and two small cuffs of left atrium: one contain-
ing the two right pulmonary veins and the other
(a)
(b)
Fig.7.3 (a) The left atrial anastomosis is complete
and the new intra-atrial septum is being completed.
(b) The right atrial anastomosis is being completed using
a portion of the donor IVC.
the two left pulmonary veins. In the bicaval
technique,there are ﬁve anastomoses: the donor
SVC,IVC,and posterior left atrium are anastomosed
to the recipient SVC,IVC,and one pulmonary vein
cuff while the donor and recipient aorta and pul-
monary artery are anastomosed. In the total tech-
nique there six anastomoses: the donor SVC,IVC,
and posterior left atrium are anastomosed to the
recipient SVC,IVC,and two pulmonary vein cuffs
while the donor and recipient aorta and pulmonary
artery are anastomosed.
For children with congenital heart lesions,the
technical aspects of the surgical procedure are more
challenging. For example,for patients with HLHS,
the aorta must be reconstructed. For children hav-
ing undergone a Fontan or bidirectional Glenn
procedure,a caval reconstruction may be necessary.
Pulmonary artery (PA) reconstruction may beAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch07” — 2007/7/17 — 20:31 — page 264 — #13
264 Chapter 7
Fig.7.4 Details of the completed aortic and pulmonary
artery anastomoses. The aortic cannula and cross-clamp
are depicted. In an effort to reduce the ischemic interval,
the surgeon may release the aortic cross-clamp after
completion of the atrial and aortic suture lines and
complete the pulmonary artery anastomosis while the
heart is being re-perfused.
necessary for patients with pulmonic atresia or RV
to PA conduits.
Post-CPBmanagement
Goals
1 Maintain sinus rhythm at 100–120 b/min in
adults and older children and at 130–150 b/min in
neonates and infants. Atrial or atrioventricular (AV)
sequential pacing may be required.
2 Avoid pulmonary artery hypertension by treating
hypercarbia,hypoxemia,and acidosis.
3 Aggressively treat pulmonary artery hyperten-
sion with vasodilator therapy to avoid RV failure.
If RV failure does occur,inotropic support of the RV
and pulmonary vasodilation may be necessary.
4 Maintain right atrial pressure (RAP) and LAP to
optimize SV in the setting of increased ventricular
stiffness.
5 Inotropic support of the LV may be necessary if
the ischemic interval is long.
PreparationforterminationofCPB
The following issues need to be considered when
formulating a plan for termination of CPB in a
patient with a newly transplanted heart.
Impairedsystolicfunction
Systolic dysfunction in the donor heart may occur
for a variety of reasons.
• Ischemia-reperfusion injury . This is the most
common cause of allograft systolic dysfunction
post-CPB. Preservation of the donor heart involves
application of the aortic cross-clamp and delivery
of cold cardioplegia to induce arrest in diastole,
followed by cold storage at 4◦C. The ischemic inter-
val,the time from when the aortic cross-clamp
is applied in the donor until the aortic cross-
clamp is removed after implantation of the heart
in the recipient is extremely important. The longer
this ischemic interval,the more likely there is to
be biventricular systolic dysfunction secondary to
myocardial ﬁbrosis. Because there is an incremen-
tal increase in mortality with ischemic times greater
than 3.5 hours,it is desirable to keep the interval at
less than 4 hours. In an effort to reduce the ischemic
interval,the surgeon may release the aortic cross-
clamp after completion of the atrial and aortic suture
lines and complete the pulmonary artery anastomo-
sis while the heart is being reperfused. Prolonged
and excessive inotropic support of the donor heart
before cross-clamping also is undesirable because it
contributes to post-transplant ischemic dysfunction.
• Brain death . Abrupt increases in intracranial
pressure as the source of brain death result in
greater degree of myocardial ischemia and necro-
sis (particularly of the RV) than gradual increases in
intracranial pressure. There is evidence that early
survival following heart transplantation is reduced
in patients receiving hearts from donors dying of
gunshot wounds to the head and from donors
dying from spontaneous intracranial hemorrhage.
Donors who experience brain death as the result of a
sudden rise in intracranial pressure exhibit a hyper-
dynamic cardiovascular response,massive increases
in plasma epinephrine,and histological evidence of
severe myocardial ischemia and necrosis.
• Hyperacute rejection. This rare event is caused by
ABO blood group incompatibility or cytotoxic recip-
ient antibodies directed against donor lymphocytes.
It presents as cyanosis and mottling of the allo-
graft in conjunction with profoundly impaired sys-
tolic function. It is impossible to separate these
patients from CPB for any extended period of time.Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch07” — 2007/7/17 — 20:31 — page 265 — #14
Heart,Heart-Lung,and Lung Transplantation 265
The only therapy available is excision of the allo-
graft with placement of a total artiﬁcial heart. This
type of rejection is preventable by careful donor and
recipient ABO typing and PRA screening.
• Myocardialcontusion . Patients with severe myocar-
dial contusions are excluded as donors. Patients
with lesser degrees of dysfunction from blunt
trauma may exhibit impaired systolic function in
the post-CPB period.
• Myocardial infarction. As a result of the careful
screening of donors this is a very rare cause of imme-
diate allograft dysfunction. With an increase in the
acceptable age for donors,this is likely to become a
more common problem.
RVafterloadmismatch
Impaired right ventricular performance is a partic-
ular risk in the presence of recipient pulmonary
hypertension. RV afterload mismatch may occur as
the result of severely depressed RV systolic func-
tion and normal pulmonary artery pressure (PAP)
and PVR or,more commonly,as the result of less
severely depressed RV systolic function and elevated
PAP and PVR. This may result in acute allograft
RV dysfunction severe enough to prevent termi-
nation of CPB. Therapy in this setting will need to
be directed toward inotropic support of the RV and
selective reduction of PVR.
SinusandAVnodedysfunction
Ischemic injury to the sinus and AV node may pro-
duce bradycardia,nodal rhythm,or heart block.
Sinoatrial (SA) node dysfunction is much more
common and approximately 10–20% of patients
need permanent atrial pacing. In some instances,an
appropriate sinus rate can be obtained with isopro-
terenol. In other instances,atrial or AV sequential
pacing is necessary.
Impaireddiastolicfunction
The post-ischemic state of the transplanted heart
is characterized by increased ventricular stiffness
and limited preload reserve resulting in a ﬁxed
SV. Increases in heart rate obtained with pacing
will reduce diastolic ﬁlling time (see Fig 5.8). This,
in turn,will produce reductions in EDV and SV for a
given ESV. The net result will be little or no change
in cardiac output. Atrial or AV sequential pacing is
likely to be superior to ventricular pacing due to
the presence of an appropriately timed atrial sys-
tole. For a given right or left atrial pressure,atrial
pacing or AV sequential pacing will provide a higher
ventricular EDV than ventricular pacing.
Inotropic support is useful for patients with
limited preload reserve in both sinus and paced
rhythms because SV can be augmented at a given
afterload by reducing ESV. Inotropic agents allow
SV to be maintained as heart rate increases,thereby
producing increases in cardiac output. This occurs
because the reductions in EDV produced by reduced
diastolic ﬁlling time are offset by the reductions in
ESV produced by enhanced contractility. Optimal
heart rate is 100–110 b/min for adults and older
children,whereas 130–150 b/min is optimal for
neonates and infants. Higher heart rates result
in progressive reductions in SV such that cardiac
output remains constant or falls.
TerminationofCPB
Terminating of CPB is discussed in detail in
Chapter 10. Particular attention must be paid to
deairing the heart. Severe ventricular dysfunction
may follow ejection of air down the coronary
arteries. The RV is particularly at risk because of the
anterior location of the right coronary ostia. TEE is
valuable in guiding the deairing process.
A dose of methylprednisolone (usually 10 mg/kg
in children and 500 mg in adults) will be given after
aortic cross-clamp removal. In some institutions,the
dose will be given after termination of CPB.
Historically,isoproterenol,which is a potent
chronotrope,dromotrope,inotrope,and vasodila-
tor,has been used to enhance cardiac output dur-
ing the immediate post-CPB period. Isoproterenol
works well for patients in whom minimal inotropic
support of the RV and LV is necessary. This is
most likely when the donor heart requires min-
imal inotropic support before cross-clamping,the
ischemic interval is short,and recipient pulmonary
artery pressure is low or mildly elevated. Generally,
isoproteronol is infused at 0.01–0.05 µg/kg/min
(adults) or 0.05–0.25 µg/kg/min (children). At
these doses,heart rate is maintained in an age-
appropriate range,inotropic support of the RV andAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch07” — 2007/7/17 — 20:31 — page 266 — #15
266 Chapter 7
LV is provided,and PVR and SVR are reduced.
Higher doses of isoproterenol increase the incidence
of hemodynamic changes that are unfavorable
to the myocardial energetics of the post-ischemic
heart. Isoproterenol increases myocardial oxygen
consumption (MVo2),reduces aortic diastolic blood
pressure,is arrhythmogenic,and increases heart
rate. All of these variables tend to exacerbate
myocardial ischemia. Furthermore,as the dose
of isoproterenol increases,it may be difﬁcult to
maintain systemic blood pressure due to pro-
hibitive decreases in SVR. Due to these side effects,
doses in excess of 0.01–0.05 µg/kg/min (adults) or
0.05–0.25 µg/kg/min (children) are rarely useful as
a means of providing additional inotropic support
or as a method of increasing heart rate. For this
reason many centers have moved away from iso-
proterenol as ﬁrst line therapy in cardiac transplant
patients using other inotropic agents and pacing as
necessary.
When isoproterenol is ineffective in producing
the desired heart rate,atrial or AV sequential
pacing should be initiated. This combination will
allow maintenance of SV as heart rate is increased.
When isoproterenol is ineffective in producing the
desired inotropic effect,alternative inotropic agents
should be promptly initiated. The need for addi-
tional inotropic support can be determined with
either TEE or a pulmonary artery catheter. TEE will
reveal ventricular dilatation and global hypokinesis.
Regional wall motion abnormalities are also possi-
ble,but the ischemic insult usually is diffuse. Atrial
enlargement and dilation of the mitral or tricuspid
valve annulus with subsequent mitral or tricuspid
regurgitation also is possible. Pressure monitor-
ing will reveal an elevated central venous pres-
sure (CVP) (>15 mmHg),elevated pulmonary artery
occlusion pressure (PAOP) ( >20 mmHg),or both.
Cardiac output will be reduced ( <2.0 L/min/m2).
The advantage of the pulmonary artery catheter
is that it allows measurement of PAP and calcula-
tion of PVR and SVR. PAP can be estimated with
TEE using a tricuspid regurgitation jet and the CVP
measurement.
The properties of the various inotropic agents
are reviewed in detail in Chapter 4. The choice
of agent should be tailored to the clinical
picture. Epinephrine 0.01–0.10µg/kg/min (adults),
0.05–0.50 µg/kg/min (children),or dopamine
5–10 µg/kg/min is a better choice than dobu-
tamine or milrinone when SVR and systemic blood
pressure are low. Dobutamine 5–10 µg/kg/min or
milrinone 0.50–0.75 µg/kg/min after a 50 µg/kg
loading dose are better choices when PAP and PVR
are elevated. Milrinone is a fairly potent inodila-
tor with salutatory effects on PVR. Its use in
adults often requires a simultaneous infusion of NE
(0.01–0.10 µg/kg/min) to maintain SVR and blood
pressure. This is generally not necessary in infants
and children.
When RV afterload mismatch exists with pre-
served LV systolic function,there will be low
cardiac output,low systemic blood pressure,ele-
vated CVP,elevated PAP,and low PAOP. TEE
will reveal a dilated right atrium and ventricle
with an under ﬁlled,hyperkinetic LV. Tricuspid
regurgitation will be likely.
Therapy for RV failure involves inotropic sup-
port and pulmonary vasodilatation. Pulmonary
vasodilatation with intravenous agents is prob-
lematic because simultaneous reduction of SVR
occurs. Simultaneous reduction of a normal SVR
may compromise RV and systemic organ perfu-
sion. Isoproterenol has historically been used dur-
ing the post-cardiac transplant setting. Although
isoproterenol is a potent inotrope and a pul-
monary vasodilator,it is not a selective pul-
monary vasodilator. Its β2 effects cause parallel
reductions in PVR and SVR. Other intravenous
pulmonary vasodilators have been evaluated in
heart transplant patients. Prostaglandin E l (PGE1),
prostacyclin (PGI 2),sodium nitroprusside (SNP),
and nitroglycerin (NTG) are pulmonary vasodila-
tors. Unfortunately,they are not selective pul-
monary vasodilators because they cause reductions
in SVR as well. In theory,PGE 1 should be a selec-
tive pulmonary vasodilator because it undergoegs a
pronounced ﬁrst-pass elimination in the lungs while
PGI2,SNP,and TNG are metabolized in one circu-
lation time. In reality,all four drugs reduce PVR
while causing a decrease in SVR such that the ratio
of PVR:SVR is unchanged or,in the case of PGI 2,
slightly increased. Efforts to reduce PVR with PGE1,
PGI2,SNP,and TNG may require simultaneousAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch07” — 2007/7/17 — 20:31 — page 267 — #16
Heart,Heart-Lung,and Lung Transplantation 267
use of inotropes and vasoconstrictors to maintain
systemic blood pressure. The simultaneous use of
inotropic support is of beneﬁt to the afterload mis-
matched RV as well. Use of PGI 2 to reduce PVR
seems to result in better maintenance of SV and car-
diac output than PGE1,TNG,and SNP due to less of
a venodilating effect.
The use of the inhaled selective pulmonary
vasodilator NO has revolutionized treatment of
pulmonary hypertension and associated RV after-
load mismatch. Aerosolized,inhaled PGI2 has a sim-
ilar proﬁle to inhaled NO. These agents are selective
for the pulmonary circulation as no substantial con-
centrations are delivered to the systemic circulation
following inhalation. NO delivered at 20 ppm selec-
tively reduces PVR in all heart transplant recipients.
Evidence suggests that the peak effect in reduc-
ing PVR with NO occurs at 20–40 ppm. Continuous
aerosolized PGI 2 is delivered at 5–50 ng/kg/min.
These agents are discussed in more detail in
Chapter 6.
In addition to pharmacologic methods,efforts
to reduce PVR with ventilatory interventions are
essential. This topic is reviewed in detail in
Chapter 6. A combination of a high fraction of
inspired oxygen (FiO2),an arterial partial pressure
of oxygen (PaO2)> 60 mmHg,an arterial partial
pressure of carbon dioxide (PaCO2) of 25–32 mmHg,
a pH of 7.50–7.60,and low inspiratory pres-
sures without high levels of positive end-expiratory
pressure (PEEP) will produce reliable reductions
in PVR.
It is important to rule out a mechanical cause of
increased impedance to RV ejection when RV dys-
function exists in the presence of low pulmonary
artery pressures. Kinking of the pulmonary artery
anastomosis has been observed to cause mechani-
cal obstruction of the RV. Kinking may be observed
directly by the surgeon. Alternatively,it may be
detected by TEE. It also is diagnosed readily by direct
measurement of a pressure gradient between the RV
and PA.
When univentricular or biventricular failure is
severe and refractory to inotropic and vasodila-
tor agents,a ventricular assist or circulatory assist
device may be necessary to support circulation until
the ventricles can recover.
Noncardiacsurgeryinthe
post-cardiactransplantpatient
The success of heart transplantation makes it likely
that anesthesiologists will encounter patients with
transplanted hearts for a variety of noncardiac
surgical procedures. Currently,the steepest drop in
survival following adult heart transplant occurs in
the ﬁrst 6 months (to approximately 90% survival).
For patients surviving beyond 1 year the conditional
half-life (time to 50% survival) is 12 years. There is a
steady linear decrease in survival beyond 6 months
of approximately 3.4% per year. Similar results exist
in children with the conditional half-life 17.5 years
in the 1–10 year age group and 13.7 years in the
11–17 year age group. Infant conditional survival
appears to be similar to that in the 1–10 year age
group.
Some of the surgical procedures are purely elec-
tive,whereas others are likely to be urgent or
emergent. Most surgical procedures are the direct
result of complications of immunosuppressive ther-
apy. These complications are listed in Table 7.3. The
most commonly used immunosuppressive agents
are summarized in Table 7.4. The incidence of
complications requiring general surgical consulta-
tion in heart transplant patients is 35–40%. Many
of these complications require operative interven-
tion. Progression of atherosclerotic vascular disease
also results in surgical intervention for aortic and
peripheral vascular surgery. Finally,heart trans-
plant patients undergo all types of elective surgery,
including cosmetic surgery.
Table7.3 Complications of immunosuppression
that may require operative intervention.
Gingival hyperplasia – cyclosporine
Pancreatitis – azathioprine, corticosteroids
Cholelithiasis and cholecystitis – cyclosporine
Malignancies
Complications of corticosteroid use: cataracts, retinal
detachment, aseptic bone necrosis, perforated viscus,
and gastrointestinal hemorrhage
Complications of infectionAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch07” — 2007/7/17 — 20:31 — page 268 — #17
268 Chapter 7
Table7.4 Immunosuppressive agents.
Agent Classiﬁcation Mechanismofaction Clinicaluse
Prednisone
methylprednisolone
Corticosteroid Nonspeciﬁc blockade of T-cell
cytokine and cytokine
receptor production
Maintenance therapy
Treatment of rejection
Cyclosporine Calcineurine inhibitor NFAT (nuclear factor)
mediated inhibition of IL-2
promoter gene
Maintenance therapy
Tacrolimus (FK506) Calcineurine inhibitor NFAT (nuclear factor)
mediated inhibition of IL-2
promoter gene
Maintenance therapy
Azathioprine Antimetabolite,
6-mercatopurine derivative
Inhibitor of T-cell proliferation Adjuvant therapy
Mycophenolate
mofentil (MMF)
Inhibitor ofde novo purine
synthesis
Inhibitor of T-cell proliferation Adjuvant therapy in lieu of
azathioprine
Sirolimus Anti-proliferative agent
(rapamycin inhibitor)
Blocks G1 to S phase of the
cell cycle, inhibitor of T-cell
proliferation
Adjuvant therapy in lieu of
azathioprine or MMF
Everolimus Anti-proliferative agent
(rapamycin inhibitor)
Blocks G1 to S phase of the cell
cycle, inhibitor of T-cell
proliferation
Adjuvant therapy in lieu of
azathioprine or MMF
OKT3 Monoclonal antibody Antibody to T-cell receptor
complex (native and
activated T cells)
Induction therapy
Basiliximab Monoclonal antibody Antibody to IL-2 receptor
(activated T cells)
Induction therapy
Daclizumab Monoclonal antibody Antibody to IL-2 receptor
(activated T cells)
Induction therapy
Rabbit antithymocyte
γ-globulin (RATG)
Polyclonal antibody Antibody to T cells (native and
activated T cells)
Induction therapy
IL, interleukin.
Physiologyofthetransplantedheart
Autonomicnervoussystem
Regardless of the surgical technique used,the ortho-
topically transplanted heart is devoid of sympathetic
and parasympathetic innervation. The most impor-
tant consequence of this is an altered barorecep-
tor response. Normally,vagal afferent ﬁbers from
the atria and ventricles produce tonic inhibition
of central sympathetic outﬂow. When atrial and
ventricular volumes are reduced,vagal afferent
outﬂow is reduced and central sympathetic outﬂow
increases. In addition,activation of carotid and aor-
tic baroreceptors by hypotension increases central
sympathetic outﬂow. The result is direct sympa-
thetic stimulation of the heart and generation of
circulating catecholamines.
In the transplanted heart,no direct sympathetic
stimulation of the heart is possible. Response to
activation of baroreceptors in the patient with
a transplanted heart is dependent on generation
of circulating catecholamines for inotropic andAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch07” — 2007/7/17 — 20:31 — page 269 — #18
Heart,Heart-Lung,and Lung Transplantation 269
chronotropic response. It normally takes several
minutes to generate appropriate levels of circulating
catecholamines. Although systemic catecholamine
generation in response to arterial hypotension is
enhanced,reﬂex systemic catecholamine release
in response to reduced atrial and ventricular vol-
umes is impaired due to atrial and ventricular
vagal deafferentation. As a result,abrupt decreases
in blood pressure will not be compensated for
quickly.
The response of baroreceptors to endogenous
and exogenous vasopressors in heart transplant
patients is normal,but feedback to the donor heart
is absent. Therefore,increases in blood pressure
will be accompanied by a reﬂex decrease in recip-
ient atrial rate but not in donor atrial rate. As a
result,there will be no reﬂex decrease in the trans-
planted heart rate in response to phenylephrine
or NE-induced hypertension. Likewise,Valsalva or
other vagal maneuvers will not elicit a heart rate
response.
Early in exercise,increases in cardiac output are
acquired by increases in SV,with EDV increas-
ing and ESV remaining unchanged. As exercise
progresses,cardiac output increases as the result
of systemic catecholamine-induced increases in
heart rate with maintenance of SV. Cardiac den-
ervation produces presynaptic super-sensitivity due
to denervation-associated loss of neuronal cate-
cholamine uptake. As a result,there is increased
sensitivity to catecholamines that are taken up by
adrenergic nerve terminals (epinephrine,NE) with
no increase in sensitivity to catecholamines that are
not taken up (isoproteronol).
Some degree of reinnervation of the LV with
efferent sympathetic ﬁbers is present in 80% of
transplant patients 3 years after transplantation.
Reinnervation seems to be progressive but is likely
not complete until 15 years after transplantation.
Patients with reinnervation have improved heart
rate and contractile response to exercise and bet-
ter exercise tolerance than patients without rein-
nervation. The ability of some transplant patients
to experience angina is consistent with reinnerva-
tion with sympathetic afferents. Reinnervation of
cardiac vagal afferents is unlikely however. There
is some evidence that over time the recipient
(old) AV node may affect the donor (new) AV
node via conduction over the suture line. In sum-
mary,sympathetic efferent and afferent reinnerva-
tion may occur in some patients during the years
after cardiac transplantation. When reinnervation
occurs,it has physiologic importance.
Heartrate
The resting atrial rate of the transplanted human
heart is approximately 90–110 b/min. This is sig-
niﬁcantly greater than the resting atrial rate of
the innervated human heart and demonstrates that
the predominant effect on sinus rate in man is
a slowing effect of the parasympathetic system.
Heart rate increases with exercise in heart trans-
plant patients are achieved through stimulation of
cardiac β2-receptors by circulating catecholamines.
The increases in heart rate do not occur until after
several minutes of exercise and they parallel the
increase in serum catecholamines. Despite this,the
heart-rate response with exercise in transplanted
hearts is attenuated relative to that seen in nor-
mal hearts due to the lack of efferent innervation
of the SA node.
LVsystolicfunction
The LV of the transplanted heart exhibits normal
contractile function. Left ventricular end-diastolic
volume (LVEDV) and left ventricular end-systolic
volume (LVESV) are reduced,whereas SV and
EF remain normal or low normal due to the
parallel reductions in EDV and ESV. LV mass
is increased due to concentric hypertrophy as
the result of the arterial hypertension,which
accompanies cyclosporine immunosuppression.
RVsystolicfunction
The RV exhibits normal systolic function. Right ven-
tricular end-diastolic volume (RVEDV) and right
ventricular end-systolic volume (RVESV) are larger
than normal,and RV wall thickness is increased.
This is probably secondary to the persistent tri-
cuspid regurgitation present in most patients. In
patients with preoperative pulmonary hyperten-
sion,persistence of RV dilatation and tricuspid
regurgitation is the result of remodeling of the donor
RV in response to recipient pulmonary circulation.Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch07” — 2007/7/17 — 20:31 — page 270 — #19
270 Chapter 7
The dilation and tricuspid regurgitation may persist
despite resolution of pulmonary hypertension.
Atrialfunction
Following the biatrial technique,both right and left
atrial areas are larger than normal. These patients
have reduced right and left atrial emptying com-
pared with normal subjects; the portion of total
atrial emptying contributed by the recipient atrium
is much less than that contributed by the donor
atrium. In addition,the asynchronous contrac-
tion of donor and recipient atrium results in wide
variations in diastolic ﬂow. Following the bicaval
technique,patients have right atrial emptying com-
parable to normal subjects. Left atrial emptying,
although reduced compared with normal subjects,
is superior to that seen in biatrial technique patients.
In addition,the left and right atrial dimensions
are smaller in patients with the bicaval or total
technique as compared with the biatrial technique.
Diastolicfunction
LV diastolic dysfunction occurs immediately after
orthotopic cardiac replacement and is related to the
post ischemic state. This dysfunction is character-
ized by a restrictive ventricular ﬁlling pattern that
improves during the ﬁrst several months after trans-
plantation. This restrictive pattern may manifest
clinically as reduced preload reserve in response to
exercise and afterload increases. The etiology of this
continued dysfunction is unclear. It may be inher-
ent to the small allograft LVEDV. Whether patients
who receive hearts from donors smaller than them-
selves may be at particular risk for reduced preload
reserve is debatable. Rejection episodes are known
to impair diastolic function,but it is unclear whether
recurring rejection episodes produce progressive
LV and RV diastolic dysfunction in the form of a
restrictive/constrictive pattern.
There also is deﬁcient acceleration of LV relax-
ation during exercise,which along with restrictive
inﬂow,contributes to the elevations in left ven-
tricular end-diastolic pressure (LVEDP) and LAP
seen during exercise. This impairment of relaxation
may be due to loss of adrenergic tone due to den-
ervation,ischemic injury at the time of harvest,or
immunosuppression-induced arterial hypertension.
Issuesuniquetohearttransplant
patients
Cardiac transplant patients have a unique set of
management issues,in addition to those associ-
ated with the denervated heart. They are outlined
below.
Cardiacallograftvasculopathy
This is currently the late survival-limiting factor
after heart transplantation. In adults it accounts for
one-third of the late deaths after transplantation as
the result of myocardial infarction,congestive heart
failure,and sudden death. In children it accounts for
40% of the deaths between 3 and 5 years after trans-
plantation. The incidence of cardiac allograft vascu-
lopathy (CAV) in both adult and pediatric cardiac
transplant patients is approximately 10% per year
post-transplant with an incidence of approximately
50% at 5 years.
The pathogenesis of CAV is complex,multifac-
torial,and incompletely understood. It is believed
that immunologic mechanisms (number of HLA
mismatches and the number and duration of rejec-
tion episodes) in conjunction with nonimmunologic
risk factors (CMV seropositivity,hyperlipidemia,
hypertension,older age at transplantation,diabetes)
produce endothelial injury with subsequent myoin-
timal hyperplasia. Unlike atherosclerotic coronary
artery disease (CAD),CAV is associated with con-
centric,diffuse lesions that do not disrupt the elastic
lamina and that progress rapidly. Focal,traditional
atherosclerotic plaques also are seen in cardiac
allografts.
Surveillance for CAV is difﬁcult. Patients with
heart transplants may not experience angina or
typical ECG changes with myocardial ischemia and
infarction due to afferent sympathetic denerva-
tion. Noninvasive testing has poor sensitivity and
speciﬁcity. Intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) is the
gold standard for detection of CAV but it is tech-
nically demanding,expensive,and limited by the
size of the catheter to investigation of vessels of
1 mm in diameter or more. Considering these lim-
itations,transplant centers currently use yearly
coronary angiography as a screen for CAV. More
frequent angiograms may be indicated to monitor
progression in individual patients.Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch07” — 2007/7/17 — 20:31 — page 271 — #20
Heart,Heart-Lung,and Lung Transplantation 271
Therapeutic options are limited. More invasive
approaches involve angioplasty and coronary stent
placement. With this approach,short-term morbid-
ity and success is similar to that seen in atheroscle-
rotic disease,but the restenosis rate is high and
long-term prognosis remains poor. Drug eluting
stents may prove to be more effective in the long-
term. Finally,in the most severe cases,coronary
artery bypass surgery and retransplantation have
been used. The diffuse nature of the coronary
lesions makes bypass surgery an option only in
selected cases. The survival rates for retransplanta-
tion are signiﬁcantly less than for initial transplan-
tation and the incidence of malignancy is twice that
of ﬁrst transplants.
Hypertension
Arterial hypertension is present in 75% of trans-
plant patients at long-term follow-up. This is not
related to the conventional risk factors associ-
ated with hypertension but to immunosuppression
mediated increases in SVR and to denervation of
cardiac volume receptors. Immunosuppression with
calcineurin inhibitors (particularly cyclosporine
versus tacrolimus),and corticosteroids is implicated.
Therapy is necessary to prevent severe LV hyper-
trophy and impaired ventricular function. This
usually requires treatment with multiple classes
of antihypertensive agents. Calcium entry blockers
and ACE inhibitors often are used as ﬁrst-line
therapeutic agents.
Atrialandventriculararrhythmias
The incidence of atrial and ventricular arrhythmias
during initial hospitalization after transplantation
is 55% and 79%,respectively. At late follow-up,
the incidence of atrial and ventricular arrhythmias
is 40%. In general,atrial arrhythmias during the
initial hospitalization are benign,except for atrial
ﬁbrillation. Development of atrial ﬁbrillation is asso-
ciated with a threefold increase in the risk of death.
The risk of death is particularly high in patients who
develop atrial ﬁbrillation more than 2 weeks after
transplantation.
Permanent atrial pacing is required in approx-
imately 10–20% of both pediatric and adult
recipients with symptomatic and asymptomatic
bradycardia. Development of bradycardia seems to
be related to a longer ischemic interval for the donor
heart.
Subacutebacterialendocarditis(SBE)
prophylaxis
Bacterial endocarditis is a rare complication in
heart transplant patients. Nonetheless,because of
the extent of the suture lines and the immuno-
suppressed status of the patient,SBE prophylaxis
is recommended the American Heart Association
(AHA).
Rejection
Most patients have at least one acute rejec-
tion episode despite adequate immunosuppres-
sion. These episodes usually occur within the
ﬁrst 3 months after transplantation with decreasing
incidence thereafter. Surveillance during the ﬁrst
year is accomplished with endomyocardial biopsies
of the RV via the right internal jugular vein every
week for the ﬁrst 4–8 weeks. Some centers do not
perform biopsies in children younger than 6 months
old or less than 5 kg in weight unless it is to con-
ﬁrm suspected rejection. Biopsies are graded from
0 to 3 based on histologic criteria. No rejection is 0R,
mild rejection is 1R,moderate rejection is 2R,and
severe rejection is 3R. After the ﬁrst year,an annual
biopsy is performed in most institutions in conjunc-
tion with coronary angiography to evaluate CAV. If
clinical evidence of rejection exists,more frequent
biopsies may be indicated to document rejection
and to assess regression of histologic changes with
treatment.
Mild rejection frequently resolves spontaneously
and is not treated. Mild rejection by biopsy usually
is not associated with clinical evidence of allo-
graft dysfunction such as hypotension,elevated
jugular venous pressure,rales,sinus rate >110,
atrial ﬁbrillation,bradycardia,or systolic dysfunc-
tion by echo. Moderate or more severe rejection
is accompanied by evidence of allograft dysfunc-
tion and is treated. Although normal allografts have
maintained coronary vasodilator reserve,moder-
ate allograft rejection is associated with impaired
reserve. Normal reserve returns after treatment
of rejection. Rejection also is accompanied byAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch07” — 2007/7/17 — 20:31 — page 272 — #21
272 Chapter 7
an attenuated coronary vasodilatory response to
nitroglycerin.
First-line therapy for moderate rejection is oral or
intravenous pulsed steroids. In the approximately
10% of cases in which mild rejection by biopsy is
associated with allograft dysfunction,pulsed steroid
therapy is necessary. Severe rejection usually is
treated with steroids and,in some institutions,
a lympholytic agent such as polyclonal antithymo-
cyte globulin (ATG) or murine monoclonal antibody
(OKT3) is added.
Responsetodrugs
The response to various drugs is altered in heart
transplant patients secondary to the denervated
state of the allograft:
• Digoxin. Digoxin prolongs AV node conduction
in a biphasic manner. The initial effect is mediated
vagally and is absent in the transplanted heart. The
chronic effect is mediated directly and is present in
the transplanted heart. The inotropic properties also
are directly mediated and present.
• Muscarinic antagonists. Atropine,glycopyrrolate,
and scopolamine produce competitive inhibition of
acetylcholine at the muscarinic receptors of post-
gangionic cholinergic nerves such as the vagus. As a
result,these drugs will not increase heart rate in the
denervated transplanted heart. The effects of these
drugs on other organs with muscarinic cholinergic
innervation will remain.
• Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors. The contention that
agents such as neostigmine and edrophonium
have no cardiac effects while they continue to
have systemic muscarinic effects has been chal-
lenged recently. Bradycardia after administration
of neostigmine,which was reversed with atropine,
has been demonstrated in a heart transplant
patient. In addition,sinus arrest after administra-
tion of neostigmine and glycopyrrolate for rever-
sal of neuromuscular blockade reversal has been
reported in heart transplant patients. Neostig-
mine produces direct stimulation of cholinergic
receptors on cardiac ganglion cells with subse-
quent release of acetylcholine. In addition,there
is allograft denervation hypersensitivity of both
the postganglionic neurons and the muscarinic
myocardial receptors. These factors,combined with
intrinsic allograft SA node dysfunction may pro-
duce severe SA node dysfunction or sinus arrest
after acetylcholinesterase inhibitor administration
in heart transplant patients.
• Beta-adrenergicagonists . There is increased sensitiv-
ity to catecholamines that are taken up by adren-
ergic nerve terminals (epinephrine,NE) with no
increase in sensitivity to catecholamines that are not
taken up (isoproterenol),Improvements in systolic
function with β-adrenergic agents are obtainable
during acute rejection episodes.
• Beta-adrenergic antagonists. These agents retain
their usual activity. The sinus rate of both the donor
and recipient slow equally,demonstrating that the
predominant effect is caused by blockade of circu-
lating catecholamines. There also will be a normal
increase in the refractoriness of the AV node.
• Calcium entry blockers. These agents directly sup-
press the sinus and AV nodes and,thus,should
have normal activity. Nonetheless,the negative
chronotropic and dromotropic effects of verapamil
have been demonstrated to be more pronounced
in the transplanted heart. There will be no reﬂex
tachycardia from agents with strong vasodilator
properties such as nifedipine.
• Vagolyticandvagotonicagents . Drugs with vagolytic
activity (pancuronium,demerol) will not increase
heart rate,whereas drugs with vagotonic activity
(fentanyl,sufentanil) will not decrease heart rate.
• Adenosine. The magnitude and duration of
adenosine’s negative chronotropic and dromotropic
effects is 3–5 times greater in the transplanted heart.
• Ephedrine. Cardiac drugs that are both direct and
indirect acting will have a diminished effect because
only the direct effect will be present.
Anestheticconsiderationsfor
noncardiacsurgeryinpatients
posthearttransplantation
A variety of regional and general anesthetic tech-
niques have been used safely and successfully in
the anesthetic management of patients with heart
transplants. In patients without evidence of allograft
dysfunction,the following principles are useful:
1 Aseptic technique is essential.
2 Appreciate that compensation for acute alter-
ations in preload,afterload,and contractilityAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch07” — 2007/7/17 — 20:31 — page 273 — #22
Heart,Heart-Lung,and Lung Transplantation 273
are incomplete and delayed; postural effects are
magniﬁed.
3 Heart rate and blood pressure increases due
to inadequate anesthesia will be delayed until
circulating catecholamine levels increase.
4 Bradycardia will compromise cardiac output.
Baseline SV is reduced and any reﬂex increase in SV
in response to bradycardia is delayed. Atropine will
not increase heart rate. Isoproterenol and ephedrine
will increase heart rate.
5 Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors (neostigmine,
edrophonium) for reversal of neuromuscular block-
ade may have cardiac effects. Anticholingeric agents
(atropine,glycopyrrolate) must be given to block
the peripheral muscarinic effects.
6 CVP monitoring,when indicated,may have to
be obtained via a route other than the right internal
jugular vein.
7 Reﬂex bradycardia will not accompany admin-
istration of vasopressor agents (phenylephrine),
nor will directly induced bradycardia accompany
administration of agents with vagotonic activity.
8 Reﬂex tachycardia will not accompany adminis-
tration of vasodilator agents (sodium nitroprusside,
nifedipine,hydralazine),nor will directly induced
tachycardia accompany administration of agents
with vagolytic activity.
9 Stress-dose steroid coverage should be adminis-
tered to patients receiving steroids as part of their
immunosuppression.
Heart-lungtransplantation
Heart-lung transplantation can be considered for
patients with end-stage cardiopulmonary disease
unresponsive to maximal medical therapy for which
no surgical options exist except combined heart-
lung replacement. Increasingly,in an effort to make
maximum use of donated organs,double lung trans-
plantation (DLT) and single lung transplantation
(SLT) are being used for patients with pulmonary
disease without secondary severe cardiac dysfunc-
tion. The number of heart-lung transplants peaked
in 1989 (at approximately 250) and has continued
to decline (74 in 2003) as the result of the increased
of the use of DLT and SLT. In the USA approximately
three pediatric HLTs are performed each year.
For adults,the primary indications for HLT,
based on 2005 Registry data,are Eisenmenger
syndrome secondary to congenital heart disease
(32%),idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension
(25%),and septic lung disease such as cystic ﬁbrosis
and bronchiectasis (15%). Other indications include
emphysema, α1-antitrypsin deﬁciency,and intersti-
tial pulmonary ﬁbrosis. For children,the primary
indications are congenital heart disease (40%),
primary pulmonary hypertension (24%),and cystic
ﬁbrosis (16%).
Singlelungtransplantation
SLT can be considered for patients with end-stage
lung disease without signiﬁcant cardiac dysfunc-
tion. Generally,patients with an LVEF > 35% and
a right ventricular ejection fraction (RVEF)> 25%
are considered candidates. The 2005 Registry data
indicate that,for adults,SLT is used primarily
for patients with obstructive lung disease from
emphysema (53%),idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbro-
sis (24%),and α1-antitrypsin deﬁciency (8%).
Increasingly,SLT is being used sparingly (1.5%) for
patients with pulmonary hypertension from idio-
pathic pulmonary arterial hypertension and from
Eisenmenger syndrome in whom there is not coex-
istent severe cardiac dysfunction. For patients with
obstructive lung disease the BODE index (B,body
mass index; O,airﬂow obstruction as measured
by FEV1; D,dyspnea as measured by the dysp-
nea scale; E,exercise capacity as measured by the
6-minute walk test) is useful in selecting candidates
for transplantation.
For children,most lung transplantations are per-
formed in the 11–17-year-old age group. SLT is
used much less frequently than in adults and is
used for patients with Eisenmenger syndrome in
conjunction with repair of intracardiac lesions.
Doublelungtransplantation
DLT is also considered for patients with end-stage
pulmonary disease without signiﬁcant cardiac
dysfunction. Two approaches to double lung trans-
plantation exist: bilateral sequential single lung
transplantation (BSSLT) and en-bloc DLT. PatientsAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch07” — 2007/7/17 — 20:31 — page 274 — #23
274 Chapter 7
with an LVEF > 35% and a RVEF > 25% are suit-
able candidates. The trend has been to reserve DLT
for patients in whom SLT is not an option. Based
on 2005 Registry data the primary indications for
DLT in adults are cystic ﬁbrosis (32%),emphy-
sema (23%),idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis (10%),
α1-antitrypsin deﬁciency (9%),and idiopathic pul-
monary arterial hypertension (7%). In addition,
DLT has been used in conjunction with cardiac
repair in adults with Eisenmenger syndrome.
In children,the primary indications are cystic
ﬁbrosis (38%),idiopathic pulmonary arterial
hypertension (19%),and Eisenmenger syndrome
in conjunction with a repair of intracardiac
lesions (10%).
Livingdonorlobarlung
transplant(LDLLT)
In the subset of patients deemed too ill to survive
long enough to receive a cadaveric SLT or BSSLT this
somewhat controversial procedure can be consid-
ered. It requires two donors,one donates the right
lower lobe the other the left lower lobe. The recipi-
ent’s native lungs are excised. The majority of these
transplants (85%) are in patients with cystic ﬁbrosis.
In these patients their small stature allows two lobes
from ordinary size donors to provide adequate lung
tissue.
Contraindications to HLT,SLT,DLT,and LDLLT
are similar to those for heart transplantation
and are outlined in Table 7.1. In addition,the
following absolute contraindications exist: severe
scoliosis or thoracic cage deformity,irreversible,
signiﬁcant respiratory muscle dysfunction,numer-
ous transpleural systemic to pulmonary artery
collateral vessels,severe tracheomegly or tracheo-
malacia,and Burkholderia cepacia genomovar III
lower respiratory tract infection in cystic ﬁbrous
patients.
Speciﬁcdiseasestates
Obstructivelungdisease
The most common indication for lung transplan-
tation is obstructive lung disease secondary to
emphysema or α1-antitrypsin deﬁciency. Patients
considered for transplantation generally have
an FEV 1 < 1 L,a requirement for supplemental
oxygen at rest,and carbon dioxide retention.
Pulmonary hypertension is uncommon in these
patients. Concomitant CAD must be ruled out
because many of these patients have long histories
of smoking.
Both SLT and BSSLT have been used for these
patients. SLT is relatively contraindicated in two
subsets of emphysema patients: those with severe
bullous disease and those with bronchiectasis.
Severe bullous disease may result in preferential
ventilation of the nontransplanted lung. Bronchie-
ctasis introduces the risk of leaving an infected lung
in communication with the transplanted lung in
an immunocompromised patient. These subsets of
patients usually are considered for BSSLT.
In other patients,both SLT and BSSLT provide
good early functional results. BSSLT provides better
long-term functional results but is associated with a
higher operative mortality. Therefore,some centers
consider BSSLT in younger emphysema patients.
Pulmonaryﬁbrosis
These patients have restrictive pulmonary physi-
ology. Patients considered for transplantation gen-
erally have a FVC < 1.5 L and a FEV 1 < 1.2 L,
a requirement for supplemental oxygen at rest,
and carbon dioxide retention. Moderate to severe
pulmonary hypertension is common in these
patients.
SLT provides good function results in these
patients as the transplant lung is preferentially
ventilated and perfused. Preferential ventilation of
the transplant lung occurs because it is more com-
pliant than the native lung. Preferential perfusion
of the transplant lung occurs because PVR is higher
in the native lung.
Idiopathicpulmonaryarterial
hypertension(IPAH)
Patients in whom the cause of pulmonary hyper-
tension is unexplained are said to have IPAH.
This disease entity was formerly known as pri-
mary pulmonary hypertension (PPH). For the diag-
nosis of IPAH to be made,the secondary causes
of pulmonary hypertension must be ruled out.Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch07” — 2007/7/17 — 20:31 — page 275 — #24
Heart,Heart-Lung,and Lung Transplantation 275
Common causes of secondary pulmonary hyper-
tension include mitral stenosis,congenital heart
disease,pulmonary embolism,and pulmonary
venous obstruction. Seventy-three percent of IPAH
patients are female; the mean age at presenta-
tion is 34 years,and the 5-year survival rate is
20%. Survival is enhanced by coumadin anti-
coagulation therapy,presumably because the pres-
ence of low cardiac output and pulmonary vascular
endothelial injury places these patients at risk for
pulmonary thrombosis and worsening pulmonary
hypertension. High-dose calcium channel block-
ers also improve survival,but only in the sub-
group of patients who experience a greater than
25% decrease in PVR and pulmonary artery pres-
sure. Continuous PGI 2 (epoprostenol,Flolan ®)
infusion improves survival and functional status.
However,it usually is reserved for patients with
NYHA functional class III–IV. Newer therapies
include bostensin (an endothelin-1 inhibitor),silde-
naﬁl (a phosphodiesteraste-5 inhibitor),and tre-
prostinil (a PGI 2 analog which can be infused
subcutaneously).
All patients with IPAH have RV dysfunction. IPAH
produces RV afterload mismatch and subsequent
RV hypertrophy. Chronic exposure to the load-
ing conditions that produce hypertrophy results in
progressive ventricular dysfunction as the result of
progressive ﬁbrosis and cell death. RV dilatation
with dilation of the tricuspid valve annulus and TR
are common. Opinion regarding the best procedure
for patients with IPAH continues to evolve. HLT
is the procedure of choice in IPAH patients with
severe end stage RV dysfunction or severe biven-
tricular dysfunction. At present,the trend is to offer
all other IPAH patients SLT or BSSLT. This strategy
has evolved because: (i) except in cases of end-stage
RV systolic dysfunction,substantial recovery of the
RV is possible with the normalization of pulmonary
artery pressures,which occurs after SLT and DLT;
and (ii) use of SLT and BSSLT makes better use of
the limited organ supply. Currently,85% of lung
transplants done in patients with IPAH are BSSLT.
Eisenmengersyndrome
This syndrome occurs in patients with congenital
heart disease and pulmonary hypertension severe
enough to cause reversal of left-to-right shunts.
Eisenmenger syndrome evolves in patients with
intracardiac or great vessel left-to-right shunts.
Initially,the left-to-right shunt produces increased
pulmonary blood ﬂow and eccentric hypertrophy
of the cardiac chambers involved. With a ventric-
ular septal defect (VSD),there will be eccentric
hypertrophy of the LV and RV; with an atrial septal
defect (ASD),there will be enlargement of the
right atrium,left atrium,and RV. Prolonged expo-
sure of the pulmonary vasculature to increased
pulmonary blood ﬂow and pressure leads to devel-
opment of pulmonary hypertension and pulmonary
vascular occlusive disease (PVOD). PVOD produces
right ventricular concentric hypertrophy. As PVOD
advances and PVR approaches and then exceeds
SVR,intracardiac shunting becomes bidirectional
and then right to left. In the short term,the
processes of eccentric and concentric hypertrophy
provide appropriate adaptation. However,chronic
exposure to the loading conditions that produce
hypertrophy results in progressive ventricular dys-
function as the result of ﬁbrosis and cell death. As
a result,these patients usually have severe biven-
tricular dysfunction and generally are not candi-
dates for SLT and BSSLT. When LV function is
preserved,repair of the congenital cardiac defect
can be performed in conjunction with SLT and
BSSLT procedures. As with IPAH,there is debate
as to whether SLT is the appropriate operation for
patients with pulmonary hypertension secondary to
Eisenmenger syndrome.
Cysticﬁbrosis
Cystic ﬁbrosis is a multisystem disease and is
the most common fatal inherited disease among
Caucasians. Pulmonary involvement is inevitable,
and 95% of affected adults die of respiratory com-
plications. Airway obstruction secondary to viscous
secretions,edema,and reactive airways leads to
air trapping and an increase in functional reserve
capacity (FRC),residual volume (RV),and total lung
capacity (TLC).FEV1 andFVC are reduced. In addi-
tion,lung damage occurs as the result of bacterial
infections. Most patients with cystic ﬁbrosis even-
tually are colonized byPseudomonasaeruginosa . This
pathogen is responsible for producing extensiveAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch07” — 2007/7/17 — 20:31 — page 276 — #25
276 Chapter 7
tissue damage both directly and by antigenic
stimulation of the immune system. Recurrent
infections and remissions are the norm. Aerosol
administration of recombinant human DNase
(rhDNase) reduces the risk of infectious exacerba-
tions requiring parenteral antibiotics and improves
pulmonary function. rhDNase reduces the visco-
elasticity,reduces the adhesiveness,and improves
the mucociliary transportability of cystic ﬁbrosis
sputum.
Chronic hypoxemia,acidosis,and physical loss
of pulmonary vessels and lung tissue produce pul-
monary hypertension and cor pulmonale. Right
ventricular hypertrophy and dilatation develop.
Chronic exposure to the loading conditions that
produce hypertrophy results in progressive ventric-
ular dysfunction as the result of progressive ﬁbrosis
and cell death.
In cases in which severe right ventricular dys-
function exists,HLT is the procedure of choice. In
cases in which right ventricular function is normal
or slightly impaired,BSSLT is used by some centers
in place of HLT. SLT is not an option for patients
with cystic ﬁbrosis because the transplanted lung
will quickly become contaminated and infected by
secretions from the remaining lung. SLT with con-
tralateral pneumonectomy has been used but has
not been widely accepted.
Additional management problems are presented
by the presence of pancreatic insufﬁciency. Eighty-
ﬁve percent of patients with cystic ﬁbrosis have
pancreatic insufﬁciency severe enough to cause
steatorrhoea and malabsorption. Insufﬁcient caloric
absorption and the anorexia of chronic disease com-
bined with the increased caloric demands of chronic
infection may result in malnutrition. Enteral and
parenteral feeding may be necessary. Vitamin K
deﬁciency may result in prolongation of the pro-
thrombin time. Glucose intolerance is common
(40% of adults) and diabetes mellitus occurs in
25% of adult patients.
Subclinical liver disease and hepatomegly sec-
ondary to fatty inﬁltration are common. Only rarely
is liver dysfunction severe enough to cause hep-
atocellular dysfunction and hypersplenism. As a
result,thrombocytopenia and coagulation factor
deﬁciencies are rare.
Thedonor
Only 5–20% of all solid organ donors are suitable
lung donors. Potential lungs are rejected because of
blunt thoracic trauma,the potential of aspiration
during resuscitation,overaggressive ﬂuid resuscita-
tion,and neurogenic pulmonary edema. The guide-
lines used to select donors for lung transplantation
are summarized below:
1 Age younger than 65 years.
2 Adequate gas exchange. The donor should have
aP aO2 > 250 mmHg on FiO2 = 1.0 and PEEP= 5c m
H2Oo rP aO2 > 100 mmHg on FiO2 = 0.4 and PEEP=
5c mH2O. Pulmonary compliance should be normal
with static pressure <20 mmHg and peak pressure
<30 mmHg at a tidal volume of 15 mL/kg.
3 Normal bronchoscopic examination.
4 Normal serial chest radiographs.
5 No history of pulmonary disease. A smoking
history is acceptable in some centers.
6 Donor recipient size match. Some programs
compare donor and recipient lung size using chest
radiograph measurements. A growing practice is
comparison of donor and recipient total lung capac-
ity from nomograms based on age,height,and
sex. In patients with obstructive lung disease,an
allograft with 15–20% greater volume than that
predicted for the recipient can be used as these
patients have huge pleural cavities.
7 No active severe infection or malignancy with the
possibility of metastases.
8 Negative serologies for HIV or hepatitis B or C.
9 ABO compatibility and HLA screen.
The guidelines used to select donors for HLT are
the combination of those for heart transplantation
and those for lung transplantation.
Harvest of the lungs usually is accomplished in
conjunction with harvest of the heart. The vena
cavae are transected,an incision is made in the left
atrial appendage,and the aorta is cross-clamped and
cold cardioplegia is given. At this point,the pul-
monary artery is injected directly with 500 µgo f
PGE1 followed by infusion of 3–4 L of iced preser-
vative solution which is vented out an incision in
the left atrial appendage. The lungs are partially
inﬂated (60%) with Fi O2 of 0.4 and the trachea
or bronchi is stapled and divided. The heart-lungAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch07” — 2007/7/17 — 20:31 — page 277 — #26
Heart,Heart-Lung,and Lung Transplantation 277
block is then removed. When the heart and lungs
are to be used for separate recipients,adequate por-
tions of pulmonary artery and left atrial-pulmonary
vein cuff must be allocated to each recipient. The
lungs are immersed in a cold crystalloid solution
at 4 ◦C and transported. Although the maximum
ischemic time is 6–8 hours,the optimal ischemic
time should not exceed 5–6 hours because short-
and intermediate-term patient survival may be
effected.
Operativeprocedureandpatient
positioning
HLT is performed through a median sternotomy
with hypothermic CPB,bicaval cannulation,and
aortic cross-clamping. The recipient undergoes
resection of the heart-lung block,leaving only a
right atrial cuff in continuity with the IVC and SVC,
the cut end of the distal trachea,and the cut end of
the proximal ascending aorta. The donor heart-lung
block is implanted with anastomoses of the right
atrium,distal trachea,and ascending aorta.
SLT is performed through a standard thoracotomy
with the patient in the lateral thoracotomy posi-
tion. The donor lung block contains a cuff of left
atrium with two pulmonary veins,the bronchus,
and the branch pulmonary artery. The other donor
lung and the donor heart can be used for two other
recipients. One lung ventilation (OLV) is established
and a pneumonectomy is performed,followed by
implantation of the donor lung with anastomoses
at the left atrium,bronchus,and branch pulmonary
artery. This procedure often can be performed
without CPB.
Two very different surgical procedures are used
for DLT. Theen-bloc procedure is performed on CPB
with hypothermia,bicaval cannulation,aortic cross-
clamping,and cardioplegic arrest of the recipient
heart. A median sternotomy is used. The donor
double lung block consists of the two lungs,the
distal trachea,the main pulmonary artery,and a
large left atrial cuff with all four pulmonary veins.
The donor heart can be used for another recipi-
ent. The block is implanted with anastomoses at the
trachea,posterior left atrium,and main pulmonary
artery after bilateral recipient pneumonectomies.
This procedure is associated with poor healing of
the tracheal anastomosis and reduced long-term
survival compared with BSSLT and has been largely
abandoned.
BSSLT is the other approach to DLT. This proce-
dure often can be performed without CPB,which is
considerably more challenging for the anesthesiol-
ogist. This procedure is performed with the patient
supine through a sternal bithoractomy. Proper
positioning is necessary to provide adequate expo-
sure for the thoracotomy portion of the incision.
One approach is to position the patient’s arms sus-
pended over the head. This is cumbersome and
consumptive of the small amount of space avail-
able at the head of the table. In addition,it exposes
the patient to an increased risk of brachial plexus
injuries. With proper positioning of two rolls,one
on either side of the patient’s spine extending from
the cervical to the lumbar region,the arms can
remained tucked at the patient’s side. Each donor
lung block contains a cuff of left atrium with two
pulmonary veins,the bronchus,and the branch
pulmonary artery. The donor heart can be used
for another recipient. OLV is established and a
pneumonectomy is performed,followed by implan-
tation of the donor lung with anastomoses at
the left atrium,bronchus,and branch pulmonary
artery. The procedure is then repeated for the next
donor lung.
UseofCPB
The indications for use of CPB are summarized in
Table 7.3.
HLTand en-bloc DLT
HLT anden-bloc DLT both require hypothermic CPB
with aortic cross-clamping as described previously.
SLTandBSSLT
Elective CPB is used for SLT and BSSLT for the
following subsets of patients:
• Infants and small children.
• Patients with pulmonary hypertension.
• Patients undergoing lung transplantation and
simultaneous repair of intracardiac defects.
For all other patients with SLT and BSSLT,CPB is
initiated only when hemodynamic,gas exchange,orAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch07” — 2007/7/17 — 20:31 — page 278 — #27
278 Chapter 7
Typeoftransplant CPB OLV
HLT Full hypothermic, aortic
cross-clamp
No
En-bloc double-lung transplant Full hypothermic, aortic
cross-clamp, cardioplegic arrest
No
SLT, BSSLT
Infants, small children Full normothermic No
Intracardiac defect repair Full hypothermic, aortic
cross-clamp, cardioplegic arrest
No
Pulmonary hypertension Partial normothermic Yes
All others Partial normothermic if necessary Yes
BSSLT, bilateral sequential single lung transplantation; CPB, cardiopulmonary
bypass; HLT, heart-lung transplantation; OLV, one-lung ventilation; SLT,
single-lung transplantation.
Table7.5 Indications for
cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) and
one-lung ventilation (OLV) in lung
transplantation.
technical difﬁculties are encountered in the course
of the procedure. Most SLT and BSSLT patients
without pulmonary hypertension can be managed
without CPB. There is a higher incidence of need for
CPB in patients with restrictive lung disease. Intra-
operative criteria that predict the need for use of
CPB in patients with restrictive lung disease include
an arterial oxygen saturation(SaO2)< 90% with an
FiO2 of 1.0,baseline mean PA pressure > 40 mmHg,
mean PA pressure > 50 mmHg with the pulmonary
artery clamped,severe systemic hypotension,and
a cardiac index < 2.0 L/min/m2. Avoiding CPB
when possible is important because use of CPB
contributes to postoperative graft dysfunction in
the form of an increased arterial:alveolar oxygen
ratio,increased severity of radiographic pulmonary
injury,and prolonged postoperative intubation. It
does not appear that use of CPB effects long-term
outcome.
Full CPB is used for infants and small children
and for all patients undergoing simultaneous repair
of an intracardiac lesion. Aortic cross-clamping and
cardioplegic arrest are only necessary when intra-
cardiac defects are repaired. Normothermic par-
tial CPB is used for all other cases of SLT and
BSSLT. Cannulation of the ascending aorta and the
right atrium is used for bilateral SLT and right SLT.
For patients undergoing left SLT,descending aorta
and pulmonary artery cannulations have been used.
Alternatively,femoral vein and artery cannulation
can be used.
Anestheticmanagement
Goals
1 Patients with obstructive lung disease may
exhibit auto-PEEP,stacking of breaths,and hemo-
dynamic compromise with positive pressure
ventilation. Ventilatory interventions will be
necessary.
2 Pre-existing LV or RV dysfunction requires that
contractility be maintained or enhanced.
3 Avoid hypercarbia,hypoxemia,and acidosis that
will exacerbate pulmonary hypertension and may
result in acute RV decompensation.
4 Avoid increase in the PVR:SVR ratio in patients
with Eisenmenger syndrome. This will increase
right-to-left shunting and worsen hypoxemia.
Preoperativeevaluation
Lung transplant patients typically undergo exten-
sive medical evaluation. A summary of this eval-
uation is readily available to the anesthesiologist
through the transplant coordinator.
Premedication
Most patients are called into the hospital on short
notice and many will have eaten solid food inAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch07” — 2007/7/17 — 20:31 — page 279 — #28
Heart,Heart-Lung,and Lung Transplantation 279
the previous 6–8 hours. In addition,patients will
have taken their initial doses of oral immuno-
suppressive drugs,usually cyclosporine and aza-
thioprine or mycophenolate moftil. Cyclosporine
usually is administered with 10–20 mL of liquid. It
is important to verify that these medications have
been taken. To reduce the risk of aspiration in adults
and older children,a nonparticulate antacid such
as bicitra 30 mL can be given in addition to intra-
venous metaclopromide 10 mg and an intravenous
H2 receptor blocker such as ranitidine 50 mg. For
infants and smaller children a period of 2–3 hours of
NPO status is sufﬁcient and usually transpires before
induction.
Premedication for adults and children is most
safely and effectively titrated by the anesthesiol-
ogist before induction and while lines are placed
and the history and physical examination are
completed. Midazolam 0.03–0.05 mg/kg in divided
doses works well to reduce anxiety. Supplemental
oxygen should be administered because hypoxemia
will exacerbate existing pulmonary hypertension.
Preinduction
Some transplant patients will be receiving intra-
venous inotropic and vasodilator therapy when
they arrive for surgery. These agents should be con-
tinued via a reliable intravenous route. Sterility is
of the utmost importance because the patients will
be immunosuppressed. Patients with bronchospas-
tic disease should receive bronchodilator therapy
before induction. Likewise,patients with cystic
ﬁbrosis should receive nebulized acetylcysteine or
rhDNase to help break up tenacious secretions.
Adults
All patients should have two large-bore periph-
eral intravenous lines (14-gauge). If the patient’s
arms are suspended over the head,venous access
in or below the antecubital fossa is not practical
because ﬂow will be impaired. Placement of one
or more introducer sheaths in the internal jugular
vein for use as reliable sites of rapid ﬂuid admin-
istration is warranted if peripheral access is poor
or the arms are to be suspended over the head.
ECG monitoring should allow assessment of V 5,
I,II,III,aV R,aV L,and aV F. Baseline recording
of all seven leads should be obtained for compar-
ative purposes. Normally,two leads (II and V 5)
are monitored simultaneously intraoperatively. If
a left thoractomy incision is used,V 5 is not an
option because the lead will be in the operative ﬁeld.
A radial or femoral artery catheter is placed with
local anesthesia before induction of anesthesia.
When a femoral artery catheter is used,it should
be placed in femoral artery contralateral to the one
that will be cannulated if CPB is used.
Most centers place a pulmonary artery catheter
in adults for SLT and BSSLT. The catheter can be
placed after induction in patients who are unable
to lie ﬂat or to cooperate. Some centers use PA
catheters that allow continuous cardiac output and
mixed venous oxygen saturation (Sv O2) moni-
toring. The PA catheter is an important tool in
managing the patient during pneumonectomy and
clamping of the pulmonary artery. In addition,
information obtained from the PA catheter is used
to determine whether completion of the proce-
dure without CPB is feasible. It is not necessary
to direct the pulmonary artery catheter into the
contralateral pulmonary artery in patients under-
going SLT. The catheter can be pulled back into the
main pulmonary artery before pulmonary artery
clamping and then advanced into the contralateral
pulmonary artery.
For HLT some centers do not place a PA catheter
for the same reasons outlined for heart transplant
patients. As with heart transplantation,some cen-
ters prefer that the right internal jugular vein not be
used as an access site in HLT patients in order that
it can be used later for obtaining endomyocardial
biopsies.
Multiplane TEE is used to help manage the patient
pre- and post-CPE. After transplantation,TEE is
used to assess left and right ventricular function,
measure pulmonary artery pressures (using a tri-
cuspid regurgitation jet),and guide management
of pulmonary artery hypertension and RV dys-
function if necessary. In addition,TEE is used
to assess the pulmonary arterial and pulmonary
venous anastomoses after lung transplantation. TEE
also has proved useful in detection and treat-
ment of dynamic,infundibular RV outﬂow tract
obstruction after lung transplantation. Patients withAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch07” — 2007/7/17 — 20:31 — page 280 — #29
280 Chapter 7
RV hypertrophy may have apposition of the walls
of the infundibulum in systole,when RV afterload
is reduced after donor lung implantation. Hypo-
volemia and inotrope use tend to exacerbate this
problem.
A thoracic or lumbar epidural can be used both
intraoperatively and for postoperative pain man-
agement in SLT and BSSLT patients. The catheter
can be placed preoperatively in those patients who
are unlikely to require CPB. For patients requiring
CPB,the epidural catheter is placed postoperatively
after reversal of heparinization and correction of
coagulation deﬁciencies. Some centers prefer to
place all epidural catheters postoperatively as it is
often impossible to predict whether a patient will
require CPB. In thoracic catheters,0.0625–0.125%
bupivacaine and fentanyl 10 µg/mL at 4–8 mL/h
can be infused. In lumbar catheters preservative-
free morphine 0.05 mg/mL at 5–10 mL/h can
be used.
Children
Placement of an intravenous catheter before induc-
tion is optimal with induction proceeding as
described for adult patients. Patients with preserved
ventricular function,an appropriate NPO interval,
and cardiopulmonary stability will likely tolerate
an inhalation induction. ECG monitoring should
allow assessment of V5,I,II,III,aV R,aV L,and aV F.
Baseline recording of all seven leads should be
obtained for comparative purposes. Normally,two
leads (II and V 5) are monitored simultaneously
intraoperatively. If a left thoractomy incision is
used,V 5 is not an option because the lead will be
in the operative ﬁeld. A radial or femoral artery
catheter is placed after induction of anesthesia. CVP
monitoring is placed after induction. For older chil-
dren undergoing SLT or BSSLT with or without
CPB,a PA catheter is placed. For all other children,
an appropriately sized double-lumen central venous
line is placed. The right internal jugular vein is the
preferred site. A pediatric multiplane TEE probe
can be used for children weighing less than 15–20 kg
and the adult multiplane TEE probe for children
weighing more than 20–30 kg to help manage the
patient pre- and post-CPB as described previously
for adult patients.
For older children undergoing SLT and BSSLT,
a lumbar or thoracic epidural catheter can be placed
for postoperative pain management.
ManagementofOLV
The indications for use of OLV are summarized in
Table 7.3. In procedures performed with full CPB,
lung isolation and OLV are not necessary. These
procedures can be managed with a standard single-
lumen endotracheal tube. The anesthetic plan for
SLT and BSSLT in adults and older children must
include a method of lung isolation and OLV because
these procedures are being performed increasingly
without CPB or with partial CPB. When partial CPB
is used,OLV to the perfused,nonoperative lung is
necessary. Four methods of lung isolation and OLV
are available.
Endobronchialintubation
A standard endotracheal tube (ETT) is used and
then a bronchoscope is used to direct the ETT down
the main stem bronchus of the lung that is to be
ventilated.
Advantages
• Applicable to any size patient with use of an
appropriate-sized ETT.
• Placement is easy with the appropriate-sized
ﬁberoptic bronchoscope. When the right main
stem bronchus is intubated,visualization of the
right upper lobe (RUL) bronchus is possible
with the bronchoscope. This helps prevent occlu-
sion of the RUL bronchus by the balloon of
the ETT.
• Suctioning of secretions via the ETT before endo-
bronchial intubation is easy because a large suction
catheter or ﬁberoptic bronchoscope can be used.
• When the procedure is completed,the ETT does
not have to be replaced.
Disadvantages
• Some deﬂation of the nonventilated lung will
occur passively,but most will occur by absorption
of gas. For patients with emphysema,this will result
in slow,poor lung deﬂation and poor operating
conditions.Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch07” — 2007/7/17 — 20:31 — page 281 — #30
Heart,Heart-Lung,and Lung Transplantation 281
• Suctioning of the nonventilated lung and applica-
tion of continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP)
to the nonventilated lung is impossible.
• In taller patients,a standard ETT may not be long
enough to extend far enough into the main stem
bronchus to provide isolation.
Single-lumenendotrachealtubeplus
abronchialblocker
This technique involves use of a Fogarty catheter or
Arndt blocker and a standard ETT. Laryngoscopy is
performed and the blocker is placed in the trachea,
followed by placement of the endotracheal tube.
Alternatively the blocker can be placed within the
lumen of the ETT. In either case,a ﬁberoptic bron-
choscope is used to guide the bronchial blocking
catheter down the appropriate bronchus.
Advantages
• Applicable to any size patient with use of
an appropriate-sized ETT and bronchial blocker.
Fogarty catheters with balloon sizes from 0.5–3.0 mL
are available. Arndt blockers are available in 5-,7-
and 9-French catheters with high-volume low-
pressure balloons. Placement is easy with the
appropriate-sized ﬁberoptic bronchoscope.
• Suctioning of secretions via the ETT before place-
ment of the blocker is easy because a large suction
catheter or ﬁberoptic bronchoscope can be used.
• When the procedure is completed,the ETT does
not have to be replaced and the Fogarty catheter
can be removed.
Disadvantages
• Deﬂation of the blocked lung must occur by
absorption of gas. For patients with emphysema,
this will result in slow,poor lung deﬂation and poor
operating conditions.
• Suctioning of the nonventilated lung and appli-
cation of CPAP to the nonventilated lung is
impossible.
• Maintaining the position of the blocker in the
main stem bronchus during surgical manipulation
may be difﬁcult or impossible. In patients with cystic
ﬁbrosis undergoing BSSLT,this introduces the risk
of contamination of the ﬁrst lung transplanted with
secretions from the remaining diseased lung.
• Visualization of the RUL bronchus with a ﬁber-
optic bronchoscope is impossible with the blocker
in the right main stem bronchus. As a result,
occlusion of the RUL bronchus by the balloon of
the blocker may occur due to the high takeoff of
the RUL bronchus. This makes surgical excision
of the right lung and the subsequent transplant
bronchial anastomosis technically difﬁcult.
• The Fogerty catheter balloon is a high-pressure
low-volume balloon that may compromise
bronchial mucosal blood ﬂow.
Univenttube
This is a standard endotracheal tube with a 3-mm
outer diameter bronchial blocker,which passes
through a 4-mm channel incorporated within the
lumen of the endotracheal tube. The bronchial
blocker has a 2-mm internal diameter lumen.
These tubes are available with internal diameters
from 6.0 to 9.0 mm in 0.5 mm increments and
in a 3.5 mm uncuffed and 4.5 mm cuffed version.
Because of the presence of the enclosed bronchial
blocker,the external diameter of these tubes is con-
siderably larger. The external diameter of the 8 mm
Univent tube is 13 mm which is the same as the
external diameter of a 39-French double-lumen
endotracheal tube (DLT). The external diameter
of the 3.5 mm Univent tube is same as a 6 mm
ETT or a 26-French DLT. Optimal placement of
the bronchial blocker requires use of a ﬁberoptic
bronchoscope.
Advantages
• The arrangement of the blocker as an integral part
of the ETT provides better stability of the blocker
within the main stem bronchus during surgical
manipulation.
• It is easier to place in a patient with a difﬁcult
airway than a DLT.
• The internal lumen of the blocker will allow some
decompression of the nonventilated lung and will
allow the application of CPAP.
• When the procedure is completed,the Univent
tube does not have to be replaced with a standard
ETT. The bronchial blocker can be withdrawn into
the internal channel and the Univent tube can be
left in place.Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch07” — 2007/7/17 — 20:31 — page 282 — #31
282 Chapter 7
Disadvantages
• Due to the large external diameter,these tubes
are useful only for adult patients and older children.
• The internal lumen of the blocker is too small to
allow adequate suctioning of secretions.
• As with a standard bronchial blocker,occlusion
of the RUL bronchus by the balloon of the blocker
may occur.
• The bronchial blocker balloon is a high-
pressure low-volume balloon that may compromise
bronchial mucosal blood ﬂow.
Double-lumenendotracheal
tube(DLT)
DLTs are available in sizes from 26-,28-,32-,35-,
37-,39-,41-,and 43-French. The outer diameter
of a 26-French DLT is equivalent to a 6.0 mm ETT
and thus is appropriate size for a patient weight-
ing approximately 30 kg or 8–10 years of age. Both
right- and left-sided tubes are available. Right-sided
tubes have a side lumen in the bronchial tube
that must be positioned over the RUL bronchus
so that the balloon of the bronchial lumen does not
occlude the RUL bronchus. Fiberoptic bronchoscopy
is necessary to ensure proper positioning of both
right- and left-sided DLTs.
Advantages
• Deﬂation and suctioning of the nonventilated
lung is easily accomplished.
• Application of CPAP to the nonventilated lung
is easy.
• The endobronchial tube is not dislodged easily
with surgical manipulation.
• Visualization of the RUL bronchus with the DLT
in place is accomplished easily with a ﬁberoptic
bronchoscope.
Disadvantages
• Alignment of the RUL lumen of a right-sided DLT
with the patient’s RUL can be difﬁcult,particularly
in the presence of thick secretions.
• The smallest available DLT is appropriate for
children aged 7–8 years.
• Suctioning tenacious secretions through the small
lumens of the DL tube is more difﬁcult than through
the lumen of a standard ETT.
• When the procedure is completed,the DLT must
be exchanged for a standard ETT.
A left-sided DLT is the method of choice for lung
isolation in adult and pediatric patients undergoing
SLT and BSSLT. The left DLT provides greater versa-
tility and ease of placement. A left-sided DLT,when
properly placed,with use of a ﬁberoptic broncho-
scope does not compromise surgical exposure for
the left pneumonectomy and the subsequent trans-
plant bronchial anastomosis. Consideration should
be given to use of a bronchial blocker or Univent
tube in patients with a difﬁcult airway. When a
left-sided DLT is needed,placement is accomplished
as follows:
1 The trachea is intubated such that the tracheal
cuff is just below the vocal cords and the tube
is rotated 90 ◦ to the left. The trachea cuff is
inﬂated and the patient is ventilated. The bronchial
lumen will be located just above the carina in most
normal-sized patients.
2 An appropriate-sized ﬁberoptic bronchoscope is
introduced down the bronchial lumen and the right
and left main stem bronchi are identiﬁed. In some
instances,it may be necessary to pull the DLT back
slightly if the tip of the bronchial lumen is past the
carina. For patients with cystic ﬁbrosis or bronchiec-
tasis,thick secretions may make identiﬁcation dif-
ﬁcult. A suction catheter and saline irrigation may
have to be introduced down the bronchial lumen to
clear secretions. Suctioning through the broncho-
scope is difﬁcult considering the small caliber scopes
that can ﬁt down the DLT. Alternatively,aggres-
sive cleanout with an SLT and a large bronchoscope
can be accomplished before placement of the DLT.
3 The bronchoscope is advanced down the left
main stem bronchus and the left upper lobe
bronchus is identiﬁed.
4 While the operator keeps the tip of the broncho-
scope above the left upper lobe bronchus oriﬁce,the
tracheal balloon is deﬂated and the DLT is advanced
into the left main stem bronchus over the bron-
choscope. The tip of the bronchial lumen should be
conﬁrmed to be above the left upper lobe bronchus.
The tracheal balloon is re-inﬂated and ventilation
continues.
5 The bronchoscope is now placed down the tra-
cheal lumen. Ideally,the tracheal lumen should beAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch07” — 2007/7/17 — 20:31 — page 283 — #32
Heart,Heart-Lung,and Lung Transplantation 283
positioned just above the right main stem bronchus
with the bronchial balloon below the rim of the
oriﬁce of the left main stem bronchus. If the DLT
has been advanced too far down the left main stem
bronchus,the tracheal lumen may lie within the
left main stem bronchus. This is unlikely if the tip
of the bronchial lumen lies above the left upper lobe
bronchus.
6 If the tracheal lumen is within the left main stem
bronchus,the tracheal balloon is deﬂated and the
DLT is pulled back until the tracheal lumen pro-
vides unobstructed access to the right main stem
bronchus. The bronchial balloon should remain at
or below the rim of the left main stem bronchus
oriﬁce. The tracheal balloon is re-inﬂated.
7 After proper positioning is conﬁrmed,the
bronchial balloon is inﬂated while the bronchoscope
remains in the tracheal lumen. The bronchial bal-
loon should not herniate out the left main stem
bronchus when the balloon is inﬂated. If the bal-
loon herniates out of the left main stem bronchus,
the DLT must be advanced slightly into the left main
stem bronchus.
8 Positioning of the DLT should be rechecked with
the bronchoscope after the patient has been moved
into ﬁnal position. DLT placement may change after
movement of the patient into the lateral decubitus
position.
Inductionandmaintenance
Anesthetic techniques should allow for early post-
operative extubation. Many patients with end-stage
pulmonary disease will be unable to lie ﬂat due
to severe dyspnea. These patients are induced in
the sitting position and,as they lose conscious-
ness,they are slowly placed supine. For patients
in whom there is a risk of aspiration,induction is
performed with the patient in a slightly head up
position and cricoid pressure is applied until the
trachea is intubated.
Narcotic-induced rigidity with subsequent difﬁ-
culty ventilating can have disastrous consequences
for these patients. Careful titration of etomidate
(0.1–0.3 mg/kg) in combination with 5–10µg/kg of
fentanyl or 1–2 µg/kg of sufentanil is useful for
induction. A full 0.3 mg/kg dose of etomidate is
often not necessary to induce hypnosis and loss
of consciousness in these patients. This drug com-
bination has minimal direct effect on heart rate,
myocardial contractility,peripheral vascular resis-
tance,or venous capacitance. An overall diminution
in central sympathetic tone will also contribute
to circulatory depression. A nondepolarizing mus-
cle relaxant in a dose 2 × ED95 such as vecuro-
nium or pancuronium 0.02 mg/kg or cisatracurium
0.04 mg/kg is used to assure prompt control of
the airway. Pancuronium is generally reserved for
those patients in who a low baseline heart rate. In
infants and children the vagolytic and sympathome-
tic effects of pancuronium can be used to counteract
the vagotonic effects of fentanyl or sufentanil. These
drugs in combination with rocuronium (1.0 mg/kg)
or succinylcholine (1–2 mg/kg) can be used to per-
form a modiﬁed rapid sequence induction (cricoid
pressure during positive pressure ventilation) in the
patient with questionable NPO status. Thiopental
and propofol are less well tolerated. Thiopental in
particular may exacerbate bronchospasm.
Anesthesia can be maintained with additional
doses of opioid in conjunction with a benzo-
diazepine (usually midazolam in increments of
0.01–0.03 mg/kg) or a low inhaled concentration
(0.5–0.75 MAC) of isoﬂurane or sevoﬂurane. N 2O
is not a good choice as an adjuvant agent; it
has a weak myocardial depressant effect that nor-
mally is counteracted by the sympathetic outﬂow it
produces.
For patients with obstructive lung disease
(emphysema, α1-antitrypsin deﬁciency,cystic ﬁbro-
sis) induction and positive pressure ventilation
may produce profound hypotension. The possibil-
ity that a pneunothorax is present must always
be considered. This cardiovascular compromise
is secondary to air trapping or auto-PEEP. This
auto-PEEP reduces SV and cardiac output through
the following:
• Reductions in venous return to the RV resulting
in a decrease in RVEDV.
• Increased impedance to RV ejection by mechan-
ical compression of the pulmonary arterial system
resulting in an increase in RVESV.
• Shift of the interventricular septum into the
LV,which increases LV stiffness and reduces
LVEDV.Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch07” — 2007/7/17 — 20:31 — page 284 — #33
284 Chapter 7
This combination is particularly detrimental for
patients with compromised RV systolic function and
RV afterload mismatch. Treatment requires vol-
ume administration to (10–15 mL/kg of a balanced
salt solution) to normalize RVEDV and inotropic
support to improve RV systolic function and nor-
malize RVESV. Either dopamine 5–10 µg/kg/min
or epinephrine 0.01–0.10 µg/kg/min (adults) or
0.05–0.50 µg/kg/min (children) are effective. In
addition,ventilation with a rapid initial inﬂation
followed by an inspiratory hold or pause and a
long expiration time is necessary (low inspiratory
to expiratory time (I:E) ratio). This may require
hand ventilation,although pressure-control venti-
lation with an intensive care unit (ICU) ventilator
works well. PEEP should not be used.
TEE is extremely valuable in assessing ventric-
ular ﬁlling and contractile function in this set-
ting because ﬁlling pressures will not provide an
accurate measure of ventricular volumes.
In the most severe instances,intermittent periods
of apnea may be necessary. This apneic oxygenation
may exacerbate pre-existing pulmonary hyperten-
sion via carbon dioxide retention and hypoxemia.
Evaluation of pulmonary artery pressures and car-
diac output with a PA catheter,RV and LV func-
tion with TEE,and arterial saturation with pulse
oximetry are necessary to determine the extent
of hypoventilation that can be tolerated. Marked
acidosis (pH of 6.94) and hypercarbia (Pa CO2 of
150 mmHg) can be tolerated during lung trans-
plantation as long as systemic blood pressure and
oxygen delivery are maintained. In some instances
initiation of CPB may be necessary.
Blood loss may be impressive during dissec-
tion for pneumonectomy in HLT,SLT,and DLT
patients with dense adhesions from previous tho-
racic surgery or for patients with cystic ﬁbrosis or
bronchiectasis. A rapid transfusion device may be
necessary in some cases. Some centers use antiﬁb-
rinolytics or aprotinin in both children and adults
when CPB is used or when there are dense adhe-
sions regardless of whether CPB is used. In addition
to red cells,component therapy with fresh frozen
plasma (FFP) and platelets often is necessary,partic-
ularly when CPB is used. Manipulation of the lungs
in patients with cystic ﬁbrosis or bronchiectasis
may result in release of endotoxins with subse-
quent decrease in SVR,hyperpyrexia,and increased
metabolic rate. Management of the recipient with-
out use of CPB under these conditions is extremely
difﬁcult.
After one or both of the lungs have been
implanted and perfused,most centers administer
methylprednisolone (usually 10 mg/kg for children
and 500 mg for adults). After lung implantation
has been completed,5–10 cm H 2O PEEP is applied
and the Fi O2 selected is the lowest necessary to
obtain a PaO2 of 90–100 mmHg. This is done because
the post-ischemic lung is vulnerable to oxygen-free
radial toxicity. At the termination of the procedure,
patients with DLTs have the DLT replaced with a
large single-lumen ETT. A large tube size should be
used to allow easy access for postoperative ﬁberoptic
bronchoscopy.
SpecialconsiderationsforSLTandBSSLT
Management of OLV and pulmonary artery clamp-
ing for recipient pneumonectomy and allograft
implantation in SLT and BSSLT patients with-
out CPB is a challenge. The task is made easier
for patients undergoing SLT if the lung with the
poorest ventilation and perfusion is removed and
replaced. For patients undergoing BSSLT,the lung
with the poorest ventilation and perfusion should
be removed ﬁrst and replaced.
Maintenance of body temperature is difﬁcult
when CPB is not used. A warming blanket under
the patient,an actively humidiﬁed breathing circuit,
a ﬂuid/blood warmer,and a forced warm air blanket
over the patient all are necessary.
Onelungventilation(OLV)
Collapse of the operative lung and OLV is likely
to exacerbate air trapping and the subsequent
hemodynamic compromise and carbon dioxide
retention. Treatment with volume administration,
inotropes,and ventilatory interventions is war-
ranted as described previously. Marked hypercarbia
with acidosis is likely and generally is well toler-
ated. Aggressive suctioning may be necessary to
facilitate collapse of the operative lung. PaO2 also is
likely to decrease,due to intrapulmonary shunting,
until the ipsilateral pulmonary artery is clamped.Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch07” — 2007/7/17 — 20:31 — page 285 — #34
Heart,Heart-Lung,and Lung Transplantation 285
Administration of CPAP to the nonventilated lung,
insufﬂation of oxygen to the nonventilated lung,
or high-frequency jet ventilation (HFJV) of the
nonventilated lung may improve oxygenation.
ClampingofthePA
Recipient pneumonectomy requires clamping of
the ipsilateral pulmonary artery. Before clamping
of the pulmonary artery,the pulmonary artery
catheter is withdrawn into the main pulmonary
artery. Palpation by the surgeon will conﬁrm its
position proximal to the proposed cross-clamp site.
After the ipsilateral pulmonary artery has been
clamped,the catheter is advanced into the contralat-
eral pulmonary artery. Clamping of the pulmonary
artery may compromise RV function due to after-
load mismatch. This is most likely in patients with
mild to moderate pre-existing pulmonary hyperten-
sion and in those with impaired RV function. This
is the primary reason why patients with severe pul-
monary hypertension require elective CPB. If there
is any doubt regarding the ability of the patient
to tolerate pulmonary artery clamping,a trial of
clamping is recommended. TEE is used to assess
RV function. In addition,increased PAP and CVP,
falling cardiac index,and Sv O2 may occur.
Allograftimplantation
Immediately after allograft implantation and
washout of the preservative solution and prosta-
glandin,there may be profound,transient systemic
hypotension. Treatment requires ﬂuid administra-
tion and α-adrenergic support. After implantation
of the donor lung,there usually is an immedi-
ate reduction in PA pressures and an improve-
ment in pulmonary compliance and gas exchange.
This period may be followed by allograft dysfunc-
tion characterized by deteriorating gas exchange,
decreasing pulmonary compliance,and elevated
PA pressures. This is the result of noncardiogenic,
reperfusion pulmonary edema. Two factors predis-
pose this process: pre-existing pulmonary hyperten-
sion,which results in over-perfusion of the donor
lung and a long ischemic interval,which enhances
capillary permeability.
PEEP (5–15 cm H 2O) usually is necessary to
maintain adequate gas exchange when allograft
dysfunction occurs. Increased capillary permeabil-
ity and the lack of pulmonary lymphatic drainage
in the allograft require judicious crystalloid admin-
istration. Excessively large tidal volumes should
be avoided because over inﬂation of the allo-
graft will contribute to elevated PA pressures
through mechanical compression of the pulmonary
vasculature.
If allograft dysfunction is severe,implantation of
the second lung in BSSLT patients may require CPB.
If CPB is not used,implantation of the second lung
is managed as described for the ﬁrst lung.
IndicationsforCPB
The decision to use CPB is individualized for each
patient. The use of CPB may become necessary
at any time during the procedure. The combina-
tion of a cardiac index< 2 L/min/m2,Sv O2 < 60%,
mean arterial pressure (MAP)< 50–60 mmHg,
SaO2 < 85–90%,and pH < 7.00 despite aggres-
sive ventilatory and pharmacologic intervention is
an indication for use of CPB. CPB is not nec-
essary for increased pulmonary artery pressures
unless there is evidence of deteriorating RV func-
tion. TEE assessment of RV function is supple-
mented by use of CVP determinations. Increasing
CVP,RV distension,worsening global hypokine-
sis,and new or worsening tricuspid regurgitation
(TR) despite inotropic support with epinephrine,
NE,or dopamine in combination with inhaled
(NO 20–40 ppm) or intravenous pulmonary vasodi-
lation (milrinone 0.5–1.0 µg/kg/min,nitroglycerin
0.5–5.0 µg/kg/min,PGE 1 0.05–0.20 µg/kg/min,or
PGI2 5–20 ng/kg/min) are indications for use of
CPB. NE (0.01–0.10 µg/kg/min) is the most effec-
tive agent for maintaining coronary perfusion pres-
sure in patients with RV hypertension but its use
must be tempered with the knowledge that it may
increase PVR as well.
TEE assessment of LV function is supplemented
by use of pulmonary artery occlusion pressure
(PAOP) determinations. Hypoxemia,hypercarbia,
and reduced systemic blood pressure can all
contribute to LV dysfunction. Progressive dete-
rioration in LV function (new wall motion
abnormalities,LV distension,new or worsen-
ing mitral regurgitation (MR)) despite aggressiveAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch07” — 2007/7/17 — 20:31 — page 286 — #35
286 Chapter 7
pharmacologic and ventilatory interventions is an
indication for CPB.
A metabolic acidosis is difﬁcult to treat because
sodium bicarbonate administration will produce
carbon dioxide,which must be eliminated by
increased alveolar ventilation. Obviously,increas-
ing alveolar ventilation often is not possible in these
patients.
Post-CPBmanagement
Preparations for terminating CPB are discussed in
detail in Chapter 10. Particular attention must be
paid to de airing the heart. Severe ventricular dys-
function may follow ejection of air through the
coronary arteries. The RV is particularly at risk due
to the anterior location of the right coronary ostia.
TEE is valuable in guiding the de-airing process.
Patients undergoing HLT have a denervated heart
and are managed in the post-CPB period in the
same manner as that described for heart transplant
patients.
RV function usually improves dramatically after
lung implantation due to the immediate reduc-
tion in pulmonary artery pressures. Despite this,
patients with en-bloc DLT,BSSLT,or SLT may
require inotropic support. Patients requiring aortic
cross-clamping and cardioplegic arrest are at par-
ticular risk for post-CPB right and left ventricular
dysfunction. In addition,the presence of lung allo-
graft dysfunction may contribute to post-CPB RV
dysfunction as the result of elevated PA pressures.
Postoperativecare
In rare instances,extracorporeal membrane oxy-
genation and independent lung ventilation may be
necessary after SLT in patients with pulmonary
hypertension secondary to reperfusion pulmonary
edema. Postoperative independent lung ventilation
with a DLT has been used for patients with SLT
to minimize preferential ventilation and air trap-
ping in the native lung in patients with obstructive
lung disease. For these patients,the native lung
has high compliance and air trapping can result in
hyperinﬂation with subsequent displacement of the
mediastinum and compression of the donor lung.
Differential ventilation with hypoventilation of the
native lung has been used successfully to avoid this
problem. Preferential perfusion of the donor lung
occurs after SLT,especially for patients with pul-
monary hypertension. In cases of severe V /Q mis-
match,selective hypoventilation of the native lung
combined with positioning the patient in the lateral
position with the donor lung in the nondepen-
dent position may be necessary in the postoperative
period. This will minimize over ventilation of the
native lung and over-perfusion of the donor lung.
In patients with SLT with a ﬁbrotic native lung,posi-
tioning the patient with the donor lung dependent
may help equalize ventilation to the both lungs.
Noncardiacsurgeryin
lungtransplantpatients
As with heart transplant patients,lung transplant,
and HLT patients may require surgical procedures.
Some are purely elective,whereas others are likely
to be urgent or emergent. Most surgical procedures
are the direct result of complications of immuno-
suppressive therapy. These complications are listed
Table 7.2. The incidence of complications requir-
ing general surgical consultation and intervention
in lung transplant patients is 16%. In addition,
lung transplant patients suffer airway and vascu-
lar anastomotic complications that require operative
intervention. The incidence of airway complications
in SLT and BSSLT is 12–17% per anastomosis with
an associated mortality rate of 2–3%. Nine percent
of nonlethal airway complications require opera-
tive intervention. Similar statistics exist in pediatric
patients. The most common intervention required
is for treatment of bronchial stenosis. This usually
involves ﬂexible and rigid bronchoscopy for laser
excision of granulation tissue,stent placement,or
balloon dilatation.
Lung transplant and HLT patients present a
unique set of management issues.
1 Loss of cough reﬂex due to transection of vagal ﬁbers.
This makes the patient with a transplanted lung
prone to retention of secretions and at risk for pul-
monary infections. The risk of aspiration should
not be signiﬁcantly increased,as the innervation of
the larynx,epiglottis,and proximal trachea remainAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch07” — 2007/7/17 — 20:31 — page 287 — #36
Heart,Heart-Lung,and Lung Transplantation 287
normal. However,laryngeal nerve injury during
dissection can result in loss of protective airway
reﬂexes.
2 Reduction in lung volumes . Mild proportional
reductions in all lung volumes are seen long term
in patients after HLT,DLT,and SLT. These reduc-
tions are not due to reduced elastic properties of
the transplanted lung but are secondary to the vol-
ume constraints of the recipient chest cavity and
to the strength and efﬁciency of the thoracic mus-
culature. In fact,the improvement in elastic recoil
and the reduced chest wall distention that follow
SLT for emphysema substantially reduce the work
of breathing and dyspnea.
3 Ventilatory response to carbon dioxide . HLT and
DLT patients have total vagal denervation,whereas
SLT patients retain vagal innervation to the native
lung. HLT,BSSLT,and SLT patients all increase
minute ventilation in response to carbon diox-
ide rebreathing-induced hypercapnia. However,
while SLT patients increase both tidal volume and
respiratory rate,HLT and BSSLT patients exhibit an
increase in tidal volume with little or no respiratory
rate response.
4 Ventilatory response to hypoxia. Lung transplant
patients have an increase in tidal volume and res-
piratory rate comparable to normal patients in
response to hypoxia.
5 Rejection. Acute rejection of the transplanted
lungs can be diagnosed both clinically and with
transbronchial biopsies via a ﬂexible bronchoscope.
In the absence of clinical evidence of rejection
(dyspnea,fever,diffuse perihilar inﬁltrate on chest
radiograph) biopsies are performed at regular inter-
vals postoperatively,Obviously,if clinical evidence
of rejection exists,more frequent biopsies may be
indicated to document rejection and to assess
regression of histologic changes with treatment.
Biopsies are graded from 0 to 4 based on histologic
criteria.
Acute rejection of the lungs is very common;
approximately 50% of patients experience an acute
rejection episode in the ﬁrst 3–6 months post-
transplantation. Rejection of the heart in HLT
patients,on the other hand,is uncommon. Because
rejection of the heart and lungs is not synchronous,
heart biopsies are performed in HLT patients
only if there is clinical evidence of heart rejec-
tion. Rejection is treated with oral or intravenous
pulsed steroids. Persistent rejection unresponsive to
steroids usually is treated with a lympholytic agent
such as polyclonal antithymocyte globulin (ATG) or
murine monoclonal antibody (OKT3).
1 Bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome (BOS) and bron-
chiolitis obliterans (BO) . BOS is a clinical entity
characterized by declining FEV1, FEF25–75,and
FEF50/FVC. BOS is graded based on the reduction
in FEV1 compared with the best baseline value
(0: FEV 1 > 90% and FEF25–75 > 75%; 1: FEV1
66–80%; 2: FEV1 51–65%; 3: FEV 1 < 50%). BO is
a pathologic diagnosis based on histologic evidence
of ﬁbrous scarring of membraneous and respiratory
bronchioles with partial or complete obliteration
of the lumen. BOS and BO are the main sources
of morbidity and mortality after lung transplanta-
tion. The prevalence of BOS and BO for HLT,SLT,
and BSSLT patients is at 25% at 1 year,50–60% at
3 years,60% at 5 years,and 80% at 10 years in large
series. The survival rate for lung transplant patients
is 76% at 1 year,60% at 3 years,49% at 5 years,and
24% at 10 years.
Once established,BOS and BO follow a progres-
sively worsening course. Patients with BOS and BO
ultimately develop severe obstructive pulmonary
disease and progressive hypoxemia. Augmented
immunosuppression may attenuate this downhill
course and improve survival. In severe progres-
sive cases,retransplantation is the only option.
However,the results are not encouraging,with a
5-year survival of 45%,as BOS and BO usually
reoccur within a short time.
The etiology is multifactorial with rejection and
CMV infection both implicated. It is believed that
an alloimmune injury occurs with subsequent
release of immunologic mediators and production
of growth factors that lead to luminal obliteration
and scarring of the small airway. Monitoring for
BO is accomplished with transbronchial biopsies
or open lung biopsy when transbronchial biopsies
specimens are equivocal.
2 Response to drugs . HLT patients have a den-
ervated heart and have drug responses iden-
tical to those described for heart transplant
patients.Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch07” — 2007/7/17 — 20:31 — page 288 — #37
288 Chapter 7
3 HLT patients. These patients will have all of
the cardiac problems outlined previously for heart
transplant patients.
Anestheticconsiderationsfor
noncardiacsurgeryinpatients
postlungtransplantation
1 Sterile technique is essential.
2 Patients with stenotic airways and patients
with BOS and BO may exhibit air trapping and
auto-PEEP.
3 Diminished cough reﬂex makes clearing of secre-
tions difﬁcult. Laryngeal damage will predispose to
aspiration.
4 Lymphatic interruption necessitates careful ﬂuid
administration to avoid interstitial pulmonary ﬂuid
accumulation.
5 Placement of an ETT must take into account the
position of the tracheal or bronchial anastomoses.
6 Patients with preoperative carbon dioxide reten-
tion may exhibit carbon dioxide retention for
2–3 weeks postoperatively as the central
chemoreceptors reset.
7 HLT patients will present the same cardiac
challenges as heart transplant patients.
8 Stress-dose steroid coverage should be admin-
istered to patients receiving steroids as part of
immunosuppression.
Suggestedreading
Bengel FM,Ueberfuhr P,Schiepel N etal . Effect of sympa-
thetic reinnervation on cardiac performance after heart
transplantation.NEnglJMed 2001;345:731–8.
Boucek MM,Edwards LB,Keck BM et al. Registry of the
International Society for Heart and Lung Transplanta-
tion: eighth ofﬁcial pediatric report – 2005.JHeartLung
Transplant 2005;24:968–82.
Cimato TR,Jessup M. Recipient selection in cardiac
transplantation: contraindications and risk factors for
mortality.JHeartLungTransplant 2002;21:1161–73.
Orens JB,Estenne M,Arcasoy S etal . International guide-
lines for the selection of lung transplant candidates:
2006 update – a consensus report from the Pulmonary
Scientiﬁc Council of the International Society for Heart
and Lung Transplantation. J Heart Lung Transplant
2006;25:745–55.
Taylor DO,Edwards LB,Boucek MM et al. Registry
of the International Society for Heart and Lung
Transplantation: twenty-second ofﬁcial adult heart
transplant report – 2005. J Heart Lung Transplant
2005;24:945–55.
Trulock EP,Edwards LB,Taylor DO et al. Registry of the
International Society for Heart and Lung Transplan-
tation: twenty-second ofﬁcial adult lung and heart-
lung transplant report – 2005. J Heart Lung Transplant
2005;24:956–67.
Valantine H. Cardiac allograft vasculopathy after heart
transplantation: risk factors and management. J Heart
LungTransplant 2004;23:S187–93.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch08” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 289 — #1
CHAPTER 8
PericardialDisease
Effective perioperative care for patients with
pericardial disease depends on a thorough under-
standing of the physiologic alterations the diseased
pericardium imposes on the heart. This chapter
reviews the normal physiology of the pericardium,
followedbyadiscussionofthephysiologicderange-
mentscausedbyapericardialeffusionoraconstrict-
ingpericardium.Diseasesthatcancausepericardial
dysfunction will be discussed, including aspects of
illnessesthataffectanestheticmanagement.Finally,
theanestheticmanagementofgenericpatientswith
pericardial tamponade and constrictive pericarditis
willbereviewed.
The normal pericardium is a dual envelope that
surrounds the heart and separates the chambers
fromtheborderingchestwall,pleura,andgreatves-
sels. There is a visceral layer that is composed of
mesothelial cells adherent to the epicardial surface
oftheheart,andathicker,ﬁbrousparietallayerthat
separates the heart from other thoracic structures.
The pericardium contains approximately 25mL of
an ultraﬁltrate of plasma. The oblique sinus lies
behind the posterior wall of the left atrium (LA),
wherethepericardiumisadherenttothevenacava
and pulmonary veins. This deﬁnes an area of the
pericardial space in which an effusion does not
collect unless it is very large or under pressure.
The transverse sinus is just inferior to the aortic
arch and is often visualized with transesophageal
echocardiography(TEE).Thelowcomplianceofthe
normal parietal pericardium is responsible for the
pathophysiologic mechanisms seen in pericardial
tamponade and accounts for the difference in pre-
sentationinpatientswitheitheranacuteorchronic
effusion.
The normal pericardium is richly enervated
and inﬂammation can result in severe pain or
vagally mediated reﬂexes. The pericardium is an
active structure providing myocardial stability, a
potential barrier to infection and prostaglandin
secretion modulating cardiac reﬂexes and coro-
nary tone. Afferents from the pericardium travel
via the phrenic nerve, entering the spinal cord at
C4–C6. Pericardial pain often is symptomatically
indistinguishablefromadiaphragmaticsource.The
phrenicnervestravelalongthelateralaspectsofthe
pericardium, where they are subject to mechani-
cal or cold induced injury during cardiac surgery.
Thepresentingsymptomsofpericardialdiseasesare
related to the innervation of the pericardium and
the location of adjacent structures. For example,
a large pericardial effusion may present as dys-
pnea, dysphagia, cough, hiccups, or hoarseness
due to compression of adjacent lung, esophagus,
diaphragm,orrecurrentlaryngealnerve.
Therearetwoprinciplephysiologicexpressionsof
pericardial disease: effusion, with or without tam-
ponade, and constriction. It is essential to realize
that both pericardial tamponade and constrictive
pericarditis produce ventricular diastolic dysfunc-
tion. An understanding of the physiology of these
diastolic limitations will provide the anesthesiolo-
gist with the knowledge to safely anesthetize these
patients.
289AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch08” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 290 — #2
290 Chapter8
ECG
PCG
JVP
S4
a
c
v
x y
d
is
Time
S1 S2 S3
25 cm/s
20
JVF
10
5
0
−5
a
Fig. 8.1 Atrialwaveforms,electrocardiogram(ECG)
andphonocardiogram(PCG)drawingdemonstratingthe
normaljugularvenouspressure(JVP)waveformsand
jugularvenousﬂow(JVF).(Reprintedfrom
KalmansonD,VeyratC,ChicheP.Atrialversus
ventricularcontributionindeterminingsystolicvenous
return.Anewapproachtoanoldriddle. Cardiovasc Res
1971;5:293–302,withpermission.)
Normally, venous return to the right side of the
heart is accelerated during ventricular systole. This
is due, in part, to a reduction in total intraperi-
cardial volume (cardiac structures plus pericardial
contents),whichgeneratesapressuregradientfrom
the vena cava to the right atrium. This increased
rate of venous ﬂow is represented in the right
atrial (RA) waveform by the X descent (Fig. 8.1).
The second surge in venous return occurs dur-
ing the latter phase of atrial systole, when the
tricuspid valve opens. This is visualized as the
YdescentintheRAwaveform(seeFig.8.1).Anal-
ysis of the RA (or central venous) pressure wave-
form, right ventricular (RV) pressure tracing, and
the pulmonary capillary wedge pressure can dif-
ferentiate pericardial tamponade from constrictive
pericarditis.
Pericardial effusion
The clinical manifestations and hemodynamic
consequences of blood or other ﬂuid in the
Pressure
Rapid effusion Slow effusion
Limit of pericardial stretch
Volume over time
Critical
tamponade
Critical
tamponade
Fig. 8.2 Totalintrapericardialpressureasafunctionof
changingintrapericardialvolume.Untilacriticalvolume
isreached,thereislittleriseinpressure.Oncethecritical
compliance/pressurerelationshipisreached,however,
smalladditionalincrementsinvolumeresultinlarge
changesinintrapericardialpressure.(FromSpodickDH.
Acutecardiactamponade. N Engl J Med
2003;349:684–90,withpermission.)
pericardial space are determined primarily by the
volume and rate of accumulation of the effu-
sion. A slowly accumulating effusion allows time
for the parietal pericardium to stretch resulting in
sometimesverylarge,asymptomaticeffusions.Con-
versely, acute pericardial effusions without pari-
etal pericardial stretch can lead to tamponade with
resultant cardiogenic shock and death. The com-
pliance curve of the normal pericardium is seen
in Fig. 8.2. In either acute or chronic pericardial
effusion, when the volume exceeds the limits of
pericardial stretch, there is a sharp elevation in
intrapericardial pressure. There is a reduction in
ventricularﬁllingandstrokevolume.
In the operating room environment, the patho-
physiology of pericardial tamponade is often
observed in acute, hemorrhagic pericardial effu-
sions. This can occur in patients with traumatic
cardiac injury, iatrogenic injury (catheterization
and pericardiocentesis mishaps), aortic dissection,
and post-cardiac surgery bleeding. There is associ-
ated hypotension, elevated venous pressure, and a
small “quiet” heart (Beck’s triad). Hypotension is
due to a markedly reduced stroke volume caused
by the compression of cardiac chambers by the
effusion, especially on the right side. An elevationAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch08” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 291 — #3
PericardialDisease 291
in the central venous pressure (CVP) also reﬂects
therestrictiontocardiacﬁllingimposedbythetense
pericardium. The CVP waveform will demonstrate
a prominent X descent, reﬂecting the accelerated
venous return associated with ventricular systole
and with the elevation of CVP. Ventricular systole
reduces total intrapericardial volume by a quan-
tity equal to the stroke volume, thereby allowing
enhanced atrial ﬁlling. In addition, the RA wave-
formwilldemonstratetheabsenceoftheYdescent,
reﬂecting the increased ventricular end-diastolic
pressure due to reduced distensibility induced by
thepericardialeffusion(Fig.8.3a,b).
Pericardial tamponade can occur even in the
absence of an elevated CVP if the patient is hypo-
volemic (low-pressure tamponade). This can occur
whenthereisconcurrenttraumawithexsanguina-
tion, excessive diuresis in heart failure patients or
inpatientswitheffusionundergoinghemodialysis.
Cardiac echocardiography is the deﬁnitive diag-
nostic technique for documenting the presence
and magnitude of a pericardial effusion. Trans-
thoracicechocardiographycanbeperformedrapidly
at the bedside with no morbidity. TEE may pro-
vide superior image quality, but there is associated
risk with insertion of the probe and patient seda-
tion. In the operating room, TEE is indicated in
patients undergoing pericardiocentesis and peri-
cardiectomy. Other important imaging techniques
include a chest X-ray (widened mediastinum and
cardiacsilhouette),computerizedtomography,and
magneticresonanceimaging.
Theechocardiographicmagnitudeofapericardial
effusion is graded as large, moderate, or small. In
thesupinepatient,effusionslayerinitiallyalongthe
dependent surfaces of the heart. As the volume of
the effusion increases, it appears apically, laterally,
and then anteriorly. The typical echocardiographic
features suggesting tamponade physiology result-
ingfromaneffusionare:RAcollapse,whichoccurs
just before ventricular systole; RV collapse in early
diastole; and a reduction in RV dimensions during
end-diastole(Fig.8.4a–c).Theinterventricularsep-
tumisdisplacedposteriorlyduringearlydiastoleasa
consequenceoftheincreaseinRVsize.Theechocar-
diographicdemonstrationofRAandRVcollapsein
thepresenceofaneffusioncanbehighlypredictive
ECG
(a)
(b)
40
20
0
100
50
FA pressure (mmHg)
0
RA/pericardial pressure (mmHg)
FA RA Pericardium
ECG
40
20
0
100
50
FA pressure (mmHg)
0
RA/pericardial pressure (mmHg)
FA RA Pericardium
x y
x
Inspiration
1 s
1 s
Fig. 8.3 (a)Simultaneousfemoralarterial(FA),right
atrial(RA),andintrapericardialpressurewaveforms
fromapatientwithpericardialtamponade.Notethe
exaggeratedXdescent,absentYdescent,equilibrationof
rightatrialandintrapericardialpressuresandsystemic
hypotension.(b)Rightatrialpressure(RA)waveform
withsimultaneouselectrocardiogramandfemoral
arterialpressurewaveform(FA).RAtracing
demonstratestimingofXandYdescentsrelativeto
cardiaccycle.Recordingsweretakenfromapatientwith
pericardialtamponadeafterpericardiocentesis.Notethe
returnoftheYdescent.Alsoshownaresimultaneous
intrapericardialpressure(pericardium)andrespiratory
cycle(inspiration).ECG,electrocardiogram.(From
LeWinterMM,KabbaniS.Pericardialdiseases.In:
ZipesDP,LibbyP,BonowRO,BraunwaldE(eds).
Braunwald’s Heart Disease: A Textbook ofCardiovascular
Medicine,7thedn.Philadelphia:Elsevier(Saunders),
2005:1757–80,withpermission.)
of tamponade physiology, except in situations in
which RV compliance is already low, as in pre-
existingpulmonaryhypertensionoraRVinfarction.
When wall stiffness does not allow intrapericardial
pressure to exceed intracavitary pressure, chamber
collapsewillnotbeseen.
In the postoperative setting, this presentation
may be difﬁcult to discern. The formation ofAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch08” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 292 — #4
292 Chapter8
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 8.4 Transesophageal(TEE)imagesofapatientwith
alargerpericardialeffusionandrightatrialcollapse.
(a)TEEimageofthetransgastricshort-axisview
demonstratingalargepericardialeffusionalongthe
posterior,lateral,andanterioraspectsoftheheart(white
arrows).(b)TEEmid-esophagealviewdemonstratingthe
effusionalongtheborderoftherightatriumduring
ventricularsystole(whitearrow).(c)Thesameview
showingrightatrialcollapseduringventriculardiastole
(whitearrow).
pericardial clot alters the distribution of an effu-
sion,asdoesthepresenceofadhesionsbetweenthe
heart, pericardium, and anterior mediastinum. In
addition, in the setting of a reduced intravascular
volume (i.e. hypovolemia from bleeding), patients
will manifest a low CVP despite hemodynamically
signiﬁcantpericardialtamponade.
Tamponade physiology can be determined by
cardiac catheterization. In patients with straight-
forward tamponade, RA catheterization reveals an
accentuated X descent, absent Y descent, and an
elevatedCVP(seeFig.8.3a,b).Therewillbeequal-
izationofRA,RVend-diastolic,andpulmonarycap-
illary wedge pressures. These pressures will equal
intrapericardial pressure, when measured during
pericardiocentesis. These ﬁndings apply only to
patients who do not have an underlying condi-
tion that alters right or left ventricular compliance,
such as prior infarction, pulmonary hypertension,
ongoingischemia,orleftventricularhypertrophy.
Pulsus paradoxus, an exaggeration of the nor-
mal 5mmHg decrease in systolic blood pressure
with inspiration, is often seen in pericardial tam-
ponade. A pulsus paradoxus is present when this
difference exceeds 10mmHg. Although a number
ofmechanismsforpulsusparadoxushavebeenpos-
tulated, echocardiographic studies have provided a
coherent explanation. During inspiration, the neg-
ative pressure gradient between the periphery and
the intrathoracic veins is increased. This increase
in negative intrathoracic pressure is transmitted to
theintrapericardialstructures,acceleratingtherate
of venous return to the right-sided chambers of
the heart. The resultant increase in RV dimensions
causes a shift of the interventricular septum to the
left,diminishingleftventriculardiastolicﬁllingand
reducing left ventricular stroke volume and sub-
sequent systolic arterial pressure (Fig. 8.5). This
mechanism has been conﬁrmed by pulsed wave
Doppler echocardiography. Normally, there is a
smallincrease( <25%)inearlytricuspidbloodﬂow
velocityandaconcomitantsmalldecrease( <10%)
in early mitral blood ﬂow velocity with inspira-
tion as compared with expiration. This pattern is
exaggerated in the presence of tamponade with
early tricuspid ﬂow velocity increasing by as much
as 130%, and early mitral ﬂow velocity decreasingAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch08” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 293 — #5
PericardialDisease 293
Fig. 8.5 Insomepatientswithpulsus
paradoxusthereisaseptalshiftduring
inspirationlimitingleftventricularﬁlling
andreducingstrokevolume.Thismay
accountfortheexaggeratedreduction
inarterialpressureobservedduring
inspiration.(FromGoldsteinJA.Cardiac
tamponade,constrictivepericarditis,and
restrictivecardiomyopathy. Curr Probl
Cardiol2004;29:503–67,with
permission.)
PA Ao
RA
RV
LA
LV
Tense pericardial effusion
Increased PA flow
Increased
return
maintains
pressure
Decreased Ao flow
and pressure
Pressure
falls
Decreased
filling
Expiration Inspiration
Increased
filling
by as much as 50% with inspiration as compared
withexpiration.
Pulsusparadoxuscanbeobservedinpatientswith
disordersunrelatedtopericardialtamponade.These
include severe chronic obstructive pulmonary dis-
ease, asthma, and pulmonary embolism. Further,
pulsus paradoxus may be absent in patients with
pericardialtamponadewhohavecoexistentcardiac
pathology. Any condition that allows equalization
ofvenousreturnbetweentherightandleftsidesof
theheart,suchasanatrialseptaldefect,willprevent
expression of a pulsus paradoxus. In addition, pul-
sus paradoxus will not be demonstrable whenever
the interventricular shift that accompanies inspi-
ration is prevented by conditions that reduce left
ventricular compliance and distensibility such as
leftventricularhypertrophy,leftventricularfailure,
infarction, ischemia, or aortic valve incompetence.
Finally,pulsusparadoxusmaynotbedemonstrable
in patients with elevated RV end-diastolic pressure
duetopulmonaryhypertensionorpulmonaryout-
ﬂowobstruction.Thehemodynamiccharacteristics
ofcardiactamponadearesummarizedinTable8.1.
The therapy for hemodynamically signiﬁcant
pericardial tamponade is drainage. The recom-
mended approach for removal of the effusion
will depend on the acuity and severity of hemo-
dynamic compromise. Percutaneous pericardio-
centesis under ultrasound guidance and local
anesthesia can be performed at the bedside and
may be life-saving. Blind pericardiocentesis is
Table 8.1 Thehemodynamiccharacteristicsofcardiac
tamponade.
• Diastolic dysfunction with impaired right heart ﬁlling
• Elevated right atrial pressure
• Prominent X descent on central venous pressure
waveform
• Blunted or absent Y descent on central venous pressure
waveform
• Equalization of diastolic pressures
• Diminished intracardiac chamber volumes
• Diastolic collapse of right atrium and ventricle
• Right ventricular septal shift during late diastole with
inspiration
• Decreased blood pressure,cardiac output,and stroke
volume
• Increased systemic vascular resistance
• Increased heart rate
• Pulsus paradoxus
• Exaggerated transvalvular ﬂow with respiration
associatedwithahighrateofcomplicationsinclud-
ing pneumothorax, coronary artery or internal
mammaryarterylaceration,andventricularcham-
berperforation.Thesecomplicationsareevenmore
likely if there are pericardial adhesions between
the pericardium and anterior mediastinum, as in
postoperativecardiacsurgicalpatients,patientswho
have received chest irradiation, or when there is
associated pericarditis. The success of pericardio-
centesis is partly a function of the etiology of the
effusion. Pericardiocentesis under ﬂuoroscopic orAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch08” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 294 — #6
294 Chapter8
echocardiographic control is very successful for
large malignant or uremic effusions, whereas peri-
cardiocentesis for a postoperative effusion, even
under ﬂuoroscopic or echocardiographic guidance,
haslimitedsuccess.
Surgery for pericardial effusion and
tamponade
Theindicationsandtimingofsurgeryforapericar-
dialeffusiondependontheetiologyoftheeffusion,
its rate of accumulation, and the severity of the
hemodynamiccompromise.
There are three surgical options for permanent
drainage of recurrent pericardial effusions: a peri-
cardial window, a partial pericardiectomy, or a
full pericardiectomy. A pericardial window creates
continuity between the pericardium and pleura or
the pericardium and peritoneum. It can be per-
formed under local anesthesia, with the patient
in the semi-sitting position. Its advantages include
obtaining a pericardial specimen for pathologic
examination and minimal physiologic trespass. For
these reasons, it is the approach taken most often
for patients with malignant pericardial effusions,
whose life expectancy from their underlying dis-
easeismeasuredinweekstomonths,orforpatients
with hemodynamically signiﬁcant uremic pericar-
dial effusions who are awaiting initiation or inten-
siﬁcation of hemodialysis. The operative mortality
is very low and is primarily a function of the
patient’s underlying disease. The drawbacks to a
pericardial window include a signiﬁcant incidence
of re-accumulation of the effusion, as well as the
potentialdevelopmentofconstrictivepericarditis.
Pericardioscopy allows visualization of much of
the epicardial surface, as well as examination of
theintrapericardialstructures.Itisusefulindirect-
ing intraoperative biopsy for diagnostic purposes.
Because of the possibility of mechanically-induced
dysrhythmias during periocardioscopy, prepara-
tionsforemergentelectricalcardioversionordeﬁb-
rillation must be made before the induction of
anesthesia.
Inasmanyas75%ofpatientsundergoingfullor
partialpericardiectomytheindicationfortheproce-
dureisrefractorypericardialeffusion.Ofthese,the
most common etiologies are neoplastic disease and
uremia. The incidence of pericardial tamponade in
the period immediately after cardiac surgery may
be as high as 1–5%. In these patients, mediasti-
nal exploration for bleeding with clot removal is
required when signs and symptoms of tamponade
arepresent.
Anesthetic technique for pericardial
effusion and tamponade
Patients undergoing a pericardiectomy for
tamponade or recurrent effusion present a unique
constellation of problems for the anesthesiologist.
The anesthetic considerations in these patients
are outlined in Table 8.2. It is essential that the
cardiac anesthesiologist obtain a preoperative
assessment of the effusion’s magnitude, and more
importantly, its hemodynamic effect. Except when
the patient’s condition does not allow time for
preoperative echocardiography and/or catheteri-
zation, this information should be available and
reviewed.
Ventricularﬁllingindiastoleislimitedtoavary-
ing degree by the effusion. This can range from
trivial compromise to cardiovascular collapse. Any
maneuver that reduces venous return has the
potential of further diminishing diastolic ﬁlling to
the point at which stroke volume becomes inade-
quate to sustain life. Such maneuvers potentially
includepositive-pressureventilation,hypovolemia,
andsystemicvenodilatation.
Initial management of patients with
an effusion
The degree of RA and RV collapse is assessed eas-
ily with echocardiography, and this information
usually is available before induction. Patients with
tamponade will require volume infusion to raise
CVP and improve RV ﬁlling. It may be necessary
to increase the CVP to 20 or 30mmHg in some
patients. Most patients with tamponade will have
completeemptyingoftheRVandleftventricle(LV)
in systole as a compensatory measure. If echocar-
diographicexaminationorprevioushistorysuggests
systolicimpairment,inotropeinfusioniswarranted
to optimize stroke volume. An agent that is not
associated with vasodilation (e.g. epinephrine) is
indicated.VasodilationmustbeavoidedasitreducesAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch08” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 295 — #7
PericardialDisease 295
Table 8.2 Anestheticconsiderationsinpericardialeffusionandtamponade.
• Administer preoperative sedation or analgesia with caution. These patients are often on the verge of cardiovascular
collapse
• In cases of severe tamponade (i.e. patient in extremis or cardiovascular collapse),consider relieving the restriction to
diastolic ﬁlling before the induction of anesthesia
• Administer positive pressure ventilation with caution until tamponade physiology has been relieved
• Maintain ﬁlling pressures high enough to overcome diastolic ﬁlling restrictions. The central venous pressure or
pulmonary capillary wedge pressure may need to be 20–30 mmHg
• Avoid vasodilation – the resulting hypotension will worsen the diastolic ﬁlling dysfunction
• Avoid bradycardia – an elevated heart rate is a normal compensatory mechanism in cardiogenic shock
• Consider inotropic support in the interval before the tamponade is relieved (epinephrine)
• Prepare for a rebound in hemodynamics once the pericardial space is drained in acute tamponade. The sudden rise in
blood pressure in patients with normal left ventricular function can be dramatic
• Carefully evaluate the necessity for invasive monitoring. Intra-arterial pressure monitoring is very helpful and can usually
be accomplished pre-induction without delay. Central venous access is usually not indicated and may lead to unnecessary
delays and increased morbidity in some patients. Intraoperative TEE is helpful in documenting and guiding the pericardial
ﬂuid drainage. In addition,TEE can monitor heart function during this interval of unstable and changing hemodynamics
TEE,transesophageal echocardiography.
RV ﬁlling and systemic blood pressure in patients
whohaveaﬁxedstrokevolume.Alpha-adrenergic
support may be necessary to maintain perfusion
pressure. Since the stroke volume is ﬁxed, heart
rate must remain normal to high to maintain an
adequatecardiacoutput.
Patients in extremis should undergo pericar-
diocentesis with local anesthesia, preferably with
echocardiographicorﬂuoroscopicguidance,before
theinductionofgeneralanesthesiaandinitiationof
positive-pressure ventilation. Although blind peri-
cardiocentesis using an ECG lead on the exploring
needletodetectinjurycurrenthasbeenusedinthe
past, echocardiographic guidance is now standard.
Reference to the pericardial compliance curve (see
Fig.8.2)indicatesthattheentireeffusionneednot
bedrainedbeforeinductionofgeneralanesthesia.It
isnecessarytoremoveonlyasmallvolumeofﬂuid
to place the patient below the bend of the pericar-
dial pressure–volume curve and effect a dramatic
improvementinhemodynamics.
Premedication
Drainage of pericardial ﬂuid is often an urgent or
emergent procedure for patients with some degree
of hemodynamic compromise. Extreme caution
with premedication is warranted. Midazolam in
increments0.5–1.0mgisareasonableapproach.
Pre-induction
Asforothercardiacsurgicalprocedures,ECGleads
for I, II, III, aVR,a VL,a VF, and V5 should be in
place before induction. Adequate intravenous (IV)
accesswithatleastonelarge-bore(14-or16-gauge)
cathetershouldbeobtained.Ideally,aradialartery
catheterisplacedbeforeinduction.Centralvenous
accessisusuallynotindicatedinmostpatients.
Induction and maintenance
For the patient with a small, hemodynamically
insigniﬁcant effusion the anesthetic management
will be dictated primarily by the patient’s under-
lying medical condition and the general principles
outlined in anesthetic care. For patients with tam-
ponade,greatcaremustbeemployedifthedecision
is made to proceed without ﬁrst relieving some of
theeffusionpercutaneously.
Thepatientshouldbepreppedanddrapedbefore
induction in case emergent surgical decompres-
sion is needed after induction. Induction with
agents with minimal cardiovascular effects is war-
ranted. Etomidate 0.3mg/kg in combination with
fentanyl 1–3µg/kg or sufentanil 0.2–0.3µg/kg isAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch08” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 296 — #8
296 Chapter8
appropriate. Ketamine 1–2mg/kg IV may be used
because it maintains heart rate, contractility, and
systemic vascular resistance (SVR). Caution must
be exercised for patients who have high existing
sympathetic tone because the negative inotropic
effectsofketaminewillpredominate.Musclerelax-
antsshouldbechosentooffsetanyvagotoniceffects
of the narcotics. Amnesia can be maintained with
benzodiapines or low doses of inhalational agents.
After the effusion has been relieved, the choice of
anestheticagentsshouldbeguidedbythepatient’s
underlying disease state and consideration of
postoperativeventilatoryrequirements.
A TEE probe can be inserted after induction and
tracheal intubation. This allows online assessment
of ventricular ﬁlling and contractility. In addition,
the completeness of ﬂuid evacuation can be easily
assessed.
Drainageofalargeeffusionandreliefoftampon-
ade generally produces a marked improvement in
hemodynamics. In some patients, this rapid alter-
ationinﬂuidstatusmayproducepulmonaryvenous
congestionorpulmonaryedema.Thisisduetothe
suddenincreaseinpulmonaryvenousreturntothe
LA and LV. This is particularly likely if there is
reduced LV systolic function or lesions that predis-
pose an elevation of left atrial pressure (i.e. mitral
regurgitation, mitral stenosis or poor LV compli-
ance). Treatment will require vasodilation with IV
nitroglycerinorasimilaragent.
Constrictive pericarditis
Constrictivepericardialdisease,likepericardialtam-
ponade, causes a restriction to diastolic ﬁlling.
In contrast to tamponade, however, all chambers
are affected equally and the pattern of restric-
tion to ﬁlling is distinctly different. The clinical
manifestations of constrictive pericarditis may be
quite subtle and easily mistaken for a restrictive
cardiomyopathy.
Constrictive pericarditis is an inﬂammatory pro-
cess caused by a myriad of processes. The more
common causes are idiopathic, infectious (viral>
bacterial), neoplastic, autoimmune, uremic, post-
irradiation or surgery, post-traumatic, and post-
myocardial infarction. Tuberculosis was the most
common cause; however, this is no longer true in
developedcountries.
The underlying pathologic process in constric-
tivepericarditisisathickened,ﬁbrotic,scarred,and
denselyadherentpericardium,withthevisceraland
parietallayersoftenfusedandoccasionallycalciﬁed.
Theantecedentillnessmaybesubclinicalpericardi-
tis, with ﬁbrin deposition and subclinical effusion
formation; a pericardial effusion with incomplete
resorptionordrainage;oraninﬁltrativeorreactive
process.
Constrictivepericarditisequallyimpairslatedias-
tolic ﬁlling of all heart chambers. Over time, this
results in symptoms of biventricular failure. Early
inthecourseofthepatient’sillness,ﬂuidretention
partiallycompensatesfortherestrictionindiastolic
ﬁlling by maintaining an elevated central venous
volume. This results in a clinical picture similar
to right-sided congestive heart failure with ascites,
pleural effusions, and peripheral edema. There is
a reﬂex tachycardia serving to maintain stroke
volume and cardiac output. Although myocar-
dial systolic function usually is intact, epicardial
compression of coronary arteries with resultant
ischemia can occur. As stroke volume becomes
limited due to inadequate preload, symptoms of
chroniclowcardiacoutputprevail,includingweight
loss,fatigue,musclewasting,andcachexia.
The physical examination demonstrates an
elevationinjugularvenouspressure.Cardiacexam-
ination reveals a heart with a ﬁxed point of max-
imal impulse (heart adhered to pericardium) and
a pericardial knock. The pericardial knock is heard
best in early diastole (the time of maximal ﬁlling
in pericarditis) along the left sternal border. The
knockoccurswhentheheartrapidlyﬁllsandthere
is abrupt cessation of ﬂow when the pericardial
restriction is encountered. The ECG in pericarditis
changesasthediseaseprogresses.Intheacutephase
there is diffuse ST segment elevation and PR seg-
ment depression. In later stages, T-wave inversion
ispresent.
An additional ﬁnding in constrictive pericarditis
is Kussmaul’s sign, the apparently paradoxical rise
in CVP with inspiration. In pericardial tamponade,
theincreaseinnegativeintrathoracicpressureasso-
ciated with inspiration is transmitted to the heart,AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch08” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 297 — #9
PericardialDisease 297
ECG
40
20
RA X Y
LVLVLV
mmHg
Fig. 8.6 Rightatrial(RA)andleftventricular(LV)
pressurewaveformsobtainedfrompatientwith
constrictivepericarditis.ProminentXandYdescentsgive
characteristic“M”and“W”appearancetotherightatrial
pressurewaveform.Notealsothatrightandleftheart
pressuresareelevatedandequalthroughoutdiastole.
(ReprintedfromLorellBH,GrossmanW.Proﬁlesin
constrictivepericarditis,restrictivecardiomyopathy,and
cardiactamponade.In:GrossmanW(ed). Cardiac
Catheterization and Angiography,3rdedn.Philadelphia:
Lea&Febiger,1986,withpermission.)
resulting in a transient decrease in CVP, stroke
volume, and systolic pressure (pulsus paradoxus).
In contrast, the thickened unyielding pericardium
in constrictive pericarditis prevents the changes
inintrathoracicpressureassociatedwithventilation
frombeingtransmittedtotheheart.Thisrestriction
resultsineithernochangeoranincreaseinCVPat
thetimeofinspiration.Thisdifferenceintheeffect
ofventilationhasimportantclinicalimplicationsfor
the anesthetic management of these two groups of
patients.
Hemodynamicmonitoringisimportantinpatients
with constrictive pericarditis and reveals charac-
teristic ﬁndings. The CVP waveforms demonstrate
prominentXandYdescents,impartingacharacter-
istic “M” or “W” shape to the atrial pressure wave-
form(Fig.8.6).Thereisearlydiastolicequilibration
of pressure within all four chambers, revealed by
the equalization of pressures in diastole between
the atrium and ventricle. Ventricular ﬁlling is ini-
tially rapid, due to the increased venous pressure,
whichisseenasasharpdipinintraventricularpres-
sure. After the limit to ﬁlling imposed by the stiff,
unyielding pericardium has been reached, further
diastolic ﬁlling is halted abruptly. This appears on
hemodynamic recordings as a “square root sign”
or “dip and plateau,” characteristic of constrictive
pericarditis(Fig.8.7a,b).
40
20
20
10
0 RV LV
(a)
40
20
20
10
0 RA
x y
LV
(b)
Fig. 8.7 (a)Right(RV)andleftventricular(LV)
pressuretracingsfromapatientwithconstrictive
pericarditis,demonstratingtherapidearlydiastolic
ﬁlling,followedbytheabruptcessationofﬁllingoncethe
limitimposedbythepericardiumhasbeenreached.This
hasbeendescribedasa“dipandplateau”or“square
root”sign.(b)SimultaneoustracingofLVandrightatrial
(RA)waveforms.Notealsotheequilibrationthroughout
diastoleofrightandleftventricularpressures.(Reprinted
fromVaitkusPT,CooperKA,ShumanWP,HardinNJ.
Imagesincardiovascularmedicine:constrictive
pericarditis. Circulation1996;93:834,withpermission.)
Table8.3summarizesthehemodynamicﬁndings
inconstrictivepericarditis.
Etiology of pericardial disease
The hemodynamic alterations seen in pericardial
disease will have a great impact on the anesthetic
management of these patients. It is important to
remember that the underlying illness causing the
pericardial disease may have equal or even greater
weight in the considerations necessary for a safeAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch08” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 298 — #10
298 Chapter8
Table 8.3 Hemodynamiccharacteristicsinpericarditis.
• Diastolic dysfunction with abrupt diastolic ﬁlling
resistance
• Elevation and equalization of diastolic pressures
• Prominent X and Y descent (“M” or “W” sign)
• Ventricular dip and plateau (square root sign)
• Decreased cardiac output,stroke volume
• Kussmaul’s sign
• Pulsus paradoxus uncommon (approximately 33%)
• Pericardial knock present
anesthetic. This section will review the anesthetic
implicationsofthosediseasestates.
Uremia
Pericardial effusions may be seen in as many as
20%ofpatientswithhemodialysis-dependantrenal
failure. Initiation or intensiﬁcation of hemodialysis
will resolve a hemodynamically signiﬁcant effu-
sion in two-thirds of patients. Operative drainage
for uremic pericardial effusions should be reserved
for patients who have not responded to augmen-
tation for their dialysis regimen. The effusion may
be hemorrhagic, and if left untreated, may evolve
into constrictive pericarditis. Asymptomatic effu-
sions are common in patients with chronic renal
failure.
Renal failure alters the anesthetic management
of patients with a pericardial effusion or constric-
tive pericarditis in a number of ways. The pre-
operative evaluation must include close scrutiny
of the patient’s coagulation capability due to the
impairmentofplateletfunctionassociatedwithure-
mia. Efforts to correct a coagulopathy should be
undertaken before surgical intervention for con-
strictivepericarditis,becausesurgicalhemostasisof
raw, bleeding surfaces will be difﬁcult to achieve
in the presence of a bleeding disorder. Admin-
istration of desmopressin (DDAVP), 0.3–0.4µg/kg
mayimproveplateletfunctionandcoagulopathyin
uremicpatients.
Renal failure alters the kinetics of many anes-
thetic agents, especially nondepolarizing muscle
relaxants. Cisatracurium is preferred in renal fail-
ure patients because of its independence from
renal function for metabolic clearance. Although
patients with chronic renal failure are adapted
to a higher than normal baseline plasma potas-
sium concentration, succinylcholine must be used
with caution to avoid the possibility of further
hyperkalemia.
Infectious pericarditis
Tuberculosis accounts for approximately 4% of
acute pericarditis cases. Initial symptoms are vari-
able with most patients presenting with a fever,
weight loss, night sweats, pericardial friction rub,
and pleural and pericardial effusions, with 40%
demonstrating tamponade physiology. In most
patients,tuberculosispericarditisisself-limitingand
clinically seems to be idiopathic in origin until
other evidence of tuberculosis is discovered. Many
patientswithpericardialeffusionswillrequireperi-
cardiectomy to treat a reaccumulation of ﬂuid,
in spite of initial pericardiocentesis. Up to one-
half of patients with acute tuberculous pericarditis
candevelopconstrictivepericarditisrequiringperi-
cardiectomy 2–4months after presentation. Spu-
tumcultureisthemostfrequentpositivediagnostic
test in those patients who present with acute peri-
carditis. Acid-fast staining of pericardial ﬂuid is
infrequentlypositive,unlikecultureresults.Patho-
logic examination of pericardial biopsy specimens
isoccasionallypositive.Untreatedtuberculousperi-
carditishasahighmortalityintherangeof30–40%.
Some authors recommend early surgery for a
pericardialwindow,topreventeffusionreaccumu-
lationandpossiblythedevelopmentoflateconstric-
tion, and early full pericardiectomy if a thickened
pericardiumisfoundatthattime.
Viral pericarditis can be due to a variety of
agents, including coxsackie B, echoviruses, vari-
cella,mumps,hepatitisB,orcytomegalovirus.Viral
pericarditisismorecommoninimmunosuppressed
patients. Bacterial agents usually are staphylococ-
cus, pneumococcus, or meningococcus. Infection
spreadsfromadjacentsitesandoccursinassociation
withhematogenouslyseededbacterialendocarditis
or from extension of a subdiaphragmatic abscess.
Although acute bacterial pericarditis is unusual
in the antibiotic era, purulent pericarditis occurs
most often in immunosuppressed patients or in
the setting of a preexisting effusion (such as withAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch08” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 299 — #11
PericardialDisease 299
uremia). Constriction may be a late consequence
of incomplete drainage of a purulent effusion.
Histoplasmosis is the most common fungal etiol-
ogy. As with other infectious agents, pericardial
involvement is most likely in those patients who
are immunosuppressed. If the patient has received
amphotericin B, consideration must be given to
the possibility of impaired renal function and, less
frequently,hemolysisorhypokalemia.
Idiopathic pericarditis
Thisisthemostcommoncauseofacutepericarditis
inmanyseries,andcertainlyincludesmanycasesof
viralpericarditisinwhichthevirusisnotidentiﬁed.
Post-myocardial infarction pericarditis
Pericarditis within a few days to a week after
myocardial infarction occurs in 5–10% of patients.
The typical presentation is new chest pain, asso-
ciated with an evanescent pericardial friction rub.
New chest pain after a myocardial infarction must
be differentiated from other, more serious com-
plications of an infarction. The new chest pain of
post-infarction pericarditis must be distinguished
from that of unstable angina, an extension of the
original infarction, or an additional infarction. His-
tory, serial ECGs, echocardiograms, and cardiac-
speciﬁc isoenzyme concentrations will help make
thediagnosis.Newchestpainassociatedwithamur-
murmayheraldapost-infarctionventricularseptal
defect(VSD)orpost-infarctionmitralregurgitation,
due to papillary muscle rupture or ischemia. The
latterconditionsusuallyareassociatedwithhemo-
dynamiccompromise,whereaspericarditisafteran
acuteinfarctionisnot.Ifthereisseriousquestionof
differentiatingthemorebenignpericarditisfromthe
othertwoconditions,echocardiographywillresolve
the issue quickly. If a patient with post-infarction
pericarditis requires surgical intervention, appro-
priate anesthetic management will be determined
primarilybythepresenceandseverityofunderlying
myocardialischemia,aswellasresidualmyocardial
systolicanddiastolicfunction.
Connective tissue disorders
The systemic manifestations of systemic lupus ery-
thematosus are protean. Pericarditis is the most
frequent cardiac manifestation, with tamponade
occurring infrequently, and constrictive pericardi-
tis occurring rarely. Myocardial involvement may
lead to conduction abnormalities or, infrequently,
contractile dysfunction with direct impairment of
systolic function. There may be direct involve-
ment of cardiac valves in 20% of patients with
lupus.Insome,valvulardysfunctionmaybesevere
enoughtobeclinicallysigniﬁcant.Rarely,anarteri-
tis can result in clinically signiﬁcant coronary
artery disease. In addition, accelerated atheroscle-
rosis in patients with lupus, in part a consequence
of prolonged corticosteroid use, increases the risk
of myocardial ischemia and infarction. Patients
with lupus severe enough to necessitate operative
intervention for effusive, pericardial, or valvular
disease usually are receiving systemic steroid ther-
apy and will need prophylactic corticosteroid ther-
apy to protect them from a chronically suppressed
pituitary–adrenalaxis.
Nonsteroidalanti-inﬂammatoryagentsmayinter-
fere with platelet thromboxanes, resulting in a
coagulation defect. However, fewer than 10%
of patients with lupus will have a signiﬁcant
thrombocytopenia. Lupus patients may have a
circulating anticoagulant, which presents as an
otherwiseunexplainedprolongedpartialthrombo-
plastin time (aPTT). The lupus anticoagulant is a
test-tube anticoagulant only interfering with the
phospholipid tissue thromboplastins used for the
laboratory determination of the partial thrombo-
plastin time and is not associated with a bleeding
tendency in vivo. In fact, patients with a lupus
anticoagulant are at risk for thrombotic events.
Therefore, long-term anticoagulation should be
considered for patients with a lupus anticoagulant
whoareundergoingvalvereplacement.
Pulmonaryinvolvementmayresultinrestrictive
lung disease, with a resulting diffusion defect and
arterial hypoxemia. Chronic renal failure may be
a late result of lupus, with well recognized impli-
cations for anesthetic management. Active lupus
cerebritismaymakeconductofaproceduresuchas
pericardiocentesisdifﬁcultorimpossibleunderlocal
anesthesia.
Chronic constrictive pericarditis can occur as
a complication of rheumatoid arthritis. Approx-
imately one-third of patients with rheumatoidAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch08” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 300 — #12
300 Chapter8
arthritis will have pericardial thickening or effu-
sion seen by echocardiography. Pericarditis usually
isseenonlyinthosepatientswithotherwisesevere
manifestations of their disease. In these patients,
constrictivepericarditisusuallyimprovesafterperi-
cardiectomy.Conductionsystemabnormalitiesmay
be due to myocardial rheumatoid nodules or from
inﬂammatorychanges.Severerheumatoidarthritis
is associated with cervical spine disease including
atlantoaxialsubluxationandthepotentialforspinal
cord or vertebral artery compression. There is pos-
sible involvement of the temporomandibular and
cricoarytenoid joints further complicating airway
management.Mostrheumaticpleuraleffusionswill
spontaneously resolve, but some will require per-
cutaneous or surgical drainage or decortication for
recurrentpleuritis.
Malignancies
Malignant pericardial disease is associated most
commonly with cancers of the breast and lung,
Hodgkin disease, and other lymphomas. The spec-
trum of pericardial disease associated with malig-
nancies ranges from acute hemorrhagic pericardial
tamponade,tocompressionsyndromesfromtumor
masses (Fig. 8.8), to constrictive physiology from a
noncompliantpericardiumencasedwithinﬁltrating
Fig. 8.8 Thispregnantpatienthasmarkedventricular
compressionfromherliver(whitearrowA),andher
Hodgkinlymphomatumormass(whitearrowB).This
patientexhibitedclassicsymptomsofaconstrictive
pericardialdiseaseduetoherpregnancyandextrinsic
neoplasticpathology.
tumor.Unlikepatientswithradiation-inducedcon-
strictive pericarditis, patients with pericardial dis-
ease secondary to a malignancy may present with
signs and symptoms of pericardial tamponade,
constrictivedisease,oracombinationofboth.
Large mediastinal masses, which can be seen
in patients with Hodgkin lymphoma, pose signiﬁ-
cantriskofintrathoracicairwaycompressionduring
theinstitutionofpositivepressureventilationinde-
pendent of endotracheal intubation. The physical
presence of such masses should be sought by
computerized tomography or magnetic resonance
imaging before surgical intervention for pericar-
dial disease. The functional signiﬁcance of ante-
rior mediastinal masses can be evaluated by
ﬂow–volumespirometry.Iffunctionalintrathoracic
airway compression is present, there often will be
a ﬂattening of the expiratory phase of the ﬂow–
volume loop in the supine but not sitting posi-
tions. Furthermore, many such patients will report
symptoms of air hunger or a sensation of chest
compression in the supine but not in the lateral
or sitting positions. When such signs or symptoms
are present, serious consideration must be given
to performing the surgical procedure under local
anesthesia or after an effective course of radiation
or chemotherapy to reduce the size of the medi-
astinalmass.Fiberopticintubationwiththepatient
appropriatelysedated,butbreathingspontaneously,
also may reveal the presence of functional airway
obstructionthatmightnotbeappreciatedbyroutine
chestX-rayorcomputerizedtomography.
Current chemotherapy for Hodgkin lymphoma
includes several agents with anesthetic impli-
cation including bleomycin (pulmonary ﬁbro-
sis, respiratory failure possibly associated with
high inspired concentrations of oxygen), doxoru-
bicin (myocardial dysfunction), and prednisone
(suppressionofthepituitary–adrenalaxis).
Chronic effusions or pericarditis can present
months to years after radiation therapy, especially
after mantle irradiation for Hodgkin disease, lym-
phoma, or other thoracic neoplasms. Typically,
patientshavereceived4500radsormore.Thelike-
lihood of pericardial injury varies with total dose
ofradiationadministered,aswellastheamountof
heartincludedintheradiationportal.IftheprimaryAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch08” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 301 — #13
PericardialDisease 301
radiation-induced lesion is symptomatic pericar-
dial constriction, then pericardiectomy should be
considered. At surgery, the pericardium and adja-
cent tissue will be very friable and densely
adherent; bleeding will be a major intraoperative
consideration.
Prior cardiac surgery
Unliketamponadefrommostothercauses,inwhich
echocardiography demonstrates the effusion to be
homogenous, the collection of blood around the
heart may usually be loculated (areas of clotted
and unclotted blood). Echocardiographic ﬁndings
typical of effusive tamponade such as RA and RV
collapse, Doppler ﬂow variation across the mitral
and tricuspid valves with respiration and swinging
of the heart within the effusion are not commonly
seeninthepostoperativeperiod.Localizedcompres-
sion of each of the cardiac chambers, as well as of
thepulmonaryoutﬂowtracthasbeenreported.Pul-
susparadoxusmaynotbeseenduetothepresence
of hypovolemia. The presence of hemodynamic
compromise (hypotension, low urine output, low
cardiac output) in combination with the echocar-
diographicﬁndingofapericardialseparationwidth
of >10mm has been shown to have 100%
sensitivity for detection of postoperative cardiac
tamponade.
Postoperativeconstrictivepericarditisisthemost
common cause of constrictive pericarditis requir-
ing pericardiectomy, with an overall incidence of
0.2–0.3%ofallpatientsundergoingcardiacsurgery.
Constrictivephysiologymaypresentintheimmedi-
atepostoperativeperiodor,moretypically,months
toyearslater.Povidone-iodineirrigationaroundthe
heart may be one etiologic factor in postoperative
constrictivepericarditis.
Pericardial closure at the time of the original
procedure decreases the incidence of periopera-
tivecardiactamponadefrombloodpooling,aswell
as subsequent constrictive pericarditis that results
from organized hematoma around the posterior
aspect of the heart. Closure of the pericardium
greatlyfacilitatesre-explorationduringsubsequent
cardiac surgery by preventing the right ventricle
andanteriorlyplacedgraftsfrombecomingdensely
adherent to the anterior chest wall. This not only
reducestheamountofbleedingduringsubsequent
surgery but also makes catastrophic entry into car-
diac chambers in re-exploration much less likely
to occur. However, the pericardium is not closed
routinely at the end of cardiac surgery by all sur-
geons for a number of reasons. For patients with
dilated ventricles or those who have developed
myocardial edema while supported by cardiopul-
monary bypass (CPB), closure of the pericardium
may restrict ventricular diastolic ﬁlling enough to
be hemodynamically signiﬁcant, especially if pre-
existing left ventricular compliance is low (as with
aortic stenosis). Furthermore, some surgeons are
concernedthatpericardialclosuremaykinkoroth-
erwisemechanicallydistortanteriororlateralcoro-
narygrafts,compromisingbothshort-termﬂowand
long-termpatency.
Surgery for constrictive pericarditis
Patientswithconstrictivepericarditisdonotpresent
emergentlyforpericardiectomy.Athoroughreview
of the cardiac catheterization data, echocardio-
graphic examination and other data by the anes-
thesiologist before the induction of anesthesia is
mandatory. Patients undergoing pericardiectomy
for constrictive disease present a spectrum of
anesthetic challenges different from the patient
withpericardialtamponade.Unlikeanesthetizinga
patientwithapericardialeffusion,duringwhichthe
mostdifﬁcultaspectsoftheanestheticoccurbefore
induction and during the early part of an other-
wise brief procedure, pericardiectomy for constric-
tive disease requires ongoing vigilance and often
enduranceduringalonganddifﬁcultsurgery.
Pericardiectomy for constrictive disease usually
involves extensive dissection of tissue which is
adherenttothin-walledcardiacchambers,thegreat
vessels, coronary arteries, or aortocoronary saphe-
nous vein grafts. Perioperative mortality can be
as high as 10%, with hemorrhage being a signif-
icant or primary cause of death. Massive hemor-
rhagecanoccurfrominadvertententryintocardiac
chambers, or the patient can bleed more slowly,
but continuously, from raw dissected surfaces. It
is imperative that venous access be adequate to
guarantee timely volume, blood, and coagulation
factor replacement, as needed. Usually, patientsAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch08” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 302 — #14
302 Chapter8
undergoingpericardiectomyforconstrictivedisease
are explored through a median sternotomy. Many
will have undergone prior cardiac surgery, and
although pump oxygenator standby is common,
CPB is required in only 10% of such patients. The
primary reason for avoiding CPB for constrictive
pericardiectomy is the need for systemic anticoag-
ulation and excessive. In patients with constriction
secondarytopriorcardiacsurgery,denseadhesions
aroundtheheartmayincorporateepicardialsaphe-
nous vein or internal mammary coronary grafts,
and damage during pericardiectomy, with either
bleedingormyocardialischemia,canresult.
Althoughsomesurgeonswillapproachtheheart
through a left lateral thoracotomy and remove
pericardium from the LV only, most will use a
mediansternotomyandresectasmuchpericardium
as is possible. Pericardial resection usually will
extend over the entire anterior surface, exclu-
sive of pericardium that overlies coronary artery
grafts, laterally to the phrenic nerves, and inferi-
orly to the diaphragmatic surface. When CPB is
notused,theanesthesiologistmustexpectfrequent
mechanically-induceddysrhythmias,andtherefore
have the capability of electrical cardioversion and
deﬁbrillation. In addition, frequent manipulation
anddisplacementoftheheartduringthedissection
willcausewideswingsinstrokevolumeandblood
pressure.Iftheextentofthedissectionorthepoten-
tialcomplicationsofreenteringthechestofapatient
who has undergone prior cardiac surgery requires
the institution of CPB, then the anesthesiologist
must be prepared to deal with ongoing hemor-
rhage,withsurgicalhemostasisdifﬁculttoachieve.
Adequate reserves of red cells, as well as platelets
and other blood products, must be immediately
available.
Anesthetic technique for constrictive
pericarditis
Table 8.4 outlines the goals for anesthetic
managementinconstrictivepericarditis.
Premedication
Theprincipledeterminantofpreoperativesedation
will be the patient’s underlying medical condition.
For example, a young, otherwise healthy patient
Table 8.4 Anestheticgoalsinconstrictivepericarditis.
• Maintain adequate central venous volume
• Avoid bradycardia. Diastolic ﬁlling is limited by the
constricting pericardium,and slow heart rates will result
in low cardiac output
• Establish generous venous access. Prolonged,continuous
bleeding is common and a major cause of mortality
• Aggressively treat platelet,red cell,and clotting factor
depletion
• Positive-pressure ventilation is not detrimental; changes
in intrathoracic compliance are poorly transmitted
through a stiff,adherent pericardium
• Be prepared for a long,tedious surgery
• Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) is indicated as
there is expected hemodynamic instability and volume
swings
with constrictive pericarditis secondary to mantle
irradiation for Hodgkin disease years earlier can be
premedicatedasforanyothermajoroperation.The
premedication of a patient with severe rheuma-
toid arthritis undergoing pericardiectomy for con-
strictive disease who also has an unstable cervical
spine will be determined primarily by the need
for sedation and topical anesthesia for an awake
intubation.Ifthepatientisundergoingpericardiec-
tomy secondary to prior cardiac surgery, premedi-
cationwillbedeterminedprimarilybytheadequacy
of myocardial revascularization and the presence
of residual angina or ischemia. If the patient has
residual myocardial ischemia, then premedication
considerations are similar to those for primary
revascularization.
Except when myocardial ischemia is likely, rel-
ative tachycardia need not be avoided. Increased
heart rate maintains cardiac output compensating
fortherestrictionindiastolicﬁlling.
Preinduction
Patients are prepared as for coronary artery bypass
graft (CABG) or valve surgery. Adequate IV
access,includingcentralvenousaccess,isessential.
A pulmonary artery catheter with thermodilution
capability may be indicated, independent of the
etiology of the constrictive disease. The ability toAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch08” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 303 — #15
PericardialDisease 303
measure cardiac output, as well as right- and left-
sided ﬁlling pressures, is often useful, even though
myocardial contractility will be normal in many
patientswithconstrictivepericarditis.
Induction and maintenance
Myocardial performance is abnormal in constric-
tivepericarditis.Thereisdiastolicdysfunctionwith
abnormal ﬁlling resulting in either compensated
or uncompensated heart failure. Anesthetic agents
mayfurthercompromisethesepatients.Theinduc-
tion of anesthesia depends on the etiology of the
patient’sconstrictivepericarditisandtheanticipated
durationofsurgery.Inductionmaybesimilartothat
usedforcoronaryarterybypasssurgery,ifthedura-
tionofsurgeryisexpectedtobelengthyandsignif-
icantresidualventriculardysfunctionisanticipated
in the immediate postoperative period. This would
include a combination of fentanyl 10–25 µg/kg
or sufentanil 1–3µg/kg, together with a benzodi-
azepine and inhalational agent. If the etiology of
constrictive pericarditis is secondary to prior coro-
nary revascularization, then a signiﬁcant potential
for perioperative myocardial ischemia exists, and
ongoing vigilance for myocardial ischemia must be
maintainedthroughouttheanesthetic.Sternotomy,
dissection, and removal of the pericardium can
injure entrapped coronary bypass grafts as well as
agraftedinternalmammaryartery.
Unlike the patient with a pericardial effusion,
changes in intrathoracic pressure are not transmit-
tedtotheheartthroughthethickenedpericardium
in constrictive disease. This eliminates the need
to avoid positive pressure ventilation and makes
inductionandmaintenancequitesimilartothatfor
coronary revascularization. The primary difference
betweensurgeryforrevascularizationandconstric-
tive pericarditis is that the latter is of shorter dura-
tion,withagreaterriskofseverehemorrhage.Many
ofthesepatientswillrequireinotropicsupportdur-
ing surgery and for a period of time after surgery.
The patient with constrictive pericarditis may take
aslongasamonthtoregainnormalhemodynamics
andventricularfunction.
Suggested reading
Asher CR, Klein AL. Diastolic heart failure: restrictive
cardiomyopathy, constrictive pericarditis, and cardiac
tamponade: clinical and echocardiographic evaluation.
Cardiol Rev2002;10:218–29.
Demangone D. ECG manifestations: noncoronary heart
disease. Emerg Med Clin North Am2006;24:113–31.
Goldstein JA. Cardiac tamponade, constrictive pericardi-
tis, and restrictive cardiomyopathy.Curr Probl Cardiol
2004;29:503–67.
MaischB,SeferovicPM,RisticAD et al.TaskForceonthe
Diagnosis and Management of Pericardial Diseases of
the European Society of Cardiology. Guidelines on the
diagnosisandmanagementofpericardialdiseasesexec-
utive summary; the Task Force on the Diagnosis and
Management of Pericardial Diseases of the European
SocietyofCardiology. Eur Heart J2004;25:587–610.
Spodick DH. Acute cardiac tamponade. N Engl J Med
2003;349:684–90.
Troughton RW, Asher CR, Klein AL. Pericarditis.Lancet
2004;363:717–27.Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch09” — 2007/7/17 — 20:32 — page 304 — #1
CHAPTER 9
Anesthesia for Surgery of
the Thoracic Aorta
Thoracicaortalesionsareamongthemostclinically
challenging and acutely life-threatening lesions
encountered by the cardiac anesthesiologist. The
perioperative mortality ranges from 10 to 35%.
Morbidity, including myocardial infarction (12%),
respiratory failure (25%), stroke (3%), and renal
failure (9%), remains signiﬁcant despite aggres-
sive intensive care interventions. The majority of
these patients are older and approximately 30%
have coexisting pulmonary, vascular, renal, and
coronary artery disease placing them at the very
highestrisk.Despitethesesigniﬁcantrisks,inmany
patients operative care remains the best option
for long-term survival. For example, the 2-year
survival in patients with untreated thoracic or
thoracoabdominalaorticaneurysmis25%,whereas
the expected 2-year survival after surgery is
approximately 70%.
Aortic disease may present at any age, including
the newborn. In younger patients, aortic disease
usually presents secondary to congenital defects,
Marfan disease (aneurysms), bicuspid aortic valve
disease with aneurysm formation, and aortic trans-
action after blunt chest trauma. In older patients,
the disease is associated with atherosclerotic
peripheral vascular disease, hypertension, diabetes
mellitus, and tobacco abuse.
All patients presenting for aortic surgery require
an extensive evaluation by the anesthesiologist. In
some cases, the surgery is urgent in nature (aortic
transectionandaorticdissection)andtheevaluation
is necessarily limited. Nevertheless, a brief review
of all available laboratories, cardiac studies, and
radiographicstudiesiscrucial.Thisinformationwill
allow the anesthesia team to quickly assess risk
andplanfortheoperativeprocedure.Management
of preoperative medications, institution of beta-
blockertherapy(ifindicated),placementofinvasive
monitoringdevices,andsurgicalstrategiescanallbe
determined in the preoperative period. Assembling
anappropriateoperativeteam,includingperfusion-
ists, nursing staff, and blood bank personnel, is
requiredbeforeanyaorticprocedure.Theoperative
team must communicate closely before the surgery
begins because line placement, drug selection, and
bloodbankingpreparationalldependontheextent
of the proposed surgery. In any aortic procedure,
theanesthesiologyteammustprepareforbloodsal-
vage techniques and be ready for potential massive
transfusion of blood and blood products.
There are multiple approaches to the repair
of aortic lesions that will affect the conduct of
anesthesia. For example, the repair of a type A
aorticdissectionmayrequiredeephypothermiccir-
culatory arrest (DHCA) with retrograde cerebral
cardioplegia. A descending aortic aneurysm repair
may employ left heart bypass with monitoring and
drainage of lumbar cerebral spinal ﬂuid. This inter-
play between surgery and anesthesia places aortic
surgery among the most challenging in cardiac
anesthesiologist’s domain.
Classiﬁcationofaorticlesions
Aortic lesions may be classiﬁed into three patho-
physiologic subtypes: aortic dissection, aortic
304Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch09” — 2007/7/17 — 20:32 — page 305 — #2
Anesthesia for Surgery of the Thoracic Aorta305
aneurysm, and aortic transection. Aortic tran-
section and acute aortic dissections are surgical
emergencies requiring immediate intervention.
Aortic aneurysms and chronic aortic dissections
often are repaired electively.
Aorticdissection
Acute aortic syndromes include aortic dissection,
intramural hematoma, and symptomatic aortic
ulcer. Aortic dissection is deﬁned as a separation
of the layers of the aortic wall with variable prox-
imal and distal extension. In 90% of the cases, an
intimal tear is identiﬁed, whereas in the remain-
der, no intimal tear is observed (Fig. 9.1a,b). In the
absenceofanintimaltear,itisthoughtthatthereis
(a)
(b)
Fig.9.1 (a) Transverse section of the descending aorta
showing the dissection ﬂap and a point of connection
betweenthetrueandfalselumen(bycolorﬂow).(b)This
is the same patient demonstrating a transesophageal
echocardiography(TEE)long-axisviewofthedescending
aorta. The dissection ﬂap is clearly seen as the point of
communication between the true and false lumen.
aruptureofthevasavasorumwithbleedingintothe
arterial media creating an intramural hematoma.
The incidence of aortic dissection ranges from 5–30
cases per million people per year. Pain is the most
commonpresentingsymptom;however,theremay
be a wide range of presentations secondary to dis-
tal organ system involvement. The dissection ﬂap
maypropagateantegradeand/orretrogradeinvolv-
ing any side branch of the aorta. There may result
malperfusion syndromes, tamponade, and aortic
valve regurgitation.
A high clinical index of suspicion is required in
order to make a timely diagnosis. Prompt evalu-
ations with computed tomography (CT) scanning,
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and/or trans-
esophageal echocardiography (TEE) are all highly
sensitive and speciﬁc modalities to diagnose aor-
tic dissection. Risk factors for aortic dissection
includehypertension,aorticmedialdisease,Marfan
syndrome, congenital bicuspid aortic valve, aortic
atherosclerosis, and blunt chest trauma. Approxi-
mately70%ofpatientswithaorticdissectionshave
a history of hypertension. Cocaine abuse may be a
causative factor in some otherwise healthy individ-
uals. Frequently, the acute event precipitating the
dissection is never determined. Iatrogenic injuries
from surgical manipulation of the aorta and place-
ment of diagnostic or therapeutic devices into the
aorta may result in acute dissection. The ratio of
males to females with aortic dissection is approxi-
mately 3:1, and the peak incidence is in the 5–7th
decadesoflife.Adissectionlessthan14-days-oldis
deﬁnedasacute,andadissectionolderthan2weeks
is deﬁned as chronic. Approximately 33% of all
thoracic aneurysms will present as an acute dissec-
tion. Anatomically, 60% of dissections involve the
ascending aorta, 20% involve the transverse arch,
and 20% involve the descending aorta.
Aortic dissections are described according to
either the DeBakey or Stanford classiﬁcation
(Fig. 9.2). DeBakey classiﬁed dissections on the
initialsiteofinjuryandthelocationofaorticexten-
sion. In type I and II dissections, the inciting lesion
occursintheascendingaorta.TypeIlesionsextend
into the descending aorta, whereas type II lesions
are limited to the ascending aorta. Both of these
dissectionsmayrendertheaorticvalveincompetentAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch09” — 2007/7/17 — 20:32 — page 306 — #3
306 Chapter 9
DeBakey
Type I     Originates in the ascending aorta, propagates at least to the
                aortic arch and often beyond it distally
Type II    Originates in and is confined to the ascending aorta
Type III   Originates in the descending aorta and extends distally down the
               aorta or, rarely, retrograde into the aortic arch and ascending
               aorta
Stanford
Type A  All dissections involving the ascending aorta,
             regardless of the site of origin
Type B   All dissections not involving the ascending aorta
Stanford
DeBakey Type I Type II Type III
Type A Type B
Fig.9.2 The DeBakey and Stanford classiﬁcation
systems for aortic dissections. (From Nienaber CA,
Eagle KA. Aortic dissection: new frontiers in diagnosis
and management. Part 1: From etiology to diagnostic
strategies. Circulation2003;108:628–35, with permission.)
due to retrograde involvement and deformation of
the aortic valve annulus. In a type III dissection,
the intimal tear is in the descending aorta. Type III
lesionsarefurthersubdividedintosubtypeA,which
has a retrograde extension into the proximal aortic
arch,andsubtypeB,whichhasantegradeextension
intothedescendingaorta.IntheStanfordclassiﬁca-
tion,typeAdissectionsarethosewithanyinvolve-
mentoftheascendingaorta,andtypeBdissections
involve only the descending aorta distal to the left
subclavianartery.Youngerpatientswithunderlying
connectivetissueabnormalitiesarepronetotypeA
dissections; older patients will commonly present
with a type B dissection.
Management of these patients depends on the
location of the lesion and extent of the dissection.
Medical management involves controlling blood
pressureandmyocardialcontractility.Thisoftenisa
temporizing measure until the patient can undergo
surgical repair. Patients with a Stanford A lesion
who undergo surgical repair have a signiﬁcantly
lower hospital mortality rate than patients who are
managed medically. In comparison, patients with
a Stanford B lesion do not have a signiﬁcant dif-
ference in mortality with either medical or surgical
management(Fig.9.3).Theoverallin-hospitalmor-
talityisapproximately30%forproximaldissections
and 10% for patients with distal dissections. The
predictors of in-hospital mortality include proxi-
mal dissection, age >65 years, shock, pulse, and
neurologic deﬁcits.
Aortictransection
Rupture of the aorta often results from nonpene-
tratingchestinjuriessustainedintrauma.Although
prompt diagnosis and treatment are crucial for sur-
vival, this lesion may remain clinically silent and
thus untreated. Anatomically, the heart and distal
aorta are mobile components, whereas the aortic
archisﬁxedbythegreatvessels.Duringthedeceler-
ation phase of an acceleration–deceleration injury,
the arch motion slows with the body while the
remainingheartandaorticcomponentscontinuein
motion. This energy creates a shearing force on the
aortaleadingtoinjury.Upto95%ofaorticinjuries
will occur at the isthmus where the aorta is teth-
eredbytheligamentumarteriosum.Additionalsites
of injury include the aortic hiatus in the diagram,
mid-thoracic descending aorta, and origin of the
left subclavian artery. Multiple sites of aortic injury
occur in up to 20% of patients (Fig. 9.4a–d).
An estimated 10–15% of fatal automobile acci-
dent victims suffer aortic rupture. Eighty-to-ninety
percent of these patients die at the scene. Among
the 10–20% surviving 1hour after the injury, an
additional 30% die within 6hours, 49% within
24hours, and 72% within 8days. Should the
patient make it to surgery, the mortality rate for
repair of this lesion is approximately 20%.
Aorticaneurysm
Aneurysms are classiﬁed by their etiology, loca-
tion, and shape. Aortic pathology predisposing
aneurysm includes atherosclerosis, cystic medial
necrosis, syphilitic aortitis, trauma, postoperative
false aneurysms, connective tissue disorders andAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch09” — 2007/7/17 — 20:32 — page 307 — #4
Anesthesia for Surgery of the Thoracic Aorta307
Fig.9.3 Fourteen-day mortality in 645
patients from the The International
Registry of Acute Aortic Dissection
(IRAD) stratiﬁed by medical (Med) or
surgical (Surg) management for either
type A or B dissection. (Modiﬁed from
HaganPG,NienaberCA,IsselbacherEM,
et al. The International Registry of Acute
Aortic Dissection (IRAD) – new insights
into old disease.JAMA
2000;283:897–903, with permission.)
60
50
40
30Cumulative mortality, (%)
20
10
0
<24
hours
12345
Days following presentation
6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14
All patients (n = 645)
A/Med (n = 98)
A/Surg (n = 320)
B/Med (n =188)
B/Surg (n = 41)
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
Fig.9.4 Angiographic studies from four patients with aortic transection following motor vehicle accidents. The defect
can have a number of anatomic locations and presentations. (a) Transection in the descending aorta. (b) Transection in
the innominate artery. (c) Fusiform transection of the descending aorta. (d) Transection at the ligamentum arteriosum.Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch09” — 2007/7/17 — 20:32 — page 308 — #5
308 Chapter 9
(a) (b)
Fig.9.5 Types of thoracic aortic aneurysms.
(a) Fusiform. (b) Saccular. (From Magilligan DJ Jr,
Ullyot DJ. The heart. I. Acquired diseases. In:
Way LW (ed).Current Surgical Diagnosis and Treatment.
Norwalk, CT: Appleton & Lange, 1991:359, with
permission.)
congenital aortic anomalies. Aneurysms with con-
currentdissectionaremorecommontotheascend-
ing aorta, whereas atherosclerotic aneurysms are
primarily localized to the descending aorta. The
DeBakey and Stanford classiﬁcations, which were
discussed under aortic dissections, are commonly
used to describe the location and extent of this
lesion. Aneurysms are described morphologically
as fusiform or saccular (Fig. 9.5a,b). Fusiform
aneurysms have a higher operative mortality than
saccular aneurysms. The male to female ratio is
approximately 2:1, although women have a higher
incidence of aneurysm rupture. This disorder tends
to affect older patients with the mean age for
diagnosis is in the sixth decade of life. A psue-
doaneurysm occurs when there is a well-deﬁned
collection of blood and thrombus outside of the
vessel wall. Exsanguination in a psuedoaneurysm
is prevented by the surrounding connective tissue.
This defect is sometimes referred to as a contained
rupture or false aneurysm.
Larger aortic aneurysms, expanding aneurysms,
and symptomatic aneurysms require surgical inter-
vention. Patients with an aortic diameter>55mm
and without surgical intervention have a 2-year
survival rate of<25%. The operative mortality for
repair is 20–34% for acute dissections and 8–22%
for chronic dissections. These patients have a high
incidence of coexisting pulmonary, cardiac, and
vascular disease complicating their intraoperative
and postoperative care.
Diagnosisofaorticlesions
Aortic lesions often present with a constellation
of symptoms suggesting the ongoing events. These
symptoms are a result of expansion, dissection, or
rupture of the aorta (Table 9.1). Severe anterior
chest or back pain is the most common present-
ing symptom. Pain may occur directly from aortic
expansion or from involvement of nearby struc-
tures. Pain may extend into the neck, shoulders, or
abdomen. The intensity of pain may not correlate
with the size of the lesion. Up to a half of patients
with aortic lesions will be asymptomatic. Possible
explanationsforthelackofsymptomsmightinclude
distracting injuries in the patient with trauma, a
chronicdiseaseprocessorothermaskingcoexisting
diseaseprocesses(i.e.cardiacischemia).Anypatient
with a suspected aortic lesion requires immediate
evaluation and diagnosis.
Chest radiography is a rapid and easily accessi-
ble method for diagnosing aortic lesions (Fig. 9.6).
Table 9.2 lists eight classic radiographic signs con-
sistent with aortic injury. Loss of the aortic knob
contour is the most consistent ﬁnding on chest
radiographforpatientswithaorticinjury.However,
radiograph under penetration or venous mediasti-
nal bleeding may cause false-positive studies. The
next most common ﬁnding is superior mediastinal
widening. Radiographs are assessed for the ratio of
mediastinal to chest width (M/C). An M/C ratio of
>0.25 is consistent with an aortic injury.
More sophisticated imaging techniques such as
angiography, CT, MRI, aortography, transthoracic
echocardiography (TTE), and TEE provide supe-
rior speciﬁcity and sensitivity of diagnosis over
chest radiographs. Historically, aortography has
been considered the “gold standard” in assessing
lesions of the aorta. However, this modality is
costly, invasive, and time consuming. Addition-
ally, aortography subjects patients to potentially
nephrotoxiccontrastagents.Althoughaortography
remains the superior diagnostic modality for coro-
nary artery anatomy evaluation and branch vessel
involvement, numerous studies have evaluatedAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch09” — 2007/7/17 — 20:32 — page 309 — #6
Anesthesia for Surgery of the Thoracic Aorta309
Table9.1 Presenting signs and potential etiologies for patients with thoracic aortic lesions. The frequency of these
ﬁndings, as calculated from previous studies is indicated when obtainable.
Symptoms/clinical
ﬁnding
Possibleetiology Frequency
(%)
Chestorbackpain Activeaorticdissection >50
Noclinicalﬁndings Distractinginjuries,chronicdissection 5–50
Angina Aorticdissectionintocoronaryarteries 5.8
Acutemyocardialinfarction Aorticdissectionintocoronaryarteries /thrombus
Aorticregurgitation Aorticvalveinjury /ascendingarchinjury 10–50
Assymetricupperextremitypulse
amplitude
Archinterruption 9–45
Hypertensionoftheupper
extremities
Distalaorticocclusion /rupture 37
Distantheartsounds Pericardialtamponade /pericardialeffusion
Hypotension Hypovolemia /aorticdissection
Pulmonaryedema Lungcontusion /myocardialcontusion /acuteaortic
insufﬁciency
Hemothorax Traumaticinjury /descendingthoracicinjury 3
Respiratorydifﬁculty Bronchialortrachealcompression /atelectasis/
pneumonitis/acuteaorticinsufﬁciencywith
pulmonaryedemaribfractures
8
Pneumothorax
Confusion Hypotension /acuteheadinjury
Hornersyndrome
Paraplegia Spinalcordischemia /trauma 2.3–2.6
Hemoptysis Erosionofbronchus /pulmonarycontusiontrauma
Externalchestwallabnormalities 35
Jawpain Referredsecondarydissection 8.8
Hoarseness Stretching /compressionoflaryngealnerve 8.6
Dysphasia Esophagealcompressionorerosion 5
Hematemasis Esophagealcompressionoferosion 5
Melena Directintestinalinjury /intestinalinfarction
Anuriaorhematuria Renalinjury /renalinfarction /hypovolemia 2–3
diagnostic alternatives with promising results
(Table 9.3). Several series have shown MRI to be
100% sensitive and speciﬁc in diagnosing aortic
lesions. Furthermore, MRI or CT in combination
withTTEhasequivalentsensitivityandspeciﬁcityto
aortographyforevaluatingsuchlesions.Thelimited
abilityofCTandMRItoevaluatetheaorticvalveis
well supplemented by adding echocardiography.
TEEprovidesexcellentresolutionofintrathoracic
structures in a rapid, relatively noninvasive fash-
ion. For patients with a suspected thoracic aortic
lesion, intraoperative TEE can make or conﬁrmAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch09” — 2007/7/17 — 20:32 — page 310 — #7
310 Chapter 9
Fig.9.6 Posteroanterior roentgenogram of a patient
presenting with a chronic transverse arch aortic
aneurysm. Note the aneurysm at the aortic knob, the
deviation of the trachea and elevation of the left
hemidiaphragm. At surgery, the left phrenic nerve was
stretched and splayed by the aneurysm. (From
Commarata BJ. Anesthesia for surgery of the thoracic
aorta. In: DiNardo JA (ed).Anesthesia for Cardiac Surgery,
2nd edn. Stamford, CT: Appleton & Lange, 1998:259–76,
with permission.)
Table9.2 Chest radiograph ﬁndings in thoracic aortic
lesions.
Lossofaorticcontour
Mediastinalwidening
Displacementoftherightparaspinousinterface
Deviationofthetracheatotheright
Displacementofthenasogastrictubetotheright
Lefthemothorax
Depressionoftheleftmainstembronchusbelow40 ◦ from
horizontal
Leftapicalcap
the diagnosis, locate dissection sites, identify the
true and false lumen, evaluate the surgical repair,
and assess the adequacy of perfusion during car-
diopulmonary bypass (CPB) (Fig. 9.7a,b). In com-
parison with aortography, TEE provides a higher
sensitivity,
Table9.3 Sensitivities, speciﬁcities, and predictive
values of imaging techniques for the diagnosis of thoracic
aortic dissection.
Technique Sensitivity
(%)
Speciﬁcity
(%)
PPV
(%)
NPV
(%)
Angiography 77–88 94–100 95–100 71–84
CT 80–83 88–100 83–100 71–88
MRI 100 100 100 100
TEE 97–99 98–100 98–100 96–99
CT,computedtomography;MRI,magneticresonanceimag-
ing;NPV,negativepredictivevalue;PPV,positivepredictive
value;TEE,transesophagealechocardiography.
(a)
(b)
FL
TL
Fig.9.7 (a) M-mode transesophageal echocardiography
(TEE) of a dissection. The true and false lumen are
clearly demonstrated. The true lumen will expand
during systole. FL, false lumen; TL, true lumen.
(b) Pseudoaneurysm of the aortic root. The defect along
the noncoronary cusp is clearly seen with color Doppler.
signiﬁcantlyshorterexaminationtimeandthrombus
identiﬁcation. TEE is indicated intraoperatively to
assess myocardial performance, signs of ischemia,
heart valve status, and post-repair aortic integrity.
Forpatientswithtrauma,TEEishighlysensitiveand
speciﬁc for evaluation of aortic injuries.Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch09” — 2007/7/17 — 20:32 — page 311 — #8
Anesthesia for Surgery of the Thoracic Aorta311
TEE has several limitations. Lesions of the dis-
tal ascending aorta are difﬁcult or impossible to
visualize with TEE secondary to interference of the
trachea and left main stem bronchus. Examina-
tion of the subdiaphragmatic descending aorta is
limited.Ultrasonicartifactssometimesareconfused
withintimaltearsandleadtoanincorrectdiagnosis.
Despitetheselimitations,TEEisawidelyusedperi-
operativeandintraoperativediagnosticmodalityfor
evaluating patients with aortic injuries.
Airwaycompressionfrom
aorticlesions
Theaorticarchsaddlestheleftmain-stembronchus
asthevesselmakesthetransitionfromascendingto
transversetodescendingaorta(Fig.9.8).Ultimately,
the descending aorta assumes its location along the
posterior wall of the bronchus. A thoracic aortic
Right common
carotid artery
Right
subclavian
artery
Trachea
Left common
carotid artery
Esophagus
Brachiocephalic
trunk
Right
primary
bronchus
Right upper
lobe bronchus
Left subclavian
artery
Aortic arch
Ligamentum
arteriosum
Tracheal
bifurcation
Left primary
bronchus
Thoracic aorta
Esophagus,
thoracic part
Fig.9.8 The anatomic relationship of the esophagus,
great vessels and the trachea. (Adapted from
Clemente CD.Anatomy: A Regional Atlas of the Human
Body, 2nd edn. Baltimore/Munich: Urban &
Schwarzenberg, 1981:181, with permission.)
lesion can impinge upon and damage the trachea
or main-stem bronchus, leading to tracheomala-
cia and respiratory distress (Fig. 9.9a,b) Thoracic
aortic lesions usually cause compression or devia-
tion of the left main-stem bronchus; however, the
right main-stem bronchus and trachea also may be
compromised.
Symptoms of airway compression may be exac-
erbated by changes in body position. A preoper-
ative history and examination revealing stridor,
wheezing,cough,ortrachealdeviationshouldraise
suspicion of aortic impingement and possible tra-
cheomalacia. Unilateral vocal cord paralysis, which
results from compression of the recurrent laryn-
geal nerve between the aorta and trachea, may
present clinically as voice hoarseness. Preopera-
tive pulmonary function testing with ﬂow–volume
loop analysis will reveal an intrathoracic obstruc-
tive process in severe cases. Radiographic studies
may be useful in delineating the extent of airway
compromise caused by aortic lesions.
Surgicalapproachand
management
Patients with a suspected aortic dissection require
immediate diagnosis, invasive monitoring, and
treatment. Medical management focuses on pain
andbloodpressurecontroltoreducediseaseexten-
sion. Narcotics are effective for pain control, and
a wide variety of vasoactive agents including
beta-blocking agents, sodium nitroprusside, and
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors
can be used for blood pressure control. The ther-
apeutic goal is to reduce the shear forces along
the dissection ﬂap. Patients with hemodynamic
instability or signiﬁcant comorbidity (i.e. pericar-
dial tamponade, acute aortic regurgitation, shock)
often require emergent intubation and preparation
for surgery.
Ventilation
Thelocationoftheaorticlesionwilldictatethesur-
gical approach necessary for repair. Ascending and
transverse aortic arch lesions are repaired through
a median sternotomy without the requirement for
one-lung ventilation (OLV). These patients can beAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch09” — 2007/7/17 — 20:32 — page 312 — #9
312 Chapter 9
(a) (b)
Fig.9.9 (a)Thetracheaismarkedlydeviatedsecondary
to an aortic aneurysm. (b) The trachea and left mainstem
bronchus may be compressed from an aortic aneurysm.
Left-sided double lumen endotracheal tubes may be
difﬁcult to place in these patients. (From Hunt D,
Schwab F. Chest trauma. In: Rosen P, Doris P, Barkin R
et al. (eds).Diagnostic Radiology in Emergency Medicine.
St. Louis: Mosby Year Book, 1992:77–100 and
Smith MS, Grichnik KP. Anesthetic considerations for
lung transplantation and thoracic aortic surgery. In:
Miller RD, Reves JG (eds).Atlas of Anesthesia, Vol.VIII:
Cardiothoracic Anesthesia. Philadelphia: Current
Medicine (Churchill Livingstone), 1999:6.1–18, with
permission.)
managed with a single lumen endotracheal tube.
Lesionsofthedistaltransversearchanddescending
aorta are repaired through a left thoracotomy. Sur-
gical exposure is enhanced and trauma to the left
lung is minimized by providing OLV with the left
lungcollapsed.Cautionisindicatedastheaneurysm
mayimpingeonthetracheaorbronchusresultingin
tubemalposition,airwaydamage,oraorticrupture.
Aorticcross-clamping
Aortic cross-clamping at some level is required for
repair of all thoracic aortic lesions. The placement
oftheaorticcross-clampsforrepairofvariousaortic
lesionsissummarizedinFig.9.10(a–f).Aorticcross-
clamping creates potential for end-organ ischemia.
The organs at risk vary with the position of the
cross-clamps.
Spinalcordischemiaisapotentialconsequenceof
aorticcross-clamping.Anatomically,thebloodsup-
plytothespinalcordisderivedfromseveralsources.
A single anterior spinal artery arises from the ver-
tebral arteries at the level of the foramen magnum
and supplies the anterior two-thirds of the spinal
cord. A pair of posterior spinal arteries arises from
theposteriorinferiorcerebellararteriesandsupplies
theremainderofthecord.Thevertebral,deepcervi-
cal, intercostal, and lumbar arteries also contribute
tospinalcordperfusionastheanteriorandposterior
radicular arteries (Fig. 9.11). The largest radicular
artery is the arteria radicularis magna or artery of
Adamkiewicz,whichsuppliesthemajorityofblood
tothelowertwo-thirdsofthespinalcord.Theorigin
of this vessel is localized to T9–T12 in over 60% of
patients. Therefore, in contrast to the upper spinal
cord, the lower cord has a relatively limited blood
supplywithfewercollateralvesselsandisatriskfor
ischemia during aortic cross-clamping or hypoten-
sive periods. Ligation of intercostals arteries at the
time of surgery is controversial. Ligation of lower
intercostal arteries is associated with a greater the
risk of neurologic deﬁcit (Fig. 9.12).
Spinal cord perfusion pressure (SCPP) is the dif-
ferencebetweenmeanarterialpressure(MAP)and
the cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF) pressure. Efforts to
improve perfusion necessitate either an increase in
MAPorareductioninCSFpressure.Lumbardrains
reduceCSFvolumeandpressuretherebyaugment-
ing SCPP (Fig. 9.13a,b). The literature is contradic-
toryonthebeneﬁtofCSFﬂuiddrainageinpatients;
however, many institutions routinely employ thisAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch09” — 2007/7/17 — 20:32 — page 313 — #10
Anesthesia for Surgery of the Thoracic Aorta313
Descending aorta Descending aorta
Left thoracotomy Left thoracotomy
GOTT shunt
Coronary circulation
Perfused by heart
O2 by lung
Descending aorta
Left thoracotomy
Perfused by heart
O2 by lung
Ascending aorta
Cardioplegia Cardioplegia
RA Femoral vein RA Femoral vein
Median sternotomy
Aortic
Median sternotomy
DHCA ± retrograde
cerebral perfusion or
direct vessel cannulation
Perfused by circuit
O2 by circuit
Descending aorta
Left thoracotomy
Perfused by heart
O2 by lungs
Perfused by heart
O2 by lung
Coronary circulation
Perfusion and O2
by collaterals
Coronary circulation Coronary circulation
LA LV LA PA Femoral vein
Centrifugal
pump
Reservoir,
oxygenator, pump
Reservoir,
oxygenator, pump
Perfused by pump
O2 by lungs
Perfused by shunt
O2 by lungs
Perfused by circuit
O2 by circuit
Perfused by circuit
O2 by circuit
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
(e) (f)
Reservoir,
oxygenator, pump
Fig.9.10 Location of aortic cross clamp (—), surgical approach, and circulatory adjuncts for repair of aortic lesions.
(a–d) Descending aorta. (e) Ascending aorta. (f) Aortic arch. (From Commarata BJ. Anesthesia for surgery of the
thoracic aorta. In: DiNardo JA (ed).Anesthesia for Cardiac Surgery, 2nd edn. Stamford, CT: Appleton & Lange,
1998:259–76, with permission.)Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch09” — 2007/7/17 — 20:32 — page 314 — #11
314 Chapter 9
Vertebral artery
Ascending
cervicle
arterySubclavian
artery
Basilar artery
Anterior spinal artery
Radicular arteries,
C3–C4
Radicular arteries,
C5–C6
Radicular arteries,
C7–C8
Radicular arteries,
T3–T4
Posterior spinal
artery
Radicular artery of
Adamkiewicz,
T11–T12
Lumbar-sacral
radicular arteries
Fig.9.11 Blood supply of the spinal cord. (From
Smith MS, Grichnik KP. Anesthetic considerations for
lung transplantation and thoracic aortic surgery. In:
Miller RD, Reves JG (eds).Atlas of Anesthesia, Vol.VIII:
Cardiothoracic Anesthesia. Philadelphia: Current Medicine
(Churchill Livingstone), 1999:6.1–18, with permission.)
modalitywithgoodresult.Therearenumerouscase
reports of patients with new onset paraplegia after
surgerywithresolutionofsymptomsafterCSFﬂuid
drainage.
Some centers employ selective cooling of the
spinal cord via lavage of the subarachnoid space.
Corticosteroids, thiopental, N-methyl-D-aspartate
receptor antagonists, papaverine, and magnesium
also have undergone studies evaluating their pro-
tective effects on the spinal cord. Although many
agentshaveshownsuccessinthelaboratory,clinical
efﬁcacyisdifﬁculttoestablish.Thesinglebestinter-
vention to reduce spinal cord injury is limiting the
aortic cross-clamp time to an absolute minimum.
Among the most common perioperative injuries
associated with repair of thoracic aorta lesions is
100
80
60
Percent40
20
0
Ligated
Occluded
Reattached
789
Intercostal artery
10 11 12
Fig.9.12 Percentage of patients with neurologic deﬁcit
by intercostal artery and artery status. The lower to
position of the artery on the spine, the higher the risk of
deﬁcit with ligation. (From Saﬁ HJ, Miller CC III, Carr C
et al. Importance of intercostal artery reattachment
during thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm repair.J Vasc
Surg1998;27:58–68, with permission.)
postoperative paraplegia. The incidence of para-
plegia after thoracic aortic repair ranges from
2–40%, depending on the site of the lesion and
the degree of aortic involvement and aortic dis-
section. Patients with dissection have at least a
twofold greater incidence of postoperative para-
plegia when compared with those without dissec-
tion.Despitenumerousanimalandhumanstudies,
the precise mechanism of spinal cord injury dur-
ing aortic cross-clamping remains uncertain. Con-
tributing factors include aortic cross-clamp time,
extent of aneurysm, presence of hypotension or
shock, urgency of operation, aneurysm with con-
current dissection, diabetes, and advanced patient
age.Thespinalcordwilltoleratealimitedperiodof
ischemia before irreversible cellular injury occurs
(Fig. 9.14). A cross-clamp time of<30minutes is
usually safe and carries a minimal risk for post-
operative paraplegia. Thirty to sixty minutes of
cross-clamp time leaves patients more vulnerable
to injury, whereas times>60minutes approach a
90% incidence of paraplegia. Therefore, for repairs
exceeding 30minutes, patients may beneﬁt from
extracorporeal circulatory techniques to augment
end-organ perfusion.
Somatosensory-evoked potentials (SSEPs) and
motor-evoked potentials (MEPs) can be used toAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch09” — 2007/7/17 — 20:32 — page 315 — #12
Anesthesia for Surgery of the Thoracic Aorta315
40
30
20Mean pressure (mmHg)
10
0
−10
−10 0 10
AXC
on
AXC
off
Time (min)
20 30 40 50 60 70
40
30
20Mean pressure (mmHg)
10
0
−10
−10 0 10
AXC
on
AXC
off
Time (min)
SCPP = 30 mmHg
20 30 40 50 60 70
SCPP = 22 mmHg
(a)
(b)
Fig.9.13 Spinal cord perfusion pressure (SCPP) (distal
aortic pressure, upper line; cerebral spinal ﬂuid pressure,
lower line) was lower in the control group of dogs (a)
than in the cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF) drainage group of
dogs (b). AXC, aortic cross-clamp. (From McCullough JL,
Hollier LH, Nugent M. Paraplegia after thoracic aortic
occlusion: inﬂuence of cerebrospinal ﬂuid drainage.
Experimental and early clinical results.J Vasc Surg
1988;7:153–60, with permission.)
detect intraoperative spinal cord ischemia. Both
evaluate amplitude and latency of signal transduc-
tion as a marker of neuronal integrity (Fig. 9.15).
SSEP involves stimulation of upper or lower
extremity peripheral nerves with signal observa-
tion at the cervical spine and scalp. The electrical
signal, which is carried by the dorsal columns,
assesses the integrity of afferent long tracts within
thespinalcord.SSEPmonitoringalsomaybehelp-
ful in assessing the adequacy of distal perfusion
via extracorporeal circulation. This type monitor-
ing is not routinely employed at all centers. Some
dataﬁndnoreductioninpostoperativeneurological
deﬁcitsassociatedwiththeuseofSSEPmonitoring.
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
Probability of spinal cord injury
(paraplegia or paresis)
0.2
0.1
0
Safe Vulnerable Certain
30 60 90
Aortic cross-clamp time (min)
Fig.9.14 Relative risk of ischemic spinal cord injury
relative to aortic cross-clamp time. (From Svensson LG,
Loop FD. Prevention of spinal cord ischemia in surgery.
In: Bergan JJ, Yao JST (eds).Arterial Surgery: New
Diagnostic and Operative Techniques. New York: Grune &
Stratton, 1988:273–85, with permission.)
Also,thepredominantlyefferentanteriorhornarea
seems to be most sensitive to ischemia. SSEP mon-
itoring directly assesses the dorsal column but can
only indirectly monitor these motor areas within
the cord. SSEP monitoring cannot differentiate
between peripheral and central ischemia causing
observed changes. Motor-evoked potential moni-
toringdetectstheareaofinterestinthespinalcord,
butitistechnicallydifﬁcultoutcomedataregarding
its use is contradictory.
Renal insufﬁciency is common after procedures
of the thoracic aorta with an incidence of approx-
imately 10%. Reported risk factors for postopera-
tive renal failure include reduced left ventricular
(LV) function, need for reoperation, renal ischemic
time exceeding 30minutes, postoperative respira-
tory insufﬁciency, preexisting renal dysfunction,
urgent or emergency procedures, and large vol-
umes of blood loss during the procedure. Ade-
quate hydration and renal perfusion pressure are
important for renal protection. Several therapeutic
interventions to avoid this complication are advo-
cated; however, clinical efﬁcacy is uncertain. Most
clinicians agree that intraoperative urine output of
0.5–1.0mL/kg/h is considered a measure of ade-
quate renal perfusion and function; however, this
assumption may be invalid. Common pharmaco-
logic interventions include “renal dose” dopamineAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch09” — 2007/7/17 — 20:32 — page 316 — #13
316 Chapter 9
P1
Amplitude Amplitude
Latency Latency
N1
Fig.9.15 Somatosensory evoke
potentials (SSEPs) and motor evoked
potentials (MEPs) latency and amplitude
determinations during aortic surgery.
(From Meylaerts SA, Jacobs MJ, van
Iterson Vet al.Comparison of transcranial
motor evoked potentials and
somatosensory evoked potentials during
thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm repair.
Ann Surg1999;230:742–9, with
permission.)
(2–4 µg/kg/min),fenoldopam,andmannitol.Man-
nitol induces an osmotic diuresis and acts as an
oxygen-free radical scavenger. There are little data
supporting the use of dopaminergic agonists for
renal protection in this clinical scenario. The anes-
thesia team should focus on appropriate hydration
prior to aortic cross-clamping and maintenance of
distalperfusionpressure.Extracorporealcirculatory
techniques may be beneﬁcial in providing blood
supply to an otherwise ischemic kidney during
aortic cross-clamping.
Distalaorticarchanddescending
thoracicaorticlesions
These lesions are repaired through a left thoraco-
tomywiththeaidofOLV.Anumberofoptionsexist
in the management of these lesions.
Simpleaorticcross-clamping
Conceptually, the simplest method for repairing
distal aortic arch and descending thoracic aortic
lesions involves cross-clamping the aorta and pro-
ceeding with the surgical procedure. As shown in
Fig. 9.10a, the aorta is clamped proximally and dis-
tally to the lesion. Coronary and cerebral perfusion
are uninterrupted by this arrangement and distal
aorticperfusioniseithertemporarilyinterruptedor
occurs via collateral vessels. Pulmonary blood ﬂow
continues normally. This method produces proxi-
mal aortic hypertension, which may produce LV
afterload mismatch, LV distension, mitral regurgi-
tation (MR), and myocardial ischemia. Pharmaco-
logicmanagementofLVfunctionduringthisperiod
is challenging. Aortic cross-clamp time ideally is
limited to<30minutes.
To provide ﬂow to the areas below the distal
clamp,severaltechniqueshavebeendeveloped.The
concept behind all of them is diversion of blood
from the heart for distribution to the distal aorta.
This serves two purposes: it provides blood ﬂow
to the areas distal to the aortic cross-clamp, and it
offersanonpharmacologicmethodtocontrolprox-
imal aortic hypertension and LV distension during
the cross-clamp period. The available methods are
described below.
Passiveshunting
The work of Gott and colleagues developed the tri-
dodecymethyl ammonium chloride–heparin shunt
consisting of sized, nonthrombogenic plastic tub-
ing. The segment of tubing is placed into the aorta
between the proximal clamp and the aortic valve,
and the other end of the tubing is placed into the
aorta beyond the distal clamp (Fig. 9.10b). This
method has several advantages and disadvantages.
Advantages
• The shunt provides a method for distal perfusion
without the need for systemic heparinization.
• The shunt is quickly and easily placed.
Disadvantages
• Precise control of shunted blood is impossible to
regulate.
• Other problems include bleeding from the inser-
tion sites, accidental dislodgement during the pro-
cedure, migration of the proximal end of the
shunt across the innominate or left carotid artery,
blockage of the surgeon’s ﬁeld of view, kinking of
the shunt, embolic stroke, and death.Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch09” — 2007/7/17 — 20:32 — page 317 — #14
Anesthesia for Surgery of the Thoracic Aorta317
Leftheartbypass
Left heart bypass removes a fraction of oxygenated
blood from either the left atrium or the left ven-
tricle for delivery to the distal aorta or femoral
artery (Fig. 9.10c). A centrifugal pump is used in
thisarrangement.Nooxygenatorisneededbecause
oxygenated blood from the left heart is used.
Advantages
• The amount of blood diverted from the left
atrium to distal aorta can be precisely controlled.
Communication with the perfusionist is essential.
• The system is relatively easy to insert.
• Minimal heparinization is needed (activated
clotting time (ACT)=150seconds).
• Patients undergoing left heart bypass have
smaller differences between the upper and lower
extremitymeanarterialpressure,higherintraoper-
ativeurineoutput,lowerincidenceofpostoperative
azotemia, and less blood loss in comparison with
patients with a passive shunt.
Disadvantages
• No blood or ﬂuid can be added to the bypass
system because there is no reservoir. Large-bore
peripheral or central venous access is a necessity.
• The absence of a heat exchanger does not allow
the patient to be actively warmed or cooled.
A 4% incidence of postoperative renal failure is
associated with left heart bypass, as compared with
9% and 11% for simple cross-clamping and CPB,
respectively. However, left heart bypass has not
eliminatedcomplicationsfromaorticsurgery.A3%
early mortality rate, 1.5% reversible renal failure
rate, and 2.3% incidence of permanent spinal cord
injury have been reported despite using left heart
bypassforpatientsundergoingrepairofdescending
thoracic aortic lesions.
Partialcardiopulmonarybypass
Partial cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) exists when
only a portion of the systemic venous drainage to
the heart is captured and returned to the CPB cir-
cuit(Fig.9.10d).DuringpartialCPB,theremaining
portion of systemic venous return is to the right
atrium. This blood makes its way to the pulmonary
bed, where gas exchange occurs. The blood then
returns to the left atrium and left ventricle, where
it is ejected into the systemic circulation. For par-
tial CPB to be effective the heart must be beating
with ejection and the lungs must be ventilated. In
the absence of ventilation, systemic venous blood
that enters the right atrium ultimately will reach
thesystemiccirculationwithoutgasexchangehav-
ing occurred. This will result in hypercarbia and
hypoxemia.
The source of venous blood for this technique
can be the femoral vein, left atrium, or pulmonary
artery. The right atrium is poorly accessible from
a left thoracotomy. Arterial outﬂow from the CPB
circuit is delivered to a distal aortic site or to the
femoral artery. The CPB circuit contains a venous
reservoir, a heat exchanger, and an oxygenator.
The oxygenator portion of the circuit is redundant
whentheleftatriumisusedasthesourceofvenous
blood.
Advantages
• The patient can be actively warmed. This is
a major advantage if hypothermia becomes a
problem.
• Bloodandﬂuidcanbeaddedeasilytothesystem
via the venous reservoir.
• All shed blood can be scavenged by the car-
diotomy suction and returned to the venous
reservoir without the need for a cell-saver system.
• Precise control of the amount of blood diverted
fromthehearttothedistalaortaispossible.Theper-
fusionistpartiallyoccludesthevenousdrainageline
withaclampandcontrolsarterialoutﬂowwiththe
pumpheadtodeterminethebalancebetweenprox-
imal and distal blood ﬂow. Close communication
with the surgeon and perfusionist is essential.
Disadvantages
• Full systemic anticoagulation with heparin is
necessary.
• LeftheartbypasswithpartialCPBrequiresinten-
sive vigilance to hemodynamics by both the anes-
thesiologist and the perfusionist. There is a shared
circulation in place. It is possible for the perfusion-
isttodiverttoomuchbloodfromtheheartthereby
depriving the heart, head, and upper extremities
adequate blood supply. The use of an upper andAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch09” — 2007/7/17 — 20:32 — page 318 — #15
318 Chapter 9
lower arterial line as well as intraoperative TEE
assist the team in assessing upper body and lower
body blood ﬂow.
Ascendingaortaandaorticarchlesions
Ascending aortic and aortic arch lesions require
full CPB. They are repaired through a median ster-
notomy. The clamps interrupt coronary circulation
necessitating cardiac arrest and cardioplegia. All
of the systemic venous drainage to the heart is
captured and returned to the CPB circuit and sub-
sequentlytothepatient.Inlesionsoftheascending
aorta(Fig.9.10e),arterialcannulationforreturnof
oxygenated blood to the patient can be obtained in
the distal ascending aorta, aortic arch, or femoral
artery. This arrangement allows cerebral perfusion
to be maintained. Venous cannulation usually is
obtained via the right atrium.
If the aortic arch is involved, the great vessels to
the head and upper extremities must be excluded
(Fig. 9.10f). In this arrangement, there is no source
of cerebral blood ﬂow. As a result, some modiﬁ-
cations must exist to provide either cerebral blood
ﬂow or to minimize the effects of cerebral ischemia
during the cross-clamp period. In the absence of
cerebral perfusion, mitigation of the effects of cere-
bral ischemia can be accomplished through the use
of DHCA. Combining DHCA with continuous ret-
rograde cerebral perfusion (CRCP) may extend the
safe arrest limit to between 65 and 90minutes and
reduce the risk of neurologic injury during the
surgical procedure. Continuous retrograde cerebral
perfusion is accomplished by low pressure delivery
(20–30mmHg)ofhypothermic(20 ◦C),oxygenated
blood from the CPB circuit to the superior vena
cava with venting of the efﬂuent via the aortic
arch. This approach has many advantages, includ-
ingitstechnicalease,abilitytoeasilyvisualizeblood
returningfromthegreatvessels,andtheremovalof
particulate material from arterial sites.
Anesthetictechniqueforaortic
surgery
Goals
1 Obtainathoroughunderstandingofthetypeand
locationofthelesion.Reviewtheoperativeplanand
prepare for use of OLV and adjuvant methods to
provide distal perfusion when indicated.
2 Prepare for potential blood loss, including
pharmacologic measures to reduce bleeding.
3 Determine necessary invasive and noninvasive
monitoring.
4 Minimize hemodynamic perturbations during
induction and maintenance of general anesthesia.
Evaluation
Review of the patient’s medical history and prior
radiographic, echocardiographic, and angiographic
studies is critical for the anesthesiologist’s under-
standing of preexisting conditions and current sta-
tus. Information regarding the patient’s prior lung
status may provide insight into his ability to tol-
erate OLV for long periods. Evaluation of existing
radiological studies will help determine the surgi-
calapproach,whichwilldictatemonitoringandthe
need for OLV.
Controlofbothbloodpressureandejectionveloc-
ityarethemainstaysofhemodynamicoptimization
ofthepatientwithanaorticlesion.Increasedblood
pressureandejectionvelocityarecapableofextend-
ing an existing dissection or causing aneurysm
rupture. Aggressive control of blood pressure with
vasodilators is likely to cause a reﬂex tachycar-
dia and an increase in left ventricular change in
pressure over change in time LV (dp/dt), thereby
increasing ejection velocity and the sheer forces on
the aortic lesion. This scenario is particularly likely
inotherwisehealthypatientwithtraumawhomay
alreadyhaveahyperdynamicLVsecondarytoblood
loss and high catecholamine levels. Simultaneous
controlofbothbloodpressureandejectionvelocity
isbestobtainedwithacombinationofbeta-blockers
and vasodilators.
Premedication
Patients who present for elective repair of lesions
often are hemodynamically optimized before
surgery. Oral antihypertensive agents may include
beta-blockers, calcium channel blockers, diuretics,
and ACE inhibitors. Calcium channel and beta-
blocking agents may be advantageous in providing
simultaneousbloodpressureandheartratecontrol.
ItisessentialtocontinueallpreoperativevasoactiveAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch09” — 2007/7/17 — 20:32 — page 319 — #16
Anesthesia for Surgery of the Thoracic Aorta319
medications. Rebound tachycardia or hypertension
from medication withdrawal may be disastrous.
Treatment with anxiolytic agents assist in control-
ling hypertension and tachycardia and, therefore,
minimize aortic wall tension.
In contrast, patients presenting emergently for
repair of an aortic lesion are often poorly
controlled. In the absence of hypotension or
shock, beta-blocking agents along with vasodila-
tors are indicated. Esmolol, metoprolol, or other
beta-blockers are commonly used intravenous
β-receptor-blocking agents in this setting. The
advantages of esmolol include its high speciﬁcity
for theβ1-receptor and its short duration of action.
Options for vasodilator therapy include nitroprus-
side, nitroglycerin, trimethaphan, and halogenated
inhalational anesthetic agents. Nitroprusside is a
potentarterialvasodilatorandmayinducecoronary
steal and subsequent myocardial ischemia. Addi-
tionally,distalorganandspinalcordperfusionmay
befurthercompromisedinpatientsreceivingnitro-
prussideduringaorticcross-clamping.Nitroglycerin
is primarily a venodilator. This medication gen-
erally is easier to titrate and provides dilation of
the large coronary arteries. However, nitroglycerin
may not provide adequate arterial relaxation and
blood pressure reduction. Both drugs may compro-
mise oxygenation during OLV by blunting hypoxic
pulmonary vasoconstriction. The clinical use of
trimethaphanislimitedbyitssideeffectproﬁleand
tachyphylaxis.
Preinduction
Preparation for massive blood loss is critical.
Bilateral upper-extremity 14-guage or 16-gauge
intravenous catheters should be placed. Large-bore
central venous access is required. The location for
arterial line placement will depend on the location
of the lesion.
Distal aortic lesions (Stanford type B) will neces-
sitate placement of a right upper extremity (radial)
arterial line. In repairing this lesion, the proximal
aortic cross-clamp will probably be placed distal to
theinnominateartery.Therefore,thepatencyofthe
rightsubclavianarterywillbepreservedthroughout
the procedure.
Proximal aortic lesions (Stanford type A) will
necessitate placement of a left upper extremity
arterialline.Theleftsubclavianarteryprobablywill
bedistaltotheaorticclampsiteandshouldbeused.
Femoral artery cannulation is used in conjunc-
tion with right radial artery cannulation in patients
undergoing repair of aortic arch or descending
thoracic aortic lesions with distal perfusion. The
femoral artery cannula is necessary to monitor
the adequacy of distal perfusion. Communication
with the surgeon is necessary to determine which
femoral artery can be used for monitoring pressure
when a femoral artery also is going to be used for
perfusion.
Allnecessaryvasopressorandvasodilatoryagents
and six units of typed and cross-matched blood
should be available in the operating room before
induction.Antiﬁbrinolyticsareoftenusedtoreduce
bleeding. Epidural catheters often are used in
nonanticoagulated patients undergoing elective
procedures. Caution must be exercised as inadver-
tent vascular placement of the catheter may delay
the procedure. A test dose with 3–5mL of 1.5%
lidocaine with 1:200000 epinephrine is important
to conﬁrm correct placement of the catheter. Con-
ﬁrming normal coagulation status before epidural
catheter removal is essential.
Induction
There is no one anesthetic technique recom-
mended for aortic surgery. The overriding factor
in choosing any agent is hemodynamic control.
For elective procedures, a narcotic induction with
fentanyl (15–25 µg/kg) or sufentanil (1–3µg/kg)
will minimize hemodynamic disturbances. An
intermediate-acting,nondepolarizingneuromuscu-
larblockersuchasvecuronium(0.1mg/kg),rocuro-
nium (0.6mg/kg), or cisatracurium (0.2mg/kg)
will provide adequate muscle relaxation. Providing
small doses of muscle relaxant during the nar-
cotic infusion will minimize opioid-induced chest
wall rigidity. Amnesia must be accomplished with
benzodiazepines and/or inhalational agents.
Patients undergoing emergent procedures often
require a rapid sequence induction. A sedative
hypnotic such as sodium thiopental (3–5mg/kg),Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch09” — 2007/7/17 — 20:32 — page 320 — #17
320 Chapter 9
propofol (2.0–2.5mg/kg), or etomidate
(0.2–0.3mg/kg) in combination with a smaller
narcotic dose (fentanyl 10 µg/kg or sufentanil
1.0 µg/kg) will blunt the hemodynamic effects of
laryngoscopy and will provide rapid induction of
general anesthesia. Succinylcholine 1–2mg/kg is
used for rapid muscle relaxation, although large
doses of nondepolarizing agents are an alternative.
Protection of the airway and the potential for aspi-
ration must be weighed against the undesirable
hemodynamicresponsetodirectlaryngoscopy.The
addition of beta-blockade and vasodilator therapy
before laryngoscopy will help attenuate this unde-
sirable response. After the airway is secured, deep-
ening the anesthetic with a supplemental narcotic
dose will improve hemodynamic stability.
Lesions of the ascending and aortic arch are
managed with a single-lumen endotracheal tube
of appropriate size. As discussed previously, aor-
tic lesions may cause both tracheal and bronchial
compression and caution should be exercised in
tubeplacement.Repairoflesionsofthedistalaortic
arch and descending thoracic aorta are facilitated
by OLV. The options available for providing OLV
are discussed in detail elsewhere. Many prefer a
left-sided double-lumen endotracheal tube (DLT)
unless collapse of the left main-stem bronchus has
occurred. In these instances, a right-sided DLT is
used. Achieving and maintaining proper position-
ing of the right upper lobe bronchus lumen can
be problematic. This is particularly true when sur-
gical manipulation of the tracheal-bronchial tree
is necessary to mobilize the aorta. The left-sided
DLT is placed using ﬁberoptic bronchoscopy. This
approachvirtuallyguaranteespropertubeposition.
This approach, although very useful for all patients
requiring DLT placement, is particularly important
for patients with thoracic aortic lesions in whom
unsuspected compression of the left main stem
bronchusmayexist.Blindadvancementoftheleft-
sided DLT under these circumstances may result in
bronchial or aortic disruption. If unsuspected left
main-stembronchuscompressionisdiagnosedwith
ﬁberoptic visualization, a right-sided DLT may be
chosen.
A rapid-sequence induction with cricoid pres-
sure may be necessary for the usual indications.
PlacementofaDLTunderthesecircumstancesmay
be difﬁcult because of the DLT’s large size and
the propensity of the tracheal cuff to catch and
tear on the patient’s teeth as the tip of the tube
is maneuvered to align with the larynx. When a
potentially difﬁcult DLT placement is anticipated
in a patient requiring a rapid sequence induction,
placement of a Univent tube (a single lumen tube
withbronchialblockerinplace)maybeconsidered.
The bronchial blocker can be directed into either
main-stem bronchus. In addition to being easier to
place in the trachea than a DLT, this tube elimi-
nates the need for exchanging a DLT to a single
lumen endotracheal tube at the end of the surgical
procedure for patients who require postoperative
ventilation. Disadvantages of this device include
high bronchial cuff occlusion pressures and com-
promised ability to actively deﬂate, apply continu-
ous positive airway pressure (CPAP) or suction the
nondependent lung.
Intraoperativemanagement
After induction of general anesthesia, additional
venous access and monitoring lines are placed.
Monitoring includes a 5-lead electrocardiogram
(aV5leadisnotpossibleinleftthoracotomypatients
and a modiﬁed V5R can be employed), as well as
arterialandpulmonaryarterycatheters.Intraopera-
tiveTEEshouldbeemployedifnotcontraindicated.
IfaDLTisused,thetubepositionshouldbechecked
with the ﬁberoptic bronchoscope after the patient
hasbeenpositionedlaterallytoensurethatthetube
remains optimally positioned.
Preparation for massive transfusion and red cell
salvagebeforeincisionisrecommended.Sixunitsof
compatiblebloodshouldbepresentthroughoutthe
procedure. Immediate availability of platelets and
fresh frozen plasma also is crucial. A rapid transfu-
siondevicecanbeindispensable,particularlywhen
full or partial CPB is not used.
Ascendingaorticandaorticarchrepairs
These lesions require full CPB and may require
DHCA. There may be associated acute aortic
insufﬁciency with an aortic dissection or a dilated
aorticroot.TheremaybepericardialtamponadeandAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch09” — 2007/7/17 — 20:32 — page 321 — #18
Anesthesia for Surgery of the Thoracic Aorta321
myocardial ischemia if the dissection involves the
coronary ostia.
Distalaorticarchanddescending
thoracicaorticlesions
If the approach is cross-clamp without distal cir-
culatory support, vigorous afterload control with
an intravenous or inhalational agent will be nec-
essary. Reduction of MAP to approximately 20%
below baseline with nitroglycerin or nitroprusside
before aortic cross-clamping will minimize wall
tension in the proximal aortic segment after the
clamp is placed. Isoﬂurane also has been advo-
catedasavasodilatoryagentinthissetting.Patients
have received up to 2.5 ± 0.3% isoﬂurane for
hemodynamic control during aortic cross-clamping
without negative consequence. Blood pressure
manipulation must always consider the potential
detrimental effects on end-organ perfusion.
After cross-clamp application, blood pressure is
maintained. Placement of the cross-clamp causes
an acute increase in LV afterload and reduction
in cardiac output. However, the pulmonary artery
occlusionpressureandcentralvenouspressureusu-
allywillremainunchanged.Diastolicdysfunctionis
commonaftercross-clampplacement.Ifpulmonary
capillary wedge pressure (PCWP) increases with
cross-clamp application, three etiologies must be
entertained:
1 LV afterload mismatch with LV failure and
dilation.LVdilationmaybeaccompaniedbydevel-
opment of a new V wave on the PCWP trace,
suggestingfunctionalMR.TEEisvaluableinassess-
ing LV size and function during this period. Left
Table9.4 Clinical scenarios and
therapeutic interventions during left
heart bypass.
PP DP PCWP TEE Intervention
↑↓ ↑ ↑ LVEDA Increasepumpﬂow
↑↓ ↓ ↓ LVEDA Increasepumpﬂow,volumeinfusion
↑↑ → → LVEDA Vasodilationinconjunctionwith
←← LVEDA volumeinfusion
↑↑ ↑ ↑ LVEDA Vasodilator,maintainpumpﬂow,
allowvenousdrainagetotemporarily
exceedarterialoutﬂowwhenusing
partialCPBcircuit
↓↓ ↓ ↓ LVEDA Volumeinfusion,temporary
vasopressorsupport
↓↓ ↑ ↑ LVEDA Increasepumpﬂow,inotropic
supportifresolutionofLVdistention
doesnotimproveLVperformance
andproximalpressure
↓↑ ↑ ↑ LVEDA Institutionofinotropicsupport
followedbyincrementaldecreaseof
pumpﬂowtoavoidfurtherLV
distention
↓↑ ↓ ↓ LVEDA Decreasepumpﬂow,ifproximal
pressureislowafterdesireddistal
pressureisreachedthenvolume
infusion
CPB, cardiopulmonary bypass; DP, distal pressure; LV, left ventricle; LVEDA,
leftventricularend-diastolicarea;PCWP,pulmonarycapillarywedgepressure;
PP, proximalpressure;TEE,transesophagealechocardiography.Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch09” — 2007/7/17 — 20:32 — page 322 — #19
322 Chapter 9
ventricle dilatation with or without functional MR
is an indication for immediate intervention with
vasodilators. If LV dilation persists despite after-
load reduction, initiation of inotropic support is
warranted.
2 Myocardial ischemia may be accompanied by
ST segment changes, but monitoring of ischemia
is hampered by the lack of a V5 lead. TEE can
diagnose new regional wall motion abnormali-
ties.Aggressivetreatmentofmyocardialischemiais
indicated.
3 Impaired LV diastolic function due to impaired
relaxation. Determination of impaired relaxation
requiresTEEtoobtainDopplerspectraofthemitral
valve inﬂow, pulmonary venous ﬂow and tissue
Doppler.Afterloadreductionmayimprovediastolic
function.
Acidosis may be treated with aggressive venti-
lation and bolus administration of sodium bicar-
bonate. A continuous infusion of bicarbonate
(0.05mEq/kg/min) during cross-clamping may be
more efﬁcacious. Large doses of sodium bicarbon-
ate administered immediately before cross-clamp
releasewillcauseatransientiatrogenichypercarbia,
which when combined with a metabolic acidosis,
can result in profound acidemia.
The physiologic changes associated with cross-
clamp removal include hypotension, pulmonary
hypertension, and metabolic acidosis. Prepara-
tion for cross-clamp removal will help mini-
mize or attenuate these undesirable consequences.
Several minutes before cross-clamp removal, the
patient should be volume loaded to a PCWP of
10–20mmHg. TEE can adequately assist with LV
volume assessment. All vasodilating agents are dis-
continued and the cross-clamp is removed over
a several-minute period. Hyperventilation before
cross-clamp removal will help minimize the acido-
sisandthepulmonaryhypertensionassociatedwith
clamp removal. Despite these measures, patients
mayrequirevariableperiodsofvasopressorsupport
after removal of the aortic cross-clamp. Intractable
hypotension after cross-clamp removal is an
indication for reapplication of the cross-clamp.
If a shunt or assisted circulatory method is used,
attention to the proximal and distal perfusion pres-
suresiscritical.Inthecaseofpassiveshunts,atten-
tion is focused on adequacy of ﬂow and patency
of the shunt. Little control of proximal and dis-
talpressureispossible.Proximalhypertensionwith
the shunt patent requires pharmacologic interven-
tions as described for simple cross-clamping. Distal
hypotension with a patent shunt is problematic.
Interventions to elevate proximal blood pressure
withvasopressorsandvolumeinfusionmayelevate
distal pressure; however, such interventions may
produce unacceptably high proximal pressures.
Left heart bypass and partial CPB provide bet-
ter proximal hemodynamic control and more pre-
dictable distal perfusion than a passive shunt. With
left heart bypass and partial CPB, the easiest initial
approach is to decide, in conjunction with the per-
fusionist, the amount of ﬂow that will be diverted
tothedistalaortaaftercross-clampapplication.This
depends on the size of the patient and the desired
distal perfusion pressure. Usually, distal perfusion
pressure is maintained at 40–60mmHg. Remem-
ber, it is essential to ensure adequate LV volume
for heart and great vessel perfusion.
After this has been established, the balance of
proximalanddistalpressureisﬁne-tunedandman-
agedasshowninTable9.4usingproximalpressure,
distal pressure, PCWP, and TEE.
Suggestedreading
Campos JH. An update on bronchial blockers during
lung separation techniques in adults. Anesth Analg
2003;97:1266–74.
HaganPG,NienaberCA,IsselbacherEM et al.TheInterna-
tional Registry of Acute Aortic Dissection (IRAD): new
insights into an old disease.JAMA2000;283:897–903.
Khan IA, Nair CK. Clinical, diagnostic, and management
perspectivesofaorticdissection. Chest2002;122:311–28.Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch10” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 323 — #1
CHAPTER 10
Managementof
Cardiopulmonary Bypass
The cardiac anesthesiologist is integrally involved
with commencing, maintaining, and terminating
cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB). It is essential for the
anesthesiologist to have a working knowledge of the
CPB circuit to aid the surgeon and perfusionist in
diagnosing and treating the problems that may be
associated with extracorporeal circulation.
The CPB circuit
The CPB circuit is intended to isolate the cardiopul-
monary system so that optimal surgical exposure
can be obtained for operations on the heart and
great vessels. For this isolation to be effective, the
CPB circuit must be able to perform the functions of
the intact cardiopulmonary system. At a minimum,
t he circuitmustbe capable of adding oxygen and
removing carbon dioxide from blood and of provid-
ing adequate perfusion of all organs with this blood.
In addition, the circuit must be able to fulﬁll these
requirements without doing permanent damage to
the cardiopulmonary system, the blood, or any of
the patient’s end organs. Substantial differences
exist between adult and pediatric CPB and these
are summarized in Table 10.1 and are addressed
through this chapter. The components of a typical
CPB circuit are illustrated in Fig. 10.1. The compo-
nents of the circuit are described in the following
sections.
Venous drainage
For the cardiopulmonary system to be isolated,
all venous return to the heart must be made
Table 10.1 Comparison of adultand pediat ric
cardiopulmonary bypass.
Parameter Adult Pediatric
MinimumCPB Rarely Frequently
temperature <25–32◦C 15–25 ◦C
UseofDHCAorRLFP Rarely Frequently
Pumpprime
Dilutionofblood 25–33% 100–200%
volume
WBorPRBCadded Rarely Usually
Perfusionpressure 50–80mmHg 20–50mmHg
pH-statmanagement Rarely Usually,at
temperature
below28–30 ◦C
Glucosemanagement
Hyperglycemia Frequently, Occasionally
requires
insulin
Hypoglycemia Rarely Occasionally
CPB, cardiopulmonary bypass; DHCA, deep hypothermic
circulatory arrest; PRBC, packed red blood cells; RLFP,
regionallowﬂowperfusion;WB,wholeblood.
available to the CPB circuit. Blood is collected from
the venous circulation and then drains by a siphon
into a reservoir that lies on or near the ﬂoor well
below the patient. The pressure gradient for venous
drainage (cm H2O) is the height difference between
the RA and the venous reservoir. The ﬂow rate
of venous blood (venous return) is determined
323Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch10” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 324 — #2
324 Chapter 10
Venous
cannula
ArterialArterial
cannulacannula
Arterial line
Arterial
line filterArterial line
pressurePump suckersArterial
pump
Oxygenator
Venous line
Venous reservoirGas source
Filter
Arterial
cannula
Fig. 10.1 A typical cardiopulmonary
bypass (CPB) circuit.
by this pressure difference and by the resistance
in the venous drainage system (cannula and tub-
ing). For a given mean systemic venous pressure
and venous resistance, maximum venous return is
reached when the right atrial (RA) pressure falls
to zero. When the RA pressure is less than zero
the superior vena cava (SVC) and inferior vena
cava (IVC) collapse and the heart acts as a Starling
resistor.
Total(alsocompleteorfull)CPB
Total CPB exists when all of the systemic venous
drainage to the heart is diverted to the CPB circuit.
Total CPB is best accomplished with either direct
cannulation of both the SVC and IVC or with use of
two-stage single venous cannula in the RA.
• Direct cannulation of the SVC and IVC . This tech-
nique is necessary for all procedures that require
opening of the RA or right ventricle (RV). It is also
commonly used in procedures where retraction of a
completely empty RA may facilitate surgical expo-
sure (mitral valve exposure via the left atrium (LA)).
Normally all systemic venous return can be cap-
tured via cannulation of both the SVC and IVC.
In children with congenital heart disease, capturing
all sources of systemic venous return may be prob-
lematic. Other sources of systemic venous return
may existsuch as a persist entleftSVC draining
to the coronary sinus. In children with hetrotaxy
syndrome there may be an interruption of the infra-
hepatic IVC with the hepatic veins draining directly
to the ﬂoor of the right-sided atrium and azygous
or hemi-azygous continuation of the IVC draining
to a right- or left-sided SVC. For total CPB, once
the cavae (and other sources of systemic venous
return) are cannulated, surgical tourniquets or tapes
are passed around the external circumference of
the vessels. When these tourniquets are tightened
around the cannulas the right heart can be iso-
lated completely and subsequently opened without
entrainment of air into the venous circuit or obscu-
ration of the surgical ﬁeld by venous blood. During
delivery of antegrade cardioplegia, it is essential that
atleastone t ourniquetbe leftun-t ight ened t o allow
egress of cardioplegia solution from the coronary
sinus without distention of the right atrium. A larger
cannula is used in the IVC as compared with the
SVC, because a larger portion of systemic venous
return (two-thirds) is from the IVC.
• Two-stage venous cannula in the RA . The single-
cannula system is satisfactory for procedures that
do notrequire opening t he RA or RV, such as coro-
nary artery bypass grafting or aortic valve replace-
ment. Venous drainage is accomplished with one
larger bore cannula with two oriﬁces inserted via
an incision in the RA appendage. One oriﬁceAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch10” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 325 — #3
Managementof Cardiopulmonary Bypass 325
(32–36-French outer diameter) lies directly in the
IVC and the other (40–51-French outer diameter)
lies in the RA proximal to the SVC–RA junction.
Coronary sinus and persist entleftSVC ret urn is
collected continuously via the oriﬁce that lies at the
SVC–RA junction.
The vast majority of operative procedures in chil-
dren require the use of either total CPB or deep
hypothermic circulatory arrest (DHCA). Venous
cannulation for DHCA is usually accomplished with
a single large venous cannula in the right atrium.
Once cooling is complete and circulatory arrest
commences the cannula can be removed to allow
maximum exposure.
PartialCPB
Partial CPB exists when only a portion of the sys-
temic venous drainage to the heart is diverted to the
CPB circuit. During partial CPB, the remaining por-
tion of systemic venous return is to the RA. Ideally,
this blood makes its way to the RV and pulmonary
bed, where gas exchange occurs. The blood then
returns to the LA and left ventricle (LV), where it
is ejected into the systemic circulation. For partial
CPB to be effective, two things must be true:
1 The heart must be beating and ejecting . If ejec-
tion is ineffective or nonexistent, distention of the
heartwill occur and syst emic blood ﬂow will be
inadequate.
2 The lungs must be ventilated. In the absence of ven-
tilation, systemic venous blood that enters the RA
will ultimately reach the systemic circulation with-
outgas exchange. This will resultin hypercarbia and
hypoxemia.
During partial CPB, the patient’s systemic blood
ﬂow is provided in partby t he CPB circuitand in part
by the patient’s heart. The patient’s arterial pH, par-
tial pressure of oxygen (PO2), and partial pressure of
carbon dioxide (PCO2) are a reﬂection of the quan-
tity and effectiveness of these two sources of blood.
Therefore, during partial CPB, blood for blood gas
analysis must be drawn from the patient and not
from the CPB circuit.
Partial CPB can be accomplished with the cannu-
lation techniques described for total CPB simply by
partially impeding venous return to the CPB circuit
with a clamp on the venous drainage line. More
commonly, partial CPB is the result of cannulation
of the right atrium directly with a small cannula
or indirectly via the femoral venous system. A can-
nula is inserted retrograde up a femoral vein toward
the heart into the IVC or RA. This system is much
less effective than caval cannulation via the right
atrium because the femoral vein limits the size of
the cannula that can be inserted. This inhibits opti-
mal systemic venous drainage because of the large
pressure drop across the long, narrow cannula. This,
in turn, elevates RA pressure, which for a given
mean arterial pressure (MAP) and systemic venous
resistance, further compromises venous return. For
these reasons, with femoral venous cannulation, it
is often impossible to divert all venous return to the
CPB circuit. The major advantage of femoral venous
cannulation is that it can be provided emergently
and quickly without a sternotomy. Partial CPB is
used under the following circumstances:
• During repair of thoracic aortic lesions.
• As temporary support for cardiogenic shock
after interventional cardiac catheterization or
electrophysiologic procedures.
• In patients undergoing reoperative procedures to
provide elective or semi-emergent decompression
of t he heartor greatvessels when t hey are adherent
to the underside of the sternum.
Even with appropriate cannulation techniques,
there may be compromise of venous return to the
CPB circuit. An air lock may occur when large bub-
bles of air become lodged in the venous drainage
lines. This air usually is entrained into the venous
drainage lines from around loose cannulation sites.
This can occur even when t he rightheartis not
directly open to air. An air lock acutely disrupts
the siphon effect. This causes RA pressure to rise
above zero and venous return to the venous reser-
voir to fall. Malposition of the venous cannula is a
constant risk particularly in infants and neonates.
Even partial obstruction of IVC return can result in
renal, hepatic, and gastrointestinal hypoperfusion
and the development of ascites. Poor SVC drainage
can resultin engorgementand cyanosis of t he head
and neck. SVC obstruction can easily lead to cerebral
ischemia particularly given the low cerebral perfu-
sion pressure (CPP) that results from the low MAPAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch10” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 326 — #4
326 Chapter 10
utilized during pediatric CPB. If poor SVC drainage
is suspected, the surgeon should be alerted so that
the cannula can be repositioned. Transducing the
central venous pressure (CVP) catheter will allow
measurement of the pressure in the SVC and is
useful in detecting poor SVC drainage.
Venous reservoirs are either of the soft shell, col-
lapsible type or the hard shell, noncollapsible type.
Hard shell reservoirs are constructed of rigid plastic
vented to atmosphere with the venous and car-
diotomy reservoirs integrated in one unit. These
reservoirs allow better visualization of the reser-
voir volume and easier removal of venous cannula
air t han softshell reservoirs. Softshell reservoirs
also require a separate cardiotomy reservoir. These
reservoirs generally have a smaller priming volume
than their hard shell counterparts but can present
a signiﬁcant obstruction to venous return if they
become distended.
Assisted venous drainage is a technique used
in adult cardiac surgical patients to augment
venous return while utilizing small venous can-
nulas primarily during minimally invasive proce-
dures. Assisted venous drainage may be via a kinetic
or vacuum assisted system. In the kinetic system,
a centrifugal pump is interposed in the venous
drainage system between the patient and the
venous reservoir. Vacuum assisted venous drainage
(VAVD) involves application of a vacuum (−40 cm
H2O) to a closed hard shell venous reservoir. Both
methods serve to augment the pressure gradient
for venous drainage. Both techniques have been
applied to neonates and infants to allow use of
smaller venous cannula and to reduce CPB prime
volume. With use of 3/16-inch venous and arte-
rial tubing, no arterial line ﬁlter, no prime in the
venous line, and use of VAVD, the prime volume
for a neonatal circuit can be as low 200 mL. Unfor-
tunately, these techniques are not without risk.
Using VAVD, arterial line emboli distal to the arte-
rial ﬁlter is increased eight-to tenfold over that seen
with conventional gravity venous drainage due to
entrainment of air into the venous system. Arte-
rial air embolism may also occur as the result of
inadvertent positive pressurization of the venous
circuitresult ing in a paradoxic air embolus across
an intracardiac communication.
Arterial inﬂow
Normally, arterial inﬂow is obtained via a cannula
placed in the lesser curve of the ascending aorta
proximal to the innominate artery. This arrange-
mentallows perfusion of all vessels of t he arch and
distal aorta, as well as perfusion of the coronary
ostia. Adult cannulas range from 19- to 24-French
in outer diameter (6.3–8.0 mm). Pediatric cannulas
range from 8.0- to 17.0-French in outer diame-
ter (2.7–5.7 mm). Because the distal end of the
arterial cannula is signiﬁcantly smaller than the
arterial inﬂow line, a large pressure drop exists
across the arterial cannula. At normal bypass ﬂows
of 2.0 L/min/m2, a gradientin excess of 120 mmHg
may exist across an appropriate diameter cannula.
This pressure drop is the result of a high velocity jet
out the distal end of the cannula. It is essential that
this jet be directed into the center of the aorta and
not up into the innominate artery so that a cerebral
overperfusion injury does notoccur.
As with venous cannulation, arterial cannula-
tion particularly in infants and neonates can be
technically challenging. In circumstances where the
ascending aorta and aortic arch are hypoplastic and
systemic blood ﬂow is ductual dependant (as in
hypoplast ic leftheartsyndrome) itmay be neces-
sary to obtain systemic perfusion through the duc-
tus arterious by cannulating the pulmonary artery
(PA). When the aortic arch is interrupted, cannu-
lation of the aorta both proximal and distal to the
interruption is necessary. Because the arterial can-
nula is relatively large as compared to the aorta in
infants and neonates, complete or partial obstruc-
tion of the aorta by the cannula itself is possible.
If dampening of the arterial trace, distension of the
systemic ventricle, or an increase in CPB line pres-
sure occurs with placement or manipulation of the
arterial cannula, the surgeon should immediately
be made aware of the situation so the cannula can
be repositioned. Some centers utilize near infra-
red spectroscopy (NIRS) and transcranial Doppler
(TCD) technology as adjunctive methods to assess
cerebral blood ﬂow during CPB.
In patients undergoing re-operative procedures
it may be necessary to obtain arterial inﬂow via
a femoral artery when the heart or great ves-
sels are adherent to the underside of the sternum.Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch10” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 327 — #5
Managementof Cardiopulmonary Bypass 327
Placement of the cannula in the femoral artery pro-
vides retrograde perfusion to the proximal aorta and
coronary ostia. This route has several limitations.
The smaller caliber of the femoral vessel limits the
size of the arterial cannula that can be used without
risk of damage to the artery. The smaller the can-
nula, the larger will be the pressure drop across it. If
the pressure drop is severe, ﬂow will be limited after
the safe maximum arterial perfusion line pressure
(about300 mmHg) has been reached. Perfusion t o
the leg in which the cannula is placed is limited by
the fact that the cannula occupies the entire lumen
of the femoral artery and is directed proximally.
This may resultin an ischemic leg and a persist ent
metabolic acidosis. When the cannula is removed,
there is often a washout of lactic acid resulting in a
metabolic acidosis that may require treatment with
sodium bicarbonate and alveolar hyperventilation.
Pumps
There currently are two types of pumps used
on modern CPB machines to provide nonpul-
satile ﬂow: the double-headed nonocclusive roller
pump (Fig. 10.2) and the centrifugal blood pump
(Fig. 10.3).
Double-headedrollerpump
The double-headed roller pump is the most com-
monly used. The double-headed roller pump is a
posit ive volume displacementpump. Atleastone
Fig. 10.2 A typical double headed nonocclusive roller
pump. One head of the pump will be in contact with the
pump bootatall t imes as is shown here.
head is in contact with the pump boot at all times
to push blood forward and ensure continuous for-
ward ﬂow. The pump boot is the piece of tubing in
contact with the pump heads. It generally is thicker
and more durable than the other sections of tub-
ing in the CPB circuit. Roller pumps are driven by
a load-independent electric motor. After the pump
speed has been set, the pump will continue the for-
ward displacementof t he same volume of blood,
even if the resistance to ﬂow is increased by kink-
ing or clamping the arterial line. This will result
in a large pressure increase in the arterial inﬂow
line, which can result in the rupture of connections
between sections of tubing. To avoid this type of
disaster pressure gauges are placed on the arterial
inﬂow line. If arterial line pressure rises to danger-
ous levels (300 mmHg) pump ﬂow can be reduced
to allow line pressure to fall until the problem is
identiﬁed and corrected.
Centrifugalpump
The centrifugal pump is a kinetic pump. It operates
on the constrained vortex principle. Blood is driven
through the pump by centrifugal forces generated
by a vortex in the pump. It has been suggested
that this causes less trauma to blood components
than the roller pump. Although the pump is driven
by a load-independent electric motor, this pump
does notbehave like t he roller pump. When line
Fig. 10.3 A typical centrifugal pump. Entrained air will
be drawn to the apex of the pump away from the outlet
at the base of the pump.Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch10” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 328 — #6
328 Chapter 10
resistance is increased, blood ﬂow falls as the shear
forces between the layers of blood are increased
and less forward displacementof blood occurs. This
resistance dependence prevents increases in arterial
line pressure when clamping or kinking occurs. The
pump is said to be inﬂow responsive as well. If a
large quantity of air is introduced into this pump,
cohesive forces will no longer existbet ween layers
of blood and pumping will cease. In addition, the
risk of micro air embolization is reduced because
small, low-density air bubbles become trapped in
the center of the vortex.
Oxygenators
Oxygenators perform the gas exchange functions
of the lung in the CPB circuit. Despite the fact
that oxygenators are incorporated in a system in
which blood is pumped under pressure, all gas
exchange occurs atat mospheric pressure because
the oxygenators are vented to the atmosphere.
There currently are two types of oxygenators avail-
able: bubble oxygenators and membrane oxygena-
tors. Membrane oxygenators are the primary type
of oxygenator currently used.
Bubbleoxygenators
Bubble oxygenators provide oxygen delivery to and
carbon dioxide removal from blood via a gas bubble-
blood interface (Fig. 10.4). The venous blood from
the venous drainage line and the blood from the
cardiotomy lines drain passively to the bottom por-
tion of a bubble column. The bottom portion of
the bubble column is separated from the gas entry
chamber by a dispersion or diffusor plate. The dis-
persion plate breaks up the bulk gas (100% oxygen
or an oxygen/carbon dioxide mixture) into bub-
bles of appropriate size for gas exchange. This gas
is bubbled through blood and gas exchange occurs
as the bubble-blood mixture rises upward to the top
of the bubble chamber. Heat exchange also occurs
as the gas mixture rises. At the top of the bubble
chamber the bubble-blood mixture passes through
a debubbler/defoamer chamber. This chamber has
a large surface area of polyurethane mesh sponge
that is coated with a silicone antifoaming agent and
covered with polyester mesh fabric. The antifoam-
ing agentcauses bubbles t o collapse by reducing
Down comer
CO2 vents
Oxygenating
tubes
Metal heat
exchanger
Defoamer
Water outlet
Arterial
reservoir pool
Arterial outlet
Blood/gas mixing chamberDiffusor plate
Oxygenating gas
Venous inlet
Water inlet
Hydrostatic
barrier
Fig. 10.4 Cutaway view of a typical bubble oxygenator.
Wat er inletand out letfor heatexchange coils are locat ed
at the bottom of the oxygenator. Oxygen inﬂow is also
located at the bottom. Venous blood passively enters the
bottom of the oxygenator via venous cannulas and
venous drainage line. Oxygen (O2), carbon dioxide
(CO2), and heatexchange all occur as bubble-blood
mixture is carried to the top of the oxygenator.
Bubble-blood mixture then passes into a debubbler/
defoamer chamber before spilling over into the arterial
reservoir. From the arterial reservoir, blood is pumped to
the patient via arterial inﬂow line and arterial cannula.
surface tension and the other components mechan-
ically disruptt he bubbles. This arrangementserves
to eliminate the majority of gaseous microemboli.
From here, the blood spills over into an arterial
reservoir. The reservoir provides an area for fur-
ther elimination of microbubbles by allowing them
to rise to the top of the blood. Blood in the arterial
reservoir is then pumped to the patient. The volumeAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch10” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 329 — #7
Managementof Cardiopulmonary Bypass 329
in the reservoir provides a volume buffer that
allows the perfusionist to react to changes in venous
return without pumping the reservoir dry and then
pumping air into the patient.
Oxygen is relatively less soluble and diffusible in
blood than carbon dioxide (ratio of 1:25). There-
fore, oxygen delivery is enhanced by the presence
of small bubbles where the surface area available
for gas exchange is large. Carbon dioxide removal,
on the other hand, is enhanced by the presence of
large bubbles where the volume of the gas bubbles
is large. In reality, the bubble size is somewhere
between these two extremes (3–7µm). For a given
bubble size, an increase in the ﬂow of bubbles
through blood results in enhanced carbon dioxide
removal. Therefore, arterial partial pressure of car-
bon dioxide (PaCO2) is controlled by the gas to blood
ﬂow ratio (GBFR). Some additional control of PaCO2
can be obtained by using an oxygen/carbon dioxide
mixture instead of 100% oxygen as the bulk gas.
Independent control of arterial partial pressure of
oxygen (PaO2) is difﬁcult as the fraction of inspired
oxygen (FiO2) is ﬁxed (100% oxygen) or very nearly
ﬁxed (oxygen/carbon dioxide). Removal of nitrogen
bubbles is difﬁcult and, therefore, oxygen/nitrogen
mixtures are not used.
The bubble-blood interface is not physiologic due
to the constantly changing blood-gas interface. This
results in traumatization of the blood. Increasing
gas ﬂow to enhance gas exchange results in further
traumatization of the blood. In addition, increas-
ing gas ﬂow increases the number and decreases
the size of the bubbles generated. This increases the
risk that gaseous microemboli will reach the arterial
circulation.
Membraneoxygenators
Membrane oxygenators allow oxygen delivery to
and carbon dioxide removal from blood across a thin
membrane, eliminating any direct blood gas con-
tact. The high resistance inherent in the membrane
oxygenators does not allow gravity ﬂow of venous
blood through the membrane into an arterial reser-
voir. As a result, the venous drainage and car-
diotomy lines empty into a venous reservoir and are
pumped through the membrane and then out to the
patient via the arterial line. As would be expected,
the pressure drop across the membrane increases
linearly with increasing ﬂow.
Membrane oxygenators generally are of two
types: microporous membranes and solid
membranes.
• Microporous membranes. Microporous membranes
are made of polypropylene with small, hydrophobic
pores (0.03–0.07 µm in diameter) impermeable to
blood and gas. These pores cover atleast50% of t he
membrane surface. Upon exposure to blood, these
pores become covered with a thin proteinacous
layer through which gas exchange occurs without
blood and gas coming in direct contact. These micro-
porous membranes offer little or no limitation to the
diffusion of carbon dioxide or oxygen. Eventually,
over the course of several hours the gas exchange
capacity of these membranes deteriorates as serum
evaporates and plugs the micropores.
There are two types of microporous membranes:
hollow ﬁber and parallel plate or pleated sheet.
Hollow ﬁber membranes are composed of a large
bundle of polypropylene microporous capillary
tubes 200–300 µm in diameter knitted together in
a mesh, wrapped around a solid core and inserted
into a cylindrical shell. Gas ﬂows on the inside
of the ﬁbers and blood ﬂows on the outside of
the ﬁbers; a design known as extra luminal ﬂow
(ELF). This allows air in the blood path to be rec-
ognized during priming. In addition, in the event
of ﬁber rupture, blood will contaminate only the
ﬁbers affected with little effect on the gas exchange
capacity of the membrane. Counter-current ﬂow of
gas and blood is induced by introducing gas into the
ﬁbers at one end of the cylinder and introducing
blood around the ﬁbers at the other end. In addition,
the path of blood around the knitted mesh of ﬁbers
induces crosscurrentﬂow wit h blood ﬂowing per-
pendicular to the ﬁbers. A hollow ﬁber membrane
oxygenation system is illustrated in Figs 10.5–10.7.
The performance characteristics of this membrane
are summarized in Fig. 10.8.
In the pleated sheet design a continuous micro-
porous sheetis folded and compressed like a col-
lapsible fan. Gas ﬂows on one side of the sheet
and blood ﬂows on the other side with ﬂow dis-
tribution promoted by polypropylene screens. The
pleated design induces counter-current ﬂow ofAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch10” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 330 — #8
330 Chapter 10
  1. Venous reservoir
  2. Cardiotomy reservoir
  3. Connection key
  4. Venous retrurn connector: 3/16-1/4″ I.D.
  5. Turrets
  6. Arterial blood outlet: 3/16-1/4″ I.D.
  7. Venous reservoir outlet: 3/16/1/4″ I.D.
  8. Venous blood inlet: 3/16-1/4 I.D.
  9. Scavenging connector
10. Sampling connector
11. Arterial temperature probe site
12. Venous temperature probe site
13. Recirculation line clamp
14. Gas inlet
15. Gas escape
16. Sample port luer
17. Drug port luer
18. Cardiotomy bypass port
9 5 18
3
2
1
13
16
10
17
8
12
15
11
6
7
14
4
Fig. 10.5 Cutaway view of a Dideco
Lilliput1 hollow ﬁber microporous
membrane oxygenator. The venous
reservoir (1) is located at the top of the
device and incorporates a cardiotomy
reservoir (2), whereas the membrane
oxygenator is located at the bottom.
Cardiotomy suction blood enters at 9.
Venous return blood passively enters
the venous reservoir at 4. Venous
return and ﬁltered cardiotomy blood
exitat7. From t here blood is delivered
to a pump (roller or centrifugal) and is
pumped into the membrane
oxygenator at 8. After undergoing gas
and heat exchange within the
oxygenator blood exits at 6 and is
delivered to the arterial cannula by the
same pump which pumped blood into
the membrane oxygenator. Fresh gas
(sweep gas) enters the membrane
oxygenator at 14 and exits at 15. If an
inhalation agent were added to the
sweep gas itwould be scavenged at15.
blood and gas. These types of membranes provide
less gas exchange surface area per unitvolume of
blood than hollow ﬁber membranes. As a result
they require a larger blood priming volume than
hollow ﬁber membranes to provide comparable
gas exchange. Both hollow ﬁber and pleated sheet
arrangements of microporous material allow a large
surface area (up to 4.5 m 2) for gas exchange to
be contained in a relatively small space. However,
neonate and infant membrane oxygenators are of
the hollow ﬁber type to minimize prime volume.
• Solid (nonporous) membranes . These membranes
are constructed of methyl silicon rubber that is
thin enough ( <25 µm) to permit diffusion of gas.
These membranes do offer some limitation to the
diffusion of carbon dioxide and oxygen with car-
bon dioxide diffusing ﬁve times as easily as oxygen.
As a result, these membranes require a greater gas
exchange surface area and thus a greater priming
volume than microporous membranes to provide
comparable gas exchange. These membranes have
greater longevity (days verses hours) than micro-
porous membranes and are reserved for use in
extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO)
circuits.
Although modern membranes themselves offer
little impedance to the diffusion of gas, there are
other characteristics of membrane oxygenators that
limit gas exchange. The primary determinants of
oxygen and carbon dioxide exchange across a mem-
brane are the solubility and diffusibility of oxygen
and carbon dioxide in blood and their partial pres-
sure gradientacross t he membrane. Because oxygen
is relatively less soluble and diffusible in blood than
carbon dioxide, oxygen exchange is dependenton
the thickness of the blood ﬁlm and the pressure gra-
dientfor oxygen across t he membrane. The vast
majority (90%) of the resistance to oxygen diffu-
sion in a membrane oxygenator system is diffusion
of oxygen into blood and not diffusion across the
membrane. The pressure gradientfor oxygen can
be increased by increasing the oxygen content ofAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch10” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 331 — #9
Managementof Cardiopulmonary Bypass 331
Fig. 10.6 Photo of the heat exchange unit of the Dideco
Lilliput 1 with the rest of the system removed. Water
out let(upper) and inlet(lower) port s are clearly seen at
the lower right.
Fig. 10.7 Photo of an assembled Dideco Lilliput 1 system
mounted on the heat exchanger. The heat exchange unit
is inserted into the core of the membrane oxygenator.
Water inlet and outlet ports are seen as in Fig. 10.5.
1.00
0.90
0.80
0.70
0.60
0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
O2 transferred
(cc/min)/(L/min)
CO2 transferred
(cc/min)/(L/min)
d P (mmHg)
0 0.2
HE performance
/afii9834=Tb(out) −T b(in)/T w(in) − T b(in)
0.4 0.6
Blood flow Qb (L/min)
Blood flow (L /min)
0.8 1.0 1.2
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
140.0
120.0
100.0
80.0
60.0
40.0
20.0
0.0
Blood flow (L/min)
Blood flow (L/min)
0 0.2
0.0 0.4 0.8 1.2
0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2
O2 transfer
CO2 transfer
d P blood
Fig. 10.8 Performance characteristics of the Dideco
Lilliput1 oxygenat or and heatexchanger over a t ypical
range of blood ﬂows through the membrane. As the
upper limits of blood ﬂow are reached gas (oxygen (O2)
and carbon dioxide (CO2)) transfer diminishes as does
the performance factor (η) of the heat exchange unit.
The pressure drop across the membrane also increases as
blood ﬂow increases. HE, heatexchange; dP, pressure
change.Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch10” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 332 — #10
332 Chapter 10
Oxygenator Patient
weight
(kg)
Oxygenator
prime (mL)
Total circuit
prime
including
oxygenator
(mL)
Manufacturer
reference ﬂow
rate (mL/min)
DidecoLiliput1 <8 60 Neonate300 800
Infant320
DidecoLiliput2 <20 105 Infant425 2300
Toddler575
CobeOptimin <40 170 Toddler790 5000
Smalladult1110
CobeOptima >40 260 Adult1300 8000
Table 10.2 Comparison of membrane
oxygenators.
the fresh gas ﬂow. However, because of the low
diffusibility of oxygen in blood, a thick blood ﬁlm
or boundary layer will resultin poor oxygen deliv-
ery to the cells most distant from the membrane,
even when the pressure gradient for oxygen is high.
Modern membranes have design features to induce
eddy currents or static mixing which serves to dis-
ruptt he boundary layer and enhance diffusion of
oxygen into blood.
Because carbon dioxide is relatively more soluble
than oxygen, carbon dioxide exchange is dependent
only on the pressure gradient for carbon dioxide
across the membrane. Normally, fresh gas ﬂow
to the membrane oxygenator contains no carbon
dioxide, and thus the gradient for carbon dioxide
removal will notbe improved by lowering t he car-
bon dioxide content of the fresh gas. The rate of
carbon dioxide removal can be increased by increas-
ing the rate of fresh gas ﬂow or sweep rate to the
oxygenator; this is analogous to increasing alveolar
ventilation.
An important measure of oxygenator perfor-
mance is reference ﬂow rates as deﬁned by the man-
ufacturer and the Association for the Advancement
of Medical Instrumentation (AAMI). Carbon diox-
ide reference ﬂow is deﬁned as the maximum ﬂow
of blood with a hemoglobin of 12 g/dL, zero base
deﬁcit, and an oxygen saturation of 65% at a tem-
perature of 37◦C that can enter an oxygenator and
subsequently leave the oxygenator with the car-
bon dioxide content decreased by 38 mL/L. Oxygen
reference ﬂow is deﬁned as the maximum ﬂow
Table 10.3 Comparison of membrane oxygenator heat
exchange capacity.
Oxygenator Membrane
surface area
(m2)
Heat exchange
surface area
(m2)
DidecoLiliput1 0.34 0.02
DidecoLiliput2 0.64 0.02
CobeOptimin 1.0 13.74
CobeOptima 1.9 13.74
of blood with a hemoglobin of 12 g/dL, zero base
deﬁcit, and an oxygen saturation of 65% at a tem-
perature of 37◦C that can enter an oxygenator and
subsequently leave the oxygenator with the oxygen
content increased by 45 mL/L. The recommended
reference ﬂow rate is the lesser of these two val-
ues. The performance characteristics of a range of
membrane oxygenation systems typically utilized
are summarized in Tables 10.2 and 10.3.
Heat exchangers
Heat exchangers are necessary to produce the
active cooling and rewarming of the patient’s blood
required for systemic hypothermia on CPB. Heat
exchange is accomplished by a countercurrent ﬂow
of water and the patient’s blood. Water of a pre-
determined temperature is pumped into a spiral
stainless steel coil as blood ﬂows in the opposite
direction over the coil. The countercurrent ﬂow
arrangementprovides t he mostefﬁcientmet hod ofAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch10” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 333 — #11
Managementof Cardiopulmonary Bypass 333
heat exchange. Water input temperature is deter-
mined by mixing various proportions of hot and
cold water before its introduction into the coil.
A device capable of accurately producing water of
the appropriate temperature and pumping it to the
heatexchange coils is a necessary componentof t he
CPB circuit.
Heat exchange coils are inserted into the core
of the membrane oxygenator in some systems (see
Fig. 10.6) or are located prior to blood entry into the
membrane in others. They are generally not located
in the CPB circuit after the oxygenator in order
to minimize the risk of systemic gaseous micro-
emboli that may be produced during rewarming
as the solubility of gases in blood is reduced. As
the temperature gradient between the venous blood
inputand wat er inputdecreases, heatexchange
slows exponentially. Nonetheless, the temperature
gradientbet ween venous blood inputand wat er
inputis keptbet ween 8 ◦C and 10 ◦C to avoid
large changes in gas solubility. During warming,
the heated water input temperature never exceeds
40◦C to avoid heat damage to blood and tissue.
Heat exchangers are rated according to the per-
formance factor (PF). The PF is the amount of heat
actually transmitted to blood divided by the max-
imal amountof heatt hatcould t heoret ically be
transferred. The PF of heat exchangers varies from
0 to 1 with a PF of 1 (100% efﬁciency) being unob-
tainable. The performance characteristics of a typical
infant and neonatal heat exchanger are illustrated
in Fig. 10.8. The heating and cooling efﬁcacy of the
Dideco Lilliput 2 system would be expected to be
inferior to that of the Lilliput 1 given that the two
systems have the same heat exchange surface area
and the Lilliput 2 is utilized for larger patients at
almost three-times the reference ﬂow rate of the
Lilliput1 (see Table 10.3).
Cardiotomy suction
Cardiotomy or pump suction is incorporated into
mostCPB circuit s, where itserves as an impor-
tant source of blood conservation. Most systems
use a roller pump to provide the necessary suc-
tion. The collected blood goes either to a ﬁltered
cardiotomy reservoir and then to the venous reser-
voir or directly to a venous reservoir that contains
a ﬁlter. Often, the cardiotomy suction is used before
initiation of CPB during cannula placement. It is
essential that adequate heparinization be obtained
before use of cardiotomy suction so that clot is not
introduced into the cardiotomy or venous reservoir.
Blood from the pericardial collected by car-
diotomy suction and returned to the venous reser-
voir is know to activate the extrinsic coagulation
pat hway during CPB. In factithas been demon-
strated that aspirated pericardial blood returned to
the venous reservoir is the most important activator
of the coagulation system during CPB. In addition
to bone and fat fragments, pericardial aspirate is rich
in tissue factor (TF) and procoagulant cellular (pri-
marily platelet) derived microparticles. It has also
been demonstrated that elimination of pericardial
cardiotomy suction return to the venous reservoir
or washing of pericardial cardiotomy blood prior to
return reduces inﬂammatory mediator generation
and thrombin, neutrophil, and platelet activation.
Cardiotomy suction is also the major source of
blood trauma and hemolysis during CPB due to the
simultaneous aspiration of air and blood. For this
reason, it is important that the pump head on the
cardiotomy suction turns only fast enough to allow
aspiration of blood. If a sucking sound is heard from
the cardiotomy, sucker aspiration of air is occurring
and the pump head rotation should be slowed.
Vent line
Venting is intended to prevent blood from collecting
in the ventricles during CPB. When blood collects
in the ventricles, distension of the ventricles and
warming of the heart may occur. Distension causes
mechanical damage to the heart from subendo-
cardial compression and also compromises surgical
exposure. The risk of distension is greatest when
the blood return to the right or left heart is high
and when the ventricles are no longer effectively
ejecting blood. As CPB commences, bradycardia,
ventricular ﬁbrillation, or asystole may occur and
prevent effective ventricular ejection. Myocardial
hypothermia during cardioplegic arrest will be com-
promised by warm blood collecting in the ventricles
during aortic cross-clamping in the unvented heart.
Figure 10.9 illustrates the most common causes
of continued blood return to the right and leftAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch10” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 334 — #12
334 Chapter 10
Bronchial
Left
atrium
Left
ventricle
Aorta
Coronary
Thebesian
Pulmonaryartery
Right
ventricle
Right
atrium
Fig. 10.9 Potential sources of continued blood ﬂow to
rightand leftheartduring cardiopulmonary bypass
(CPB). Bronchial ﬂow is derived from aorta and returns
to left atrium. Coronary blood ﬂow returns to the right
atrium via coronary sinus but variable proportions may
return to the left atrium and ventricle via thebesian veins.
Shunt is seen between the aorta and pulmonary artery.
This shunt may be anatomical (patent ductus arterious)
or surgical (Blalock–Taussig, Potts, Waterston). Finally,
aortic regurgitation may be responsible for blood ﬂow
into left ventricle on CPB before aortic cross-clamping.
ventricles after institution of CPB with all IVC and
SVC return diverted to the circuit. Blood ﬂow to the
rightheartduring CPB usually is t he resultof coro-
nary blood ﬂow. Mostcoronary blood ﬂow comes
from coronary arteries and their collaterals. A small
portion comes from noncoronary collaterals, usu-
ally of pericardial and mediastinal origin. Coronary
venous blood returns to the coronary sinus, which
is located near the junction of the IVC and the RA.
Coronary sinus return can be captured by a prop-
erly positioned single cannula or with separate IVC
and SVC cannulas with the tourniquets loosened.
For procedures in which t he rightheartis opened,
coronary sinus blood can be captured with the car-
diotomy suction. Coronary sinus blood ﬂow (except
that contributed by noncoronary collaterals) will
cease when the aortic cross-clamp is applied and
coronary arterial blood ﬂow ceases.
Blood ﬂow to the left heart during CPB arises
from several sources. The Thebesian veins drain a
very small portion of the coronary circulation into
the LA and ventricle. This ﬂow will cease when the
aortic cross-clamp terminates coronary blood ﬂow.
The bronchial veins drain into the pulmonary veins
and subsequently into the LA and ventricle. The
bronchial circulation may be very large in patients
with cyanotic heart disease. In patients with con-
genital heart disease, a large portion of pulmonary
blood ﬂow may be supplied by anatomic (patent
ductus arteriosus, aortopulmonary collaterals) or
surgical (Blalock–Taussig, Waterston, Potts, central
shunts) systemic-to-pulmonary artery communi-
cations. If these communications are not ligated
or controlled before institution of CPB, the blood
return to the PA, and subsequently to the LA and
LV, may be very large. In this circumstance venting
will relieve leftheartdist ent ion. However, unless
CPB ﬂow rate is increased by an amount equal to
the vented blood systemic oxygen delivery to the
patient will be compromised. Flow return to the LV
also may resultfrom an incompet entaort ic valve. In
this instance, retrograde ﬁlling of the LV with blood
from the aortic cannula will occur until the aortic
cross-clamp is applied.
Normally, right ventricular venting is unneces-
sary because coronary sinus ﬂow is captured by
the venous drainage system. Several sites are avail-
able for left ventricular venting. The right superior
pulmonary vein provides relatively easy retrograde
access to the LA and the ventricle via the mitral
valve. The insertion site subsequently can be used
for placement of a transthoracic LA pressure line.
Direct venting of the left ventricular apex is possible,
but this route requires careful repair and may result
in damage to the LV. Direct venting via the LA is also
possible. The PA can be used to vent both the right
heart and the left heart. A competent mitral valve
will limit effective venting of the LV via this route.
The vent line returns blood either to the ﬁltered
cardiotomy reservoir and then to the venous reser-
voir or directly to a venous reservoir that contains
a ﬁlter. The vent line may be either active or passive.Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch10” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 335 — #13
Managementof Cardiopulmonary Bypass 335
The risk of active venting is that after the ventricle
has been emptied of blood, continued active venting
may result in entrainment of air into the ventricu-
lar cavity. In procedures in which the heart is not
opened (such as coronary artery bypass grafting),
this entrainment of air will require the additional
step of evacuating air from the heart before ter-
mination of bypass. Close communication between
surgeon and perfusionist are necessary to avoid this
complication.
Micropore ﬁlters
Most CPB circuits are equipped with both car-
diotomy and arterial microporous ﬁlters. These ﬁl-
ters remove particulate contaminants such as bone,
tissue, and fat fragments from blood and prevent
micro- and macro- air emboli. Screen ﬁlters are
made of a woven polyester mesh. These ﬁlters have
a 30–40 µm pore size and a large working sur-
face area. This pore size makes these ﬁlters useful
for trapping both air and particulate microemboli
without high resistance to ﬂow or damage to cel-
lular blood elements. Depth ﬁlters are composed
of packed ﬁbers of Dacron and ﬁlter by impaction
of particles on their wetted surface. These ﬁlters
tend to lose their air-ﬁltering capabilities over time,
cause more hemolysis, and are more damaging to
platelets.
Screen ﬁlters commonly are used on the arterial
side of the circuit. The vent at the top of the ﬁlter
allows air to be vented directly back to the venous
reservoir so that it is not trapped in the ﬁlter. This is
important in cases of massive air emboli, in which
the presence of trapped air will greatly reduce the
ﬁlter surface area and allow the pressure in the ﬁlter
to become high enough to translocate air across the
ﬁlter and into the arterial circulation of the patient.
The arterial ﬁlter also has a bypass line so that it can
be excluded from t he circuitif itbecomes clogged
with debris. A combination of depth and screen
ﬁlters is used in most cardiotomy reservoirs.
Ultraﬁltrators
Ultraﬁltrators are devices commonly added to the
CPB circuitt o remove excess ﬂuid and produce
hemoconcentration. When used in conjunction
with CPB, these devices produce an ultraﬁltrate that
occurs as the result of a hydrostatic pressure gradi-
entacross a semipermeable membrane. These are
the same devices that can be used for hemodialysis
when they are used in conjunction with a dialysate.
When used during CPB, they are commonly called
hemoconcentrators as they produce an increase in
hematocrit by removing excess ﬂuid.
These devices consistof a core of microporous
hollow ﬁbers made of polysulfone, polyamide, or
polyacrylonitrile material arranged in a bundle. The
pore size generally is 0.30–0.40µm. Due to the pres-
sure drop across the device, blood inﬂow must be
obtained from the arterial side of the CPB circuit
while blood outﬂow is diverted to the cardiotomy
reservoir or venous reservoir. The ultraﬁltrate is
collected in a container connected to a vacuum
source.
The ultraﬁltrate is discarded and has the com-
position of glomerular ﬁltrate. The rate at which
ultraﬁltrate is produced is dependent on the trans-
membrane pressure gradient(TMP). TMP is det er-
mined by the arterial inlet pressure (Pa), the venous
outlet pressure (Pv), the absolute value of applied
suction at the outlet (Pn), the oncotic pressure at the
inlet( Pi), and the oncotic pressure at the outlet (Po):
TMP = Pa + Pv
2 + Pn − Pi + Po
2
is increased by using the regulated vacuum source
connected to the outlet of the device. TMP should
notexceed 500 mmHg.
A number of different ultraﬁltration techniques
exist.
Continuousultraﬁltration
Continuous ultraﬁltration (CUF) refers to ultraﬁl-
tration occurring throughout CPB or during those
intervals when venous reservoir volume is sufﬁ-
cient to allow it. This system would be expected to
produce hemoconcentration (Fig. 10.10).
Modiﬁedultraﬁltration
Modiﬁed ultraﬁltration (MUF) allows ultraﬁltration
to continue after weaning from CPB. MUF allows
the CPB circuit to remain primed while both the
patient’s blood volume and the CPB circuit contents
are hemoconcentrated. MUF may be performedAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch10” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 336 — #14
336 Chapter 10
Hemoconcentrator
Regulated
vacuum
source
Cardiotomy
reservoir
Venous
reservoir
From patient
Arterial filter
To patient
Arterial
pump
Arterial filter
To patient
Hemoconcentrator
Regulated
vacuum
source
Cardiotomy
reservoir
Venous
reservoir
From patient
Arterial
pump
Ultrafiltrate
collection
container
Recir.
line
Membrane
oxygenator
Ultrafiltrate
collection
container
Membrane
oxygenator
Fig. 10.10 Two arrangements that allow continuous ultraﬁltration (CUF), dilutional ultraﬁltration (DUF), and
zero-balance ultraﬁltration (ZBUF) to be performed during cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB).
utilizing either an arteriovenous or veno-venous
system. In the arteriovenous system inﬂow to the
ultraﬁltrator during MUF is directly from the aor-
tic cannula. Outﬂow from the ultraﬁltrator is to
the right atrium. Blood volume is kept constant as
ultraﬁltrate is lost by replacing it with blood from
the CPB circuit, which passes through the ultra-
ﬁltrator before being delivered to the right atrium
(Fig. 10.11). In the veno-venous system, the IVC
cannula provides inﬂow to the ultraﬁltrator with
the aid of a roller pump while outﬂow from the
ultraﬁltrator is returned to the SVC cannula. Blood
volume is kept constant as ultraﬁltrate is lost by
replacing it with blood from the CPB circuit, which
passes through the ultraﬁltrator before being deliv-
ered to the SVC. The end point for termination
of MUF following CPB varies from institution to
institution and may depend on either a set time
interval (15–20 minutes), a set hematocrit (40%)
or a setvolume removed (750 mL/m 2). Heparin
anticoagulation must be maintained during MUF
with protamine reversal of heparin initiated after
termination of MUF.
The major advantage of MUF over CUF is that
it allows hemoconcentration to continue once CPB
has been terminated. As a result MUF normally
allows a greater degree of hemoconcentration than
can be obtained with CUF alone particularly in
small children. Some institutions utilize both CUF
and MUF, as the techniques are not mutually
exclusive.
Use of MUF is not without potential problems.
MUF use has been associated with air cavitating into
the circuit potentially increasing the risk of iatro-
genic air embolism. MUF has been demonstrated
to increase plasma heparin concentrations that may
require reevaluation of the protamine dose. MUF
has also been demonstrated to cause reductions
in plasma aprotinin, opioid, and benzodiazepine
levels. While the reductions in anesthetic agents
are generally clinically insigniﬁcant, the clinical sig-
niﬁcance of plasma aprotinin level reductions is
unknown. Patient hypothermia is a potential com-
plication of MUF if the system is not modiﬁed to
allow warming of re-infused ﬁltrate.
Dilutionalultraﬁltrationandzero-balance
ultraﬁltration
Dilutional ultraﬁltration (DUF) and zero-balance
ultraﬁltration (ZBUF) utilize the same system as
CUF but involve high-volume ultraﬁltration during
CPB in which crystalloid solution is continuously
used to replace the ultraﬁltrate in order to main-
tain reservoir volume. ZBUF utilities ultraﬁltration
rates of 200 mL/kg/min while DUF utilizes rates
of 40–80 mL/kg/min. These methods do not result
in hemoconcentration but may be beneﬁcial in
removing inﬂammatory mediators. MUF is usuallyAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch10” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 337 — #15
Managementof Cardiopulmonary Bypass 337
Venous reservoir
Arterial line filter
clamped out and bypass
opened
Cardioplegia pump used as MUF pump
(crystalloid raceway tubing removed)
MUF
hemoconcentrator
Ultrafiltrate
collection
Blood cardioplegia system
warmed to 37°C
Vacuum
Monitor MUF line pressure
Right
atriumAorta
Oxygenator
Monitor line pressure
Arterial
pump
Fig. 10.11 A typical arteriovenous modiﬁed ultraﬁltration (MUF) circuit. Input to the ultraﬁltrator is via the aortic
cannula with warmed, hemoconcentrated blood returned to the patient via the venous cannula. Blood from the venous
reservoir can also be hemoconcentrated and returned to the patient.
used in conjunction with these techniques to obtain
hemoconcentration.
Circuit prime
Basic prime solutions in adults are usually iso-
tonic crystalloid solutions (lactated Ringer’s lactate
or Plasmalyte). Some institutions add albumin to
the CPB prime to increase the oncotic pressure
of a crystalloid prime and to precoat the mem-
brane oxygenator so as to delay absorption of ﬁb-
rinogen with subsequent platelet activation. It has
been consistently demonstrated that albumin and
crystalloid primes reduce the CPB positive ﬂuid
balance, postoperative weight gain, and provide
better preservation of platelet counts as compared
to pure crystalloid primes. No clear clinical out-
come advantage associated with these differences
has been demonstrated. Enthusiasm for increas-
ing the oncotic pressure of the CPB prime with
hydroxyethyl starch is tempered by the fact that its
use compromises post-CPB hemostasis.
The volume and composition of the CPB circuit
prime for pediatric patients has more important
physiologic consequences than in adult patients.
In order to keep prime volumes, exposure of the
patient’s blood to artiﬁcial surfaces, and hemodilu-
tion to a minimum, the appropriate size circuit is
essential in the pediatric population. The smallest
membrane oxygenator with a reference ﬂow rate
capable of meeting the anticipated CPB ﬂow rates is
selected. In addition, the smallest diameter venous
and arterial tubing that will not impede anticipated
ﬂow due to high resistance is selected. The tubing
is keptas shortas possible by posit ioning t he CPB
close to the OR table. The volumes of various tubing
diameters per 1 foot of length are: 3/16 inch – 5 mL;
1/4 inch – 9.7 mL; 3/8 inch – 21.7 mL; and 1/2 inch –
38.6 mL. For infants and neonates 3/16 inch arterial
and 1/4 inch venous tubing is used. With currently
available technology, the smallest CPB prime vol-
ume for neonatal use is approximately 300 mL.
Given that the blood volume of a 4.0 kg neonate
is approximately 340 mL, 100% dilution of the
patient’s blood volume is expected upon initiation
of CPB (Table 10.4).
Both Ringer’s lactate solution and Plasmalyte
contribute to the development of a metabolic acido-
sis with initiation of CPB. Ringer’s lactate solutionAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch10” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 338 — #16
338 Chapter 10
Table 10.4 Estimated blood volume (EBV) comparison.
Patient weight
(kg)
Estimated blood
volume (mL/kg)
<10 85
10–20 80
20–30 75
30–40 70
>40 65
does this via hyperchloremia and Plasmalyte via
an increase in unmeasured anions, mostproba-
bly acetate and gluconate. Hemoﬁltration of the
circuit prime prior to initiation of CPB is an
effective method to normalize electrolyte balance
(particularly potassium and pH) and reduce inﬂam-
matory mediator concentrations. Additional com-
ponents commonly added to the CPB prime are
sodium bicarbonate, mannitol, calcium chloride,
and magnesium.
The circuit prime volume to patient blood vol-
ume ratio would be expected to decrease plasma
unfractionated heparin (UFH) levels with initiation
of CPB unless an appropriate quantity of heparin
is added to the CPB prime. Most institutions add
UFH to the CPB prime (3–4 unit/mL of prime) to
reach a CPB target UFH concentration similar to the
patient’s plasma UFH concentration.
Blood is often added to the prime to reach
a target CPB hematocrit. Whole blood can be
used to prevent dilution of coagulation factors
in pediatric patients. The target CPB hematocrit
and the degree of coagulation factor dilution that
is tolerated vary from institution to institution.
Hemodilution during hypothermic CPB may be
advantageous because it offsets the increase in
blood viscosity induced by hypothermia and pro-
motes microvascular ﬂow. In addition, systemic
hypothermia reduces whole-body and cerebral
oxygen consumption 5% for each 1 ◦C decrease
in body temperature allowing the reduction in
oxygen delivery which accompanies reduction of
red cell mass and oxygen-carrying capacity to
be tolerated. The hematocrit (Hct) on CPB can
be accurately predicted in the following manner
when the pump is primed with an asanguineous
solution:
• Estimated blood volume (EBV) is calculated using
the patient’s weight and Table 10.4.
• Patient red cell mass (RCMP) = patient hematocrit
(Hct) × EBV.
• Hcton CPB = RCMP/(EBV + prime volume).
In a 4.0 kg neonate with a hematocrit of 45%,
the expected CPB hematocrit would be 24% using
a 300 mL asanguineous circuitprime.
The CPB red cell mass (RCM CPB) necessary
to obtain a target hematocrit on CPB can be
determined as follows:
RCMCPB =[ (desired Hcton CPB )
× (EBVP + prime volume)]− RCMP
The volume of blood prime necessary to obtain the
desired RCMCPB will depend on whether whole
blood or packed cells are used in the prime. The
RCM of a blood product is determined by multi-
plying the hematocrit of the blood product by its
volume. Therefore, the RCM of a unit of packed cells
mightbe (0.7 ×350 mL) or 245 mL, whereas that of
whole blood will be (0.4× 350 mL) or 140 mL. The
4.0 kg neonate described would have to the have
the CPB circuit primed with 98 mL of whole blood
to reach a target CPB hematocrit of 30%.
An ancillary method of limiting the hemodilu-
tion induced by the CPB prime is the technique
of retrograde autologous priming (RAP). This tech-
nique is initiated in the 5–10 minutes just prior
to commencing CPB. A 1000 mL blood collection
bag is connected to the CPB circuit and is sus-
pended at a level 20 cm higher than the patient’s
right atrium. The technique involves three steps.
First, blood from the patient’s aorta is permitted to
ﬂow retrograde through the arterial ﬁlter displacing
approximately 300 mL of semi-sanguineous pump
prime into the collection bag. It is often necessary
to use phenylephrine to maintain a systemic sys-
tolic blood pressure >100 mmHg during this phase.
Next, volume in the venous reservoir is pumped for-
ward through the membrane oxygenator into the
collection bag until the reservoir volume is reduced
to 200 mL. At this point, additional blood from the
arterial cannula is allowed to ﬁll the venous reser-
voir retrograde via the arterial ﬁlter purge line.Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch10” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 339 — #17
Managementof Cardiopulmonary Bypass 339
The added venous reservoir volume is then pumped
forward into the collection bag until sanguineous
ﬂuid leaves the oxygenator. This displaces approxi-
mately 300 mL of semi-sanguineous prime. Finally,
the collection bag in lowered and as CPB com-
mences the prime solution from the venous line
is drained into the collection bag yielding an addi-
tional 300 mL of prime solution. In a typical adult
patient approximately 800–1000 mL of a 1500 mL
asanguineous CPB prime can be removed with this
method. The semi-sanguineous solution in the col-
lection bag can be processed via a cell-saver system
and re-infused.
Circuit coating
Recent attempts to attenuate the deleterious
effects of blood contact with nonphysiologic
surfaces have focused on modiﬁcation of CPB tub-
ing and membrane surfaces. A number of CPB
coating substances are currently under investiga-
tion. These include a phosphorylcholine coating,
a poly 2-methoxyethylacrylate coating, a siloxane/
caprolactone oligomer coating and covalent hep-
arin binding via the terminal amine. To date
there is conﬂicting evidence as to whether
these surface modiﬁcations reliably reduce throm-
bin formation and the associated consumption
of platelets, ﬁbrinogen, and antithrombin, allow
reduced doses of heparin to be utilized, or attenu-
ate complement activation and initiation of systemic
inﬂammation.
Preparation for CPB
The anesthesiologist has several important respon-
sibilities in ensuring safe preparation for CPB. These
are described in the following sections.
Assess anticoagulation
Before use of cardiotomy suction, cannulation, and
commencing bypass, it is essential that adequate
anticoagulation be obtained. Inadequate anticoag-
ulation will result in thrombus formation on the
cannulas during cannulation and on the oxygenator
once CPB commences. UFH currently is the primary
anticoagulant used for CPB. UFH is an animal tissue
(bovine lung, porcine intestinal mucosa) derived
mucopolysaccharide (glycosaminoglycan) that has
an antithrombin (AT)-III dependant anticoagulant
mechanism of action. AT-III is responsible for bind-
ing to and inactivating the serine proteases throm-
bin (factor IIa), factor Xa, factor IXa, factor XIa, and
factor XIIa. AT-III is 10–20 times more efﬁcient in
inactivating thrombin and factor Xa than it is in
inactivating factors IXa, and XIa, and XIIa. Binding
of AT-III to a speciﬁc pentasaccharide induces a
conformation change in AT-III that enhances bind-
ing to and subsequent inhibition of these serine
proteases by a factor of 1000–10 000. This pen-
tasaccharide is present in about a third of the
10–90 mucopolysaccharide chains that comprise
UFH. In combination with AT-III, any mucopolysac-
charide chain containing the speciﬁc pentasaccha-
ride (UFH, low molecular weightheparin (LMWH),
fondaparinux) can inhibitfact or Xa while only
mucopolysaccharides with the speciﬁc pentasaccha-
ride and a chain length ≥18 can inhibitfact or IIa.
This is due to the fact that a chain length
of atleast18 monosaccharides is necessary t o
link factor IIa (thrombin) to AT-III. As a result,
the anti-factor Xa/anti-factor IIa ratio of these
mucopolysaccharides is solely dependenton t heir
chain lengths. Essentially all the mucopolysaccha-
ride chains in UFH contain >18 monosaccharide
units.
It generally is acknowledged that an activated
clotting time (ACT) in excess of 480 seconds is nec-
essary to ensure adequate anticoagulation for the
safe conductof CPB. An UFH dose does notreliably
result in a predictable plasma UFH concentration
and that the plasma UFH concentration does not
necessarily correlate with the anticoagulant effect of
UFH. For this reason, a test such as the ACT, which
quantitates the functional anticoagulant effect of
UFH in a dose responsive fashion, mustbe used
prior to CPB. Hypothermia, hemodilution, platelet
dysfunction, and low coagulation factor levels also
prolong the ACT. When any of these conditions are
present the ACT will overestimate the anti-factor IIa
and anti-factor Xa effects of heparin. These condi-
tions are commonly present during CPB in infants
and children.
Automated ACT determination is used in most
institutions. Kaolin or celite, both potent activatorsAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch10” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 340 — #18
340 Chapter 10
of the contact phase of coagulation, is used to initi-
ate clot formation in whole blood. The two most
common devices automated ACT devices are the
Hemochron® (International Technidyne Corp.) and
the Hemotec® (Medtronic).
• The Hemochron device requires placementof
2 mL of whole blood into a test tube containing
either kaolin or celite and a small iron cylinder.
A timer is started and the test tube is placed in the
device where it is rotated in a nearly horizontal posi-
tion within a magnetic ﬁeld and heat block. The iron
cylinder rolls along the bottom side of the tube until
enough clot forms to entrain it. Once the cylinder
is entrained and is longer detected by the magnetic
ﬁeld the timer stops signaling the clotting time.
• The Hemotec device requires placement of 0.4 mL
of blood into each of two chambers that contain
kaolin or celite. Each chamber contains a ﬂag like
plunger that can be raised vertically and allowed to
fall passively. The chambers are placed in the device
containing a heating block. A timer is started and
the device raises the plungers in each chamber and
allows them to fall. As clot forms the passive descent
of the plunger is progressively inhibited. A photo-
optical sensor detects descent of the plunger. When
the velocity of the decent of the plunger falls to a
predetermined value the timer stops signaling the
clotting time. The ACT is the average of the two
separate determinations.
• The Hemochron® and Hemotec® ACT determi-
nations are not interchangeable. The Hemochron®
determinations are typically longer than the
Hemotec® determinations for a given heparin level.
This difference is particularly pronounced in infants
and children.
UFH is dosed in USP units not milligrams
because UFH preparations vary in the number of
USP units per milligram. Generally speaking UFH
is prepared as 100 USP unit/mg and packaged as
1000 USP unit/mL. UFH can be dosed in two ways
as follows:
• Empirically. Many institutions use an age or
weight based empiric protocol to determine the
initial pre-CPB dose of heparin. A typical adult
dose of UFH would be 300–400 unit/kg. The large
circuit prime volume to blood volume ratio (partic-
ularly in infants and children) would be expected
to decrease plasma heparin levels with initiation
of CPB unless an appropriate quantity of heparin
is added to the CPB prime. Most institutions add
heparin to the CPB prime in a quantity sufﬁcient
(3–4 unit/mL) to give the prime volume an UFH
concentration similar to that of the patient. As a
result, 5000–10 000 units are added to a 1500 mL
adultprime. A t ypical UFH dose in children is
as follows: patients <30 kg − 200 unit/kg; patients
>30 kg−300 unit/kg. UFH is added to the CPB prime
as follows: patients <30 kg − 2.5 unit/mL of CPB
prime; patients >30 kg−3.0 unit/mL of CPB prime.
• Individualized heparin dose response. Some insti-
tutions make use of technology that allows the
patient UFH dose response to be determined and
the individualized UFH dose to achieve a target
ACT to be administered. The two most commonly
used commercially available tests are the heparin
response test (HRT, Hemochron®) and the heparin
dose-response test (HDR, Medtronic Hemotec ®).
These monitors will allow detection of patients
with an altered UFH dose response (those requir-
ing a larger or smaller dose of UFH per kilogram to
achieve a target ACT than the “average” empirically
dosed patient).
If a baseline ACT is drawn, the following factors
must be taken into consideration:
• An ACT drawn after incision will be shorter than
one drawn before incision presumably due to the
procoagulant state induced by surgical stress.
• Patients on preoperative UFH infusions and those
with factor deﬁciencies that impair the intrin-
sic and common coagulation pathways will have
prolonged ACT.
UFH should always be given into a central line or
directly into the heart (usually the right atrium) by
the surgeon. This is necessary to ensure that the UFH
dose has reached the central circulation. The CVP
port of a PA catheter or a central venous catheter
works well in this regard. The ACT should be mea-
sured after UFH administration. The clinical onset
of UFH is rapid with peak arterial ACT prolongation
occurring within 30 seconds and peak venous ACT
prolongation occurring within 60 seconds.
Heparin resistance, more properly called altered
heparin dose responsiveness may occur in some
patients. It is generally deﬁned as an ACT <480Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch10” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 341 — #19
Managementof Cardiopulmonary Bypass 341
seconds following administration of 500 unit/kg
of UFH. Generally, a 400 unit/kg dose of UFH
is effective in prolonging the ACT to more than
400 seconds. Approximately 50% of patients who
have been receiving preoperative intravenous (IV)
UFH therapy will have an ACT of less than
400 seconds after a 400 unit/kg dose of UFH.
The etiology of this resistance is unknown, and
doses of UFH as high as 1000 unit/kg may be
needed for these patients. UFH resistance has
been observed in elderly patients due to decreased
AT-III levels and in patients with thrombocyto-
sis. Platelet factor 4 (which neutralizes heparin)
may be released in excess in patients with throm-
bocytosis after UFH administration. Other causes
of UFH resistance include AT-III deﬁciency; infec-
tive endocarditis, intracardiac thrombus, shock, and
low-grade disseminated intravascular coagulation.
Fresh frozen plasma (FFP) (a source of AT-III) and
recombinant AT-III administration have been used
as a method of improving UFH response in patients
with documented AT-III deﬁciency. They have also
has been used to reduce the UFH requirement in
cases in which the source of UFH resistance is
unknown.
Administration of UFH for CPB may result in
hypotension due to calcium binding and can be
treated with calcium administration (1–2 mg/kg).
If UFH is administered over 1–2 minutes and ade-
quate intravascular volume is maintained, calcium
administration usually is unnecessary.
If the ACT is more than 480 seconds, no addi-
tional UFH is necessary. The ACT should be checked
every 20 minutes until CPB commences. Additional
UFH may be necessary if an extended period of time
elapses. If the ACT is less than 480 seconds after the
initial UFH dose, additional UFH will be necessary.
By constructing a UFH dose–response curve, the
required UFH dose can be determined. Most centers
no longer use this cumbersome method; instead,
an additional 100 unit/kg of UFH is administered
and the ACT is checked 5 minutes later. This process
should be repeated until an ACT level greater than
480 seconds is reached or until the total UFH dose
equals 600 unit/kg. Before reaching the 600 unit/kg
dose it may be prudent to make certain that the UFH
is reaching the central circulation, that the UFH is
really UFH and is not outdated, and to try a different
lotof UFH.
When the UFH dose reaches 600 unit/kg with-
outan ACT of more t han 480 seconds one of
the following interventions should be undertaken
to increase plasma AT-III levels and improve
heparin dose responsiveness: 0.015–0.03 unit/kg
of FFP (1–2 units in an adult) should be admin-
istered and the ACT should be rechecked, or
75 unit/kg of recombinant AT-III should be admin-
istered. In either case the possibility that enhanced
heparin dose responsiveness will exacerbate hep-
arin rebound (described later) and contribute to
post -CPB bleeding mustbe keptin mind.
If the ACT is still less than 480 seconds,
additional UFH in 100 unit/kg increments should
be administered. In patients deemed to be at
high risk for UFH resistance, it is best to begin the
heparinization process as early as possible so that
t he commencementof CPB will notbe unduly
delayed.
Arterial cannulation
Arterial cannulation generally occurs before venous
cannulation. Prior placement of the arterial can-
nula allows promptcommencementof CPB if severe
hemodynamic compromise occurs with venous
cannulation. The arterial cannula usually is placed
in the ascending aorta via an aortotomy encir-
cled by two purse-string sutures after adequate
heparinization has been obtained. Transesophageal
echocardiography (TEE) may be useful in guid-
ing cannula placement. Arterial blood pressure and
aortic wall tension must be carefully controlled to
avoid a hematoma or intimal dissection at the can-
nulation site. Generally, a systolic blood pressure
less than 100 mmHg or a mean blood pressure less
than 60–70 mmHg is satisfactory. It may be neces-
sary to use vasodilator therapy to accomplish this.
The anesthesiologist should aid the surgeon in visu-
ally examining the arterial cannula and arterial
inﬂow line for air bubbles after they are connected
and before bypass commences. These bubbles must
be eliminated before bypass starts by disconnect-
ing the cannula and the inﬂow line, holding them
upright, and tapping them with clamps. This allows
the bubbles to ﬂoat upward, where they can beAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch10” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 342 — #20
342 Chapter 10
ﬂushed outbefore t he inﬂow line and cannula are
reconnected.
Obstruction of the lumen of the aorta may occur
if the cannula is introduced too far into the aorta.
Because the arterial cannula is relatively large
as compared to the aorta in infants and neonates,
complete or partial obstruction of the aorta by the
cannula itself is possible. Constant vigilance is nec-
essary to avoid this problem. If dampening of the
arterial trace, distension of the systemic ventricle, or
an increase in CPB line pressure occurs with place-
ment or manipulation of the arterial cannula, the
surgeon should immediately be made aware of the
situation so the cannula can be repositioned.
Venous cannulation
Placement of the venous cannula requires that the
surgeon manipulate the right atrium and potentially
the IVC and SVC. This manipulation may result in
compromise of venous return to the heart as well as
a variety of atrial dysrhythmias such as atrial prema-
ture beats, atrial ﬁbrillation, or atrial ﬂutter. These
perturbations may result in hemodynamic compro-
mise. For this reason, it is essential that the internal
cardioversion paddles be on the surgical ﬁeld, ready
to be synchronized before atrial cannulation com-
mences. Placementof t he venous cannula also may
resultin rapid blood loss. This blood can be collect ed
with the cardiotomy suction and rapid transfu-
sion of prime solution can occur via the arterial
cannula.
Temperature
Various sites are available for monitoring body tem-
perature. The core is considered to be the well-
perfused organs; the shell is an intermediate area
that consists mainly of less well-perfused muscle
and fat. Shell temperature will lag behind core
temperature during cooling and rewarming. Homo-
genous cooling and rewarming should resultin a
minimal temperature gradient between core and
shell temperature.
Tympanicmembrane
This is a core temperature site. These probes pro-
vide close correlation to the temperature at the base
of the brain during cooling and rewarming and to
actual brain temperature during stable hypother-
mia. These probes are associated with minimal risk
of tympanic membrane damage.
Esophagus
This is a core temperature site. During rapid cool-
ing and rewarming and during CPB, temperature
measurements in the esophagus must be interpreted
with caution. Because of their proximity to the
mediastinum, probes in the esophagus will reﬂect
changes in the CPB perfusate temperature and the
temperature of blood or ﬂuid in the pericardial
space not detected in other core sites. Esophageal
temperatures will fall quickly during cooling and
rise rapidly during rewarming and may notaccu-
rately reﬂect the patient’s temperature in other
core sites. The blood temperature, as measured by
the PA catheter, closely approximates esophageal
temperature. The reliability of PA catheter tem-
perature monitoring on CPB is limited because
there is little or no pulmonary blood ﬂow at
this time.
Nasopharyngeal
These probes, like tympanic membrane probes, pro-
vide close correlation to the temperature at the
base of the brain during cooling and rewarm-
ing and to actual brain temperature during stable
hypothermia. There is little risk associated with
placement of these probes and, as a result, this
site is preferred by many institutions to the tym-
panic membrane. This site is not inﬂuenced by acute
changes in mediastinal temperature changes and
will more closely reﬂect actual core temperature
changes.
Rectumandurinarybladder
Rectal temperature is not a core temperature but a
measure of shell temperature. Bladder temperature
and rectal temperature correlate closely. High urine
output creates closer correlation between bladder
temperature and core temperature. Temperature
changes in the rectum and bladder will lag behind
temperature changes in the core sites. These probes
are therefore very useful in determining whether
the core and shell temperatures have equilibrated
after cooling and rewarming.Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch10” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 343 — #21
Managementof Cardiopulmonary Bypass 343
Temperature monitoring in association with CPB
and particularly DHCA is of paramount impor-
tance given that hypothermia prior to and during
CPB and DHCA and the avoidance of hyperthermia
after CPB and DHCA are the mainstays of cere-
bral protection. It has been demonstrated clinically
in association with DHCA that core temperature
monitoring sites (esophagus, tympanic membrane,
nasopharyngeal, and PA) track brain temperature.
However, temperature at these sites differs from
true brain temperature by several degrees, some-
times overestimating and sometimes underestimat-
ing true brain temperature. None of these sites
consistently and accurately measures brain tem-
perature. Shell sites, such as rectum and bladder,
may be useful in assuring homogenous somatic
rewarming butperform poorly as measures of brain
temperature. It is prudent then to use temperature
readings from multiple sites (both core and shell)
during cooling and rewarming.
Baseline assessment of the pupils
The pupils should be checked for symmetry, and any
asymmetry due to iridectomies or the like should be
noted.
Commencing CPB
The anest hesiologistmustwork in concertwit h t he
perfusionist and the surgeon to ensure that CPB
commences smoothly. The anesthesiologist must
remain alertt o help solve problems.
Assess venous drainage
When the clamps are taken off the venous line,
there should be continuous ﬂow of venous blood
from the venous cannula(s) into the pump reser-
voir. If this does not occur, the venous line must be
examined for air lock, residual clamps, or mechan-
ical obstruction of the cannula due to malposition.
The surgeon and perfusionistmustbe alert ed if t hey
are not aware of the situation. The head and neck
should be assessed for adequate venous drainage,
and the pupils should be rechecked for symmetry.
Poor SVC drainage will resultin engorgementand
cyanosis of the head and neck. If poor SVC drainage
is suspected, the surgeon should be alerted so that
the cannula can be repositioned. Measurement of
the pressure in the SVC (not the RA) is useful in
detecting poor SVC drainage. The monitoring site
must be cephalad to the SVC lumen of a two-
stage venous cannula or cephalad to the tourniquet
around the SVC cannula when the SVC is cannu-
lated separately. This can be accomplished by trans-
ducing the side port of the PA catheter introducer or
a catheter in the SVC. PA catheters migrate further
out into the pulmonary arterial system during CPB
and ventricular apical retraction. The PA catheter
should be pulled back 5 cm as CPB commences to
preventitfrom lodging in t he wedge posit ion.
Assess arterial inﬂow
When the pump head begins to turn, there should
be continuous ﬂow of the crystalloid prime followed
by oxygenated blood into the aorta. The arterial
waveform will take on a nearly nonpulsatile ﬂat line
form punctuated by intermittent small pulsations as
the LV ejects its small residual volume. When an
extremely low ( <30 mmHg) or nonexistent pres-
sure is observed as CPB commences, dissection at
the site of aortic cannulation must be excluded
immediately. It is heralded by dilation and bluish
discoloration of the cannulated vessel, a reduction
in arterial pressure, and an increase in the pump
line pressure. An aortic dissection requires immedi-
ate attention. The dissection site must be repaired
and an alternate cannulation site must be found.
Misdirection of the aortic cannula into one of
the arch vessels should be assessed as CPB com-
mences. A high arterial perfusion line pressure
is likely t o resultbutis notuniformly observed.
If the subclavian or innominate artery is cannu-
lated, the blood pressure measured in the ipsilateral
radial artery will be abnormally high with wider-
than-normal pulsations, whereas that measured
in the contralateral radial artery will be abnor-
mally low (below 30 mmHg). Cannulation of either
carotid artery will result in an abnormally low pres-
sure, regardless of which radial artery pressure is
being monitored. Unilateral otorrhea, rhinorrhea,
conjunctival edema, facial edema, and facial cold-
ness are later signs of arch vessel cannulation and
are the result of cerebral overperfusion. Misdirec-
tion has been reported into the innominate artery;Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch10” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 344 — #22
344 Chapter 10
left subclavian artery, and left carotid artery. If mis-
direction is suspected, immediate action to correct
the placement is necessary.
The risk of misdirection of the arterial cannula
into one of the arch vessels is higher in reopera-
tive procedures because the surgeon may need to
cannulate the aorta higher to avoid the previous
cannulation site. TEE is not reliable in visualizing
the ascending aortic cannulation site due to the
blind spot created by the trachea and bronchus.
However, longitudinal plane imaging reliably allows
visualization of the left subclavian and left carotid
arteries. In conjunction with color ﬂow Doppler
imaging, it is possible to detect preferential direc-
tion of the jet of blood out of the cannula into one
of these arteries. Some centers utilize NIRS and TCD
technology as adjunctive methods to assess cerebral
blood ﬂow during CPB.
Assess oxygenator function
After CPB has commenced the oxygenator func-
tion must be rapidly assessed. There should be
immediat e visual assessmentof brightred blood
leaving the oxygenator. Infrared oxygen satura-
tion monitors on the venous and arterial lines will
verify that the blood leaving the oxygenator is satu-
rated with oxygen. Optical ﬂuorescence technology
allows on-line monitoring of both venous and arte-
rial PO2,P CO2, and pH. Blood gas analysis is rou-
tine and will provide information on oxygenation,
carbon dioxide elimination, and acid-base status. If
arterialized blood does not leave the oxygenator, it
must be assessed immediately for malfunction. The
mostlikely cause of failure is an inadequat e supply
of fresh gas to the oxygenator from a ﬂow meter
malfunction, gas line switch or gas line leak.
Inadequate arterial oxygenation also may occur
if the maximum ﬂow capacity of the oxygenator
is exceeded. Inadequate arterial oxygenation may
occur at ﬂow rates less than the maximal ﬂow capac-
ity if a very low mixed venous saturation exists
as bypass commences. The mostcommon causes
of a low mixed venous oxygen saturation as CPB
commences are as follows:
• Low pre-bypass cardiac output.
• Oxygen consumption that is abnormally high due
to shivering, light anesthesia, or hyperthermia.
• The surface area of the oxygenator is too
small to meet the metabolic demands of a large
patient.
Discontinue ventilation
Ventilation should be discontinued after bypass
has commenced unless partial CPB is initiated and
a signiﬁcant volume of blood continues to ﬂow
through the pulmonary arteries. Complete collapse
of the lungs provides optimal surgical exposure,
whereas continuous positive airway pressure poten-
tially inhibits exposure and has no proven beneﬁt in
the post-CPB period.
Assess need for venting
The anesthesiologist can aid the surgeon in the deci-
sion t o ventby observing t he rightand leftheartfor
dilation with TEE and by examining the RA and pul-
monary artery pressure traces on CPB. An elevation
of the RA pressure suggests continued blood return
and dilation of the right heart. An elevation of the
PA pressure suggests left ventricular distension with
mitral valve incompetence and retrograde ﬂow of
blood into the PA.
Supplement neuromuscular blockade
It is important to administer a muscle relaxant
as CPB commences to prevent the large increases
in systemic oxygen consumption that accompany
shivering and to prevent the diaphragmatic move-
mentt hatcompromises surgical exposure during
the operative procedure. The effect of hypothermic
CPB on nondepolarizing neuromuscular blockade
is complex. Hypothermic CPB in the absence of
neuromuscular blockade enhances electrochemical
neuromuscular transmission, assessed by electro-
myogram (EMG) but attenuates mechanical func-
tion, assessed by twitch tension development.
Clinically, the goal is attenuation of the mechani-
cal response with neuromuscular blocking agents.
Vecuronium neuromuscular blockade as assessed
by twitch tension is enhanced and prolonged by
hypothermic CPB, whereas pancuronium neuro-
muscular blockade as assessed by twitch tension is
unaltered.
From a practical point of view, any of the
nondepolarizing muscle relaxants can be utilizedAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch10” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 345 — #23
Managementof Cardiopulmonary Bypass 345
to ensure muscle relaxation during CPB. It has
been demonstrated that pancuronium require-
ments are increased at the initiation of CPB and
during rewarming. Presumably, hemodilution at
the onset of CPB reduces the plasma concentra-
tion of neuromuscular blocking agents, whereas
rewarming reverses hypothermia-induced depres-
sion of twitch tension development. Pancuronium
0.05 mg/kg at the start of CPB, followed by pan-
curonium 0.01 mg/kg/h while on CPB, is sufﬁcient.
When DHCA is used, a large enough dose of relaxant
to last the entire arrest period must be administered
at the outset.
Conduct of CPB
After CPB has commenced, the perfusionist assumes
primary responsibility for its safe conduct with the
cooperation of the surgeon and anesthesiologist.
It is necessary to be familiar with the effects of
CPB on various organ systems to make rational
managementdecisions.
Temperature
CPB is most commonly conducted in conjunction
with systemic hypothermia. Systemic hypother-
mia reduces systemic oxygen consumption and
reduces cerebral oxygen consumption. Q10 deﬁnes
the ratio of oxygen consumption at a deﬁned
temperature to the oxygen consumption at tem-
perature 10 ◦C lower. Systemic Q 10 is approxi-
mately 2.5, whereas cerebral Q10 is approximately
2.1–3.5. Reductions in oxygen consumption per-
mit reductions in oxygen supply to be tolerated.
Levels of hypothermia have been deﬁned as fol-
lows: mild (32–35 ◦C), moderate (26–31 ◦C), deep
(20–25◦C), and profound (<20◦C). Unfortunately,
not all authors adhere to this classiﬁcation and care
must be taken when comparing data from studies.
For instance, it is not uncommon for temperatures
<20◦C used in conjunction with pediatric cardiac
surgery to be called “deep hypothermia”.
Normothermic CPB for CABG surgery is utilized
in some institutions. When normothermic CPB is
conducted so as to avoid inadvertent cerebral hyper-
thermia there is no difference in cognitive outcome
as compared to hypothermic CPB in CABG patients.
Systemic blood ﬂow
Systemic blood ﬂow on CPB can be varied instan-
taneously and is determined by the rate of arterial
pump head rotation. In the steady state, systemic
blood ﬂow and venous ret urn mustbe equal, justas
they are in the intact circulatory system. If venous
return is compromised for any reason, then systemic
blood ﬂow may transiently exceed venous return
and the volume of blood in the venous reservoir
will diminish. As the volume of blood in the venous
reservoir falls, t he perfusionistmustdecrease sys-
temic blood ﬂow by decreasing the speed of pump
rotation. Simultaneously, volume is added to the
venous reservoir while the source of compromised
venous return is aggressively pursued and cor-
rected. If the venous reservoir is inadvertently
emptied, massive arterial air embolization may
occur. This disastrous complication is preventable in
several ways:
• Vigilance on the part of the perfusionist and
anesthesiologist.
• Level sensors on the venous reservoir that sound
and/or shut down the arterial pump head when a
predetermined reservoir volume is reached.
• Bubble sensors on the arterial perfusion line that
shut down the arterial pump head before massive
transfusion of air occurs.
Optimal ﬂow rates for CPB have yet to be
deﬁned clearly, although the goal is to maintain
systemic and cerebral oxygen delivery. Flows of
2.0–2.4 L/min/m2 are used for infants, children, and
adults during mild to moderate systemic hypother-
mia. Due to age-related differences in the relation-
ship of surface area to weight, these ﬂow rates
expressed in milliliters per kilograms per minute
will be substantially higher in the neonate than
in the adult. The recommended full ﬂow rates
for CPB are summarized in Table 10.5. Low ﬂow
CPB in neonates and infants conducted in con-
junction with temperatures of 18–25 ◦C is gener-
ally deﬁned as 50–70 mL/kg/min or approximately
1.0–1.5 L/min/m2. Flows as low as 1.2 L/min/m 2
will notcompromise whole-body oxygen delivery
when moderate systemic hypothermia is employed.
At such low ﬂow rates, with higher temperature,
systemic oxygen delivery is maintained by increased
peripheral extraction of oxygen. Because low mixedAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch10” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 346 — #24
346 Chapter 10
Table 10.5 Full cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) ﬂow
rates.
Patient
weight
(kg)
Full CPB
ﬂow rates
(mL/kg/min)
<3 150–200
3–10 125–175
10–15 120–150
15–30 100–120
30–50 75–100
>50 50–75
venous oxygen saturations result, oxygen delivery
reserve is compromised.
To improve surgical exposure during complex
intracardiac repairs and arch reconstructions in
neonates and children and during aortic arch
repairs in adults, DHCA may be used. DHCA allows
cessation of blood ﬂow, cannula removal, and
exsanguination of the patient into the venous reser-
voir. DHCA has been studied most extensively in
pediatric patients.
Systemic blood pressure
Mean arterial pressure (MAP) on CPB is deter-
mined by the relationship between pump ﬂow and
systemic vascular resistance (SVR):
SVR =[ (MAP − CVP) × 80]/pump ﬂow rate
Recall that the CVP on CPB with adequate venous
drainage will be zero and that 80 is a conversion
factor (Wood units to dynes s/cm 5). For a given
SVR, the MAP can be instantaneously increased or
decreased by increasing or decreasing pump ﬂow.
Likewise, the perfusionist is able to maintain MAP
when acute increases or decreases in SVR occur
by decreasing or increasing pump ﬂow. Itis not
uncommon for MAP to decrease to 30–50 mmHg
as CPB commences despite pump ﬂow rates of
2.0–2.4 L/min/m2 or approximately 4 L/min in a
70-kg patient.
This is due, in part, to the enormous decrease in
viscosity that occurs when the patient’s blood vol-
ume and the asanguineous prime ﬁrst mix. Viscos-
ity, as discussed previously, is a major determinant
of SVR. Several other factors have been identiﬁed
which inﬂuence SVR on CPB:
• Temperature. The incidence of low SVR is signiﬁ-
cantly higher during normothermic compared with
hypothermic CPB. This may be caused by vaso-
constriction induced by hypothermia or release of
vasodilator substances during normothermia. Long
periods of rewarming during reperfusion also seem
to contribute to low SVR.
• Age and peripheral vascular disease. Older patients
and patients with peripheral vascular disease are less
likely to exhibit low SVR during CPB secondary to
a less compliant arterial system.
• Diabetes mellitus. Diabetics are less likely to
exhibit low SVR during CPB secondary to coexist-
ing vascular disease, sympathetic neuropathy with
near maximum vasodilation at rest, and reduced
baroreceptor sensitivity.
• Left ventricular function. Patients with LV ejection
fraction (EF) < 40% are less likely to exhibit low
SVR during CPB. These patients tend to be receiving
vasodilator therapy to improve systolic function and
may have near-maximal vasodilation at rest.
Cerebral blood ﬂow
The control of cerebral blood ﬂow on CPB is depen-
dent on several factors, as described in the following
sections.
Cerebralautoregulation
Cerebral blood ﬂow autoregulation is altered by
hypothermic nonpulsatile CPB. Cerebral blood ﬂow
is autoregulated between MAP values of 30 and
110 mmHg during CPB in patients without cere-
brovascular disease or preexisting hypertension.
In contrast, in the intact circulation of normal,
nonhypertensive patients, cerebral blood ﬂow is
autoregulated between MAP values of 50 and
150 mmHg. Unfortunately, there are no data on the
lower limit of cerebral autoregulation on CPB in
patients with coexisting cerebrovascular disease. It
may be prudent to maintain a slightly higher MAP
(higher than 50 mmHg) on CPB in patients with
known cerebrovascular disease although there is no
evidence to support or refute this recommendation.
Aging has notbeen shown t o have an effect
on cerebral autoregulation during CPB. DiabeticsAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch10” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 347 — #25
Managementof Cardiopulmonary Bypass 347
appear to have impaired cerebral autoregulation
during CPB. Cerebral autoregulation is lost and
cerebral vascular responses to PaCO2 are attenuated
under conditions of deep (18–20 ◦C) hypothermia
CPB in infants and children. This is felt to be due to
cold induced vasoparesis.
Acid-basemanagement
Electrochemical neutrality is important in preserva-
tion of cellular protein and enzyme structure and
maintenance of the constant transcellular hydro-
gen (H +) ion gradientnecessary for many cellu-
lar processes. In addition, optimal functioning of
the imidazole buffering system is dependent on
maintenance of cellular electrochemical neutrality.
The imidazole group of the amino acid histidine
is presenton many blood and cellular prot eins
and is an important buffer. Electrochemical neu-
trality occurs when there are equal concentrations
of hydroxyl (OH −) and hydrogen (H +) ions. As
temperature decreases, the dissociation constant
(pK) of aqueous systems such as those found in
cells increases. This process results in a reduc-
tion in the concentrations of OH − and H + ions
as temperature decreases. If there are equal con-
centrations of OH− and H+, then electrochemical
neutrality will be maintained. Recall that pH is the
inverse log of the H + ion concentrations; as the
H+ ion concentration decreases, pH increases. Thus,
for electrochemical neutrality to be maintained,
pH must increase as temperature decreases. In an
electrochemically neutral cell at 37◦C, the measured
pH will be 7.40, whereas in an electrochemi-
cally neutral cell at 20 ◦C, the measured pH will
be 7.80.
Changes in cellular pH during hypothermia are
mediated through PaCO2 homeostasis. As temper-
ature decreases, the solubility of carbon dioxide in
blood increases. If the total carbon dioxide content
of blood is held constant, this increase in carbon
dioxide solubility will result in a reduction in PaCO2.
For example, if the total carbon dioxide content is
held constant and the measured Pa CO2 at37 ◦Ci s
40 mmHg, then the measured PaCO2 at20 ◦C will
be 16 mmHg. This situation causes pH to increase
as temperature decreases and electrochemical
neutrality to be maintained.
pH-Stat and α-stat regulation are acid-base man-
agement methods that directly inﬂuence blood ﬂow
to the brain and other organs. Although pH-stat and
α-st atacid-base managementcommonly are men-
tioned in association with temperature-corrected
and temperature–uncorrected blood gases, it must
be emphasized that these are entirely different
concepts. The method of blood gas interpreta-
tion (corrected or uncorrected) does not dictate
the method of acid-base management (pH-stat or
α-stat). In fact with the use of Table 10.6, α-stat
or pH-stat management is possible with use of
both temperature-corrected and uncorrected blood
gases. In addition, is important to point out that at
a patient temperature of 37 ◦C there is no differ-
ence between pH-stat and α-stat management. The
difference between these two strategies becomes
Table 10.6 Alpha-stat versus pH-stat acid-base management.
Patient
temp.
(◦C)
Temperature uncorrected Temperature corrected
(reported at 37◦C) (reported at patient temperature)
α-stat
pH
pH-stat
pH
α-stat
PCO2
pH-stat
PCO2
α-stat
pH
pH-stat
pH
α-stat
PCO2
pH-stat
PCO2
37 7.40 7.40 40 40 7.40 7.40 40 40
33 7.40 7.34 40 47 7.44 7.40 35 40
30 7.40 7.30 40 54 7.50 7.40 29 40
27 7.40 7.26 40 62 7.55 7.40 26 40
23 7.40 7.21 40 74 7.60 7.40 22 40
20 7.40 7.18 40 84 7.65 7.40 19 40
17 7.40 7.14 40 96 7.69 7.40 17 40Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch10” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 348 — #26
348 Chapter 10
more marked as patient temperature progressively
decreases below 37◦C and is notclinically relevant
until patient temperature <30◦C (see Table 10.6).
When a blood gas sample is drawn from a patient
at25 ◦C and sent to the blood gas laboratory, the
sample is warmed to 37◦C before measurement. The
values obtained at 37◦C are called the temperature-
uncorrected values. These values are converted to
temperature-corrected values using a nomogram.
The nomogram accounts for temperature-induced
changes in pH, oxygen solubility, and carbon diox-
ide solubility in a closed-blood system. When pH
and PaCO2 are measured at37◦C and then corrected
to a lower temperature, the electrochemically neu-
tral pH will be higher and the corrected PaCO2 will
be lower than the normal values at 37◦C. Therefore,
electrochemical neutrality is maintained by keeping
pH alkalotic in temperature-corrected blood gases
and normal in temperature-uncorrected gases. This
is known as α-stat regulation. For practical pur-
poses, it is easier to use uncorrected gases and keep
pH and Pa CO2 in the range considered normal at
37◦C. Cerebral blood ﬂow and oxygen consumption
are appropriately coupled whenα-stat regulation is
used. Deep hypothermia in the presence of α-stat
regulation produces loss of cerebral autoregulation
such that cerebral blood ﬂow varies directly with
arterial pressure.
pH-Stat regulation refers to maintaining pH
and Pa CO2 atnormal values for 37 ◦C when
temperature-corrected gases are used and at acidotic
values when temperature-uncorrected gases are
used. pH stat is maintained by adding carbon diox-
ide to the ventilating gas during hypothermic CPB
to increase PaCO2 and decrease the pH. In contrast to
α-stat regulation, in which total carbon dioxide con-
tent is kept constant, pH stat regulation results in an
increase in total carbon dioxide content. The cere-
bral vasculature maintains vasomotor responses
to varying Pa CO2 during hypothermic CPB. This
response is maintained during moderate hypother-
mia and is attenuated during deep hypothermia
despite the fact that deep hypothermia induces
loss of cerebral blood ﬂow autoregulation. When
pH-stat regulation is used with moderate hypother-
mic CPB, there is uncoupling of cerebral blood ﬂow
and metabolism and loss of cerebral autoregulation.
As a result, cerebral blood ﬂow varies linearly with
arterial blood pressure and cerebral hyperperfu-
sion exists with cerebral blood ﬂow far in excess
of that dictated by cerebral metabolic rate. This
hyperperfusion state is the result of reduced cerebral
oxygen consumption induced by hypothermia and
cerebral vasodilation resulting from a dispropor-
tionately high PaCO2 for the degree of hypothermia
present. The potential danger of the hyper-perfused
state is increased delivery of microemboli into the
cerebral circulation.
Clinical trials in adults suggest that use of α-stat
management during normothermic or hypothermic
CPB results in improved cognitive outcome follow-
ing cardiac surgical procedures. The question as to
whether pH-stat or α-st atmanagementshould be
utilized during DHCA in adults is a source of debate.
In infants and children, pH-stat management is
generally initiated once the perfusate temperature
<28–30◦C.
Pumpﬂowrates
Cerebral blood ﬂow and oxygen delivery are main-
tained with ﬂow rates as low as 1.0 L/min/m2 and
perhaps as low as 0.5 L/min/m2 when moderately
hypothermic CPB (26–29◦C) and α-stat regulation
are used. There is preferential distribution of blood
ﬂow to the brain when low pump ﬂows are used.
Despite this, cerebral oxygen delivery at these ﬂows
is maintained at the expense of increased cerebral
extraction of oxygen and decreased jugular venous
oxygen saturation. In addition, despite the fact that
somatosensory neural transmission remains intact
when moderate systemic hypothermia is used and
pump ﬂow is reduced to 0.5 L/min/m 2, signiﬁ-
cant cerebral lactate accumulation develops after
15 minutes.
Low ﬂow rates are used most commonly in con-
junction with pediatric open-heart procedures to
improve surgical exposure. In neonates, infants,
and children, cerebral blood ﬂow and cere-
bral metabolism are unaffected by reductions in
conventional pump ﬂow rates less than 45%.
When conventional ﬂow rates (150 mL/kg/min for
neonates and 100 mL/kg/min for infants and chil-
dren) are reduced 45–70% at moderate hypother-
mia (26–29◦C) with α-stat acid-base management,Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch10” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 349 — #27
Managementof Cardiopulmonary Bypass 349
cerebral blood ﬂow and metabolic rate decrease
with a compensatory increase in oxygen extrac-
tion. Similar reductions during deep hypothermia
(18–22◦C) do notproduce increased oxygen ext rac-
tion. Minimal acceptable low ﬂows on CPB for
pediatric patients are not yet clearly deﬁned, but
cellular oxygen debtoccurs at5–30 mL/kg/min at
18◦C and at30–35 mL/kg/min at28◦C. In neonates
cooled to 18◦C, cerebral blood is detectable in the
middle cerebral artery by TCD as long as CPB ﬂow
rat e is atleast30 mL/kg/min.
Myocardial blood ﬂow
On CPB, the coronary ostia are provided with
hemodiluted, nonpulsatile blood ﬂow until the aor-
tic cross clamp is applied. Aortic cross-clamping for
cardiac surgery involves placing a completely occlu-
sive clamp across the ascending aorta between the
aortic cannula and the aortic valve, such that the
coronary circulation is excluded from the CPB
circulation. Aortic cross-clamping has evolved as
the method of choice for providing an immobile,
bloodless ﬁeld for the cardiac surgeon. Depend-
ing on the operative procedure and technique,
variable periods of time may pass from the
onset of CPB until placement of the aortic cross-
clamp. It is therefore necessary to be famil-
iar with the effects of CPB, hemodilution, and
hypothermia on myocardial oxygen delivery and
demand.
Myocardialoxygendelivery
Myocardial oxygen delivery is the product of coro-
nary blood ﬂow and the oxygen-carrying capac-
ity of the blood. Coronary blood ﬂow in turn is
dependent on the pressure gradient between the
aorta and the myocardial tissue. For the subendo-
cardium, the tissue most likely to be hypoperfused,
this gradient is equal to the MAP minus the right
or left ventricular intracavitary pressure. The fac-
tors described in the following sections play a major
role in determining oxygen and substrate delivery to
the myocardium, particularly the subendocardium,
during CPB.
• Coronary stenoses. Due to the pressure drop
across stenoses, perfusion to the area supplied
by the stenosed artery will be compromised if
MAP is reduced. Therefore, whereas cerebral blood
ﬂow can be maintained with perfusion pressures
as low as 30 mmHg, myocardium supplied by
stenosed arteries is poorly perfused at this pressure.
Such low perfusion pressures should notbe t oler-
ated for more than a few minutes in patients with
critical stenoses. Subendocardial ischemia in the dis-
tribution of a critical coronary stenosis is avoided
if MAP is maintained at 80 mmHg in the beat-
ing empty heart. However, subendocardial ischemia
is inevitable in the distribution of a critical coro-
nary stenosis when ventricular ﬁbrillation exists
despite maintenance of MAP. This ischemia is seen
to develop after as little as 15 minutes of ven-
tricular ﬁbrillation with MAP values as high as
80 mmHg.
• Ventricular distension. Ventricular distention
markedly elevates intracavitary pressure and com-
promises subendocardial perfusion for a given MAP.
The causes of ventricular distension have been dis-
cussed previously. If ventricular distension is likely
to persist, then ventricular venting is necessary.
Ventricular distension can be terminated promptly
when aortic insufﬁciency exists by placing the aortic
cross-clamp.
• Ventricular ﬁbrillation. As systemic cooling on
CPB progresses, the heart becomes progressively
more bradycardic. When the temperature of the
heartreaches approximat ely 28◦C, coarse ventric-
ular ﬁbrillation ensues and myocardial wall tension
increases. As the temperature of the heart contin-
ues to drop, the ventricular ﬁbrillation becomes
ﬁner, myocardial oxygen consumption decreases,
and ventricular wall tension diminishes. Ven-
tricular ﬁbrillation, particularly in hypertrophied
myocardium, results in poor perfusion of the sub-
endocardium due to increased myocardial wall
tension and a reduced perfusion gradient. When
the MAP is less than 50–60 mmHg, subendocardial
perfusion will be compromised when ventricular
ﬁbrillation exists.
• Hemodilution. In the presence of adequate perfu-
sion pressures, myocardial oxygen delivery is poten-
tially compromised by the reduced oxygen-carrying
capacity of the hemodiluted systemic perfusate
despite the fact that the decreased temperature
allows more oxygen to be carried in solution.Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch10” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 350 — #28
350 Chapter 10
Oxygen delivery to the nonhypertrophied ejecting
myocardium is unlikely to be compromised unless
the Hct is less than 15%. In the presence of coro-
nary stenoses or concentric hypertrophy, Hct values
in the 20–30% range may be needed to prevent
ischemia during normothermic CPB.
• Hypothermia. Hypothermia reduces coronary
vasodilator reserve capacity and potentially lim-
its myocardial oxygen delivery. Therefore, despite
the fact that hypothermia reduces myocardial
oxygen consumption (described later), subendocar-
dial ischemia develops in the beating, empty heart
when MAP is lower than 50 mmHg at 28◦C due to
attenuated coronary vasodilator reserve.
Myocardialoxygendemand
CPB provides a state of hypothermic, hemodiluted,
nonpulsatile ﬂow during which the heart is called
upon to do little or no mechanical work in the form
of generating pulsatile ﬂow. The two major deter-
minants of myocardial oxygen consumption on CPB
are temperature and the functional status of the
myocardium.
• Temperature. As Fig. 10.12 illustrates, the lower
the temperature of the heart, the less oxygen it
6.0
4.0
2.0cc/100 g/min
0
37°C3 2 °C2 8 °C
Beating nonworking
Fibrillating
Arrest
22°C
Fig. 10.12 Left ventricular oxygen consumption
during three functional states (beating empty, ﬁbrillating,
and arrested) and at four temperatures. Hypothermia
clearly reduces myocardial oxygen consumption for any
functional state. Below 37◦C, the beating empty heart
consumes the most oxygen, followed in decreasing
order by the ﬁbrillating and arrested heart. (From
Buckberg GO, et al. Studies on the effects of
hypothermia on regional myocardial blood ﬂow and
metabolism during cardiopulmonary bypass I. The
adequately perfused beating, ﬁbrillating, and arrested
heart. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg1977;73:89, with
permission.)
consumes per minute for a given functional state.
For the beating empty heart, oxygen consump-
tion per beat increases as temperature decreases
due to the positive inotropic effect of hypother-
mia on the myocardium. However, this increase in
oxygen consumption per beat is overshadowed by
the larger relative decrease in heart rate induced
by cold, such that oxygen consumption per minute
falls.
• Functional status. The functional status of the
myocardium whether beating and empty, ﬁbril-
lating, or arrested plays an important role in
determining myocardial oxygen consumption (see
Fig. 10.12). Below 37 ◦C, the heart consumes less
oxygen ﬁbrillating than it does beating and empty.
Recall, however, that subendocardial perfusion
is compromised by ﬁbrillation due to increased
wall tension. Subendocardial perfusion will be fur-
ther compromised in the un-vented ﬁbrillating,
heart.
Renal function
Normally, renal blood ﬂow is autoregulated
between renal artery pressures of 80 and 180 mmHg.
Despite this, systemic ﬂows as low as
1.6–1.8 L/m2/min and sustained MAP as low as
50 mmHg during hypothermic, hemodiluted, non-
pulsatile CPB do not result in a deterioration of
post-CPB renal function. In addition, pH manage-
ment, pulsatile versus nonpulsatile ﬂow, and CPB
temperature do not inﬂuence renal function dur-
ing or after CPB. The quantity of urine output on
CPB is not a reliable predictor of post-CPB renal
dysfunction. The presence of preexisting renal dys-
function, post-CPB ventricular dysfunction and low
cardiac output, use of intra-aortic balloon pump
(IABP), emergency operative procedures, DHCA,
prolonged CPB time, valve surgery, diabetes mel-
litus, and advanced age have all been identiﬁed as
independent predictors of post-CPB renal dysfunc-
tion and acute renal failure. In fact, the presence of
post-CPB ventricular dysfunction and low cardiac
output is a major risk factor in the development of
post-CPB renal dysfunction and failure.
Generally, a urine output of 1 mL/kg/h is con-
sidered adequate while on CPB. Although urine
output on CPB has not consistently been correlatedAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch10” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 351 — #29
Managementof Cardiopulmonary Bypass 351
with post-CPB renal function, oliguria (urine output
<0.5 mL/kg/h) mustbe considered a harbinger of
renal hypoperfusion and ischemia.
Recommendations for
conduct of CPB
Lower limits of MAP
The safe lower limits of MAP on CPB must be
determined with all organ systems in mind. If the
aortic cross-clamp is applied within 1–2 minutes
after the start of CPB, a MAP greater than 30 mmHg
with a pump ﬂow of 2.0–2.4 L/min/m 2 is accept-
able for patients without cerebrovascular disease.
For patients with known cerebrovascular disease,
a MAP in excess of 50 mmHg may be more pru-
dent. If there is a delay in placing the aortic cross-
clamp, then attention should be directed toward
optimal perfusion of the myocardium. A MAP of
atleast50 mmHg should be maint ained for per-
fusion of the beating, empty heart. If ventricular
ﬁbrillation develops and is likely to persist for more
than a few minutes, then MAP must be elevated
t o atleast60–80 mmHg t o ensure subendocar-
dial perfusion. Likewise, if ventricular ﬁbrillation
is likely to persist, myocardial temperature should
be decreased to reduce oxygen consumption and
improve perfusion by lowering wall tension. A vent
mustbe placed if leftvent ricular dist ension occurs.
If coronary stenosis or ventricular hypertrophy also
exists, MAP must be elevated to 80–100 mmHg
and the cross-clamp should be applied as soon as
possible.
If high pump ﬂows are needed to maintain the
desired MAP, the maximal ﬂow capacity of the oxy-
genator may be exceeded. If this is likely, then SVR
can be increased and pump ﬂow can be decreased
to maintain MAP. SVR can be increased by transfu-
sion of blood into the venous reservoir to increase
viscosity. Generally, this strategy is reserved for
those instances in which the Hct is less than 20%.
SVR can also be increased by increasing arterio-
lar tone. The simplest way to accomplish this is by
infusing an α-agonistsuch as phenylephrine int o
the pump. As a rule, as CPB progresses, arteriolar
tone will increase and the phenylephrine can be
stopped.
Upper limits of MAP
Generally, a mean arterial blood pressure less than
70 mmHg is maintained to remain within the limits
of cerebral autoregulation and to reduce noncoro-
nary collateral blood ﬂow after the aortic cross-
clamp has been applied. Because the noncoronary
collaterals originate from the mediastinum and peri-
cardium, the blood they deliver to the heart will be
at the same temperature as the patient (25–30◦C).
While the aortic cross-clamp is in place and the
heart is arrested with cardioplegia, optimal myocar-
dial temperature is usually between 8◦C and 15◦C.
Excessive noncoronary collateral ﬂow will cause
the heart to rewarm and compromise myocardial
preservation. Excessive noncoronary collateral ﬂow
also will compromise surgical exposure by causing
bleeding from the incised coronary artery. There are
several strategies available to reduce MAP and each
has its own advantages and disadvantages:
• Reduction of pump ﬂow is useful as a temporizing
maneuver, buta prolonged reduct ion may resultin
systemic and cerebral hypoperfusion.
• Sodium nitroprusside is a very effective arterio-
lar dilator and thus very useful in reducing SVR.
It is easily titratable, has no negative inotropic
propert ies, and has a shorthalf-life. Ithas, how-
ever, been implicated in causing reversible platelet
dysfunction. Nitroglycerin does not cause platelet
dysfunction, is easily titratable, and has a short half-
life and no negative inotropic properties but is much
less effective than nitroprusside. This decreased
effectiveness is because nitroglycerin is primarily
a venodilator and actively adheres to the plastic
components of the CPB circuit.
• Volatile anesthetic agents such as sevoﬂurane,
desﬂurane, and isoﬂurane are very effective, easily
titratable arteriolar dilators. The vaporizer must be
spliced into the fresh gas ﬂow line of the oxygena-
tor. Caution must be exercised when CPB vaporizers
are ﬁlled with inhalation agent because the plas-
tic components of the oxygenator may crack if
agent is accidentally spilled on them. During CPB
with a membrane oxygenator, inhalational anes-
thetic agents are completely eliminated from the
circulation 10–15 minutes after they are discontin-
ued. Nonetheless, it is prudent to discontinue these
agents before removal of the aortic cross-clamp toAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch10” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 352 — #30
352 Chapter 10
allow adequate time for their elimination before
coronary blood ﬂow resumes if there is a concern.
Urine output
A urine out putof atleast1.0 mL/kg/min is desir-
able on CPB. Urine output should be assessed
every 15 minutes while on CPB. If urine out-
putfalls below 0.1 mL/kg/15 min (0.5 mL/kg/h),
action is necessary. Aortic perfusion pressure should
be increased to at least 50 mmHg. If this fails to
increase urine output or if aortic perfusion pressure
is already optimized consideration should be given
to improving hematocrit to at least 25%. Induc-
tion of diuresis with furosemide 0.5–1.0 mg/kg or
mannitol 0.5–1.0 g/kg is of no proven utility but
can be considered in circumstances where exten-
sive use of cardiotomy suction leads to hemolysis
and hemoglobinuria. In this circumstance alkaliza-
tion of the urine with sodium bicarbonate should
also be considered. Prophylactic administration of
dopamine or fenoldopam during CPB is of no
proven beneﬁtin improving renal funct ion during
or after CPB.
Monitoring of anticoagulation
Maintenance of anticoagulation must continue on
CPB. The ant icoagulanteffectof UFH is prolonged
by the presence of hemodilution, the anticoagulant
effect of hypothermia, and the prolonged half-life
of UFH associated with hypothermia. Nonetheless,
the anticoagulation status of the patient should be
monitored at least every 30 minutes with an ACT.
More frequentACT assessmentis necessary dur-
ing periods of cooling and rewarming. Care must
be taken to ensure adequate anticoagulation during
rewarming.
Preparation for termination
of CPB
It is essential that an organized approach be taken
to preparing for the termination of CPB so that a
smooth transition is ensured. The anesthesiologist
has a number of responsibilities as outlined below.
Ensure rewarming
After induced systemic hypothermia, it is neces-
sary to ensure that adequate core rewarming has
occurred before termination of CPB. The perfu-
sionist will assume responsibility for using the heat
exchanger to rewarm the patient when instructed
to do so by the surgeon. Generally, rewarming
will take place for 30–60 minutes before termi-
nation of CPB, depending on the degree of the
hypothermic state and its length. As with cooling,
the site of temperature measurement is impor-
tant in assessing homogeneous core rewarming.
Equilibration of the bladder or rectal temperature
and the nasopharyngeal temperature at 36–37◦Ci s
desired.
The rate of rewarming is important, as increased
cerebral oxygen extraction has been noted in adults
during rapid rewarming. In the setting of constant
cerebral oxygen delivery this increase in oxygen
extraction results in a wider cerebral AV O2 satu-
ration difference (a lower jugular venous oxygen
saturation). This increase in cerebral oxygen extrac-
tion during rewarming is associated with sub-
sequent cognitive defects, particularly in elderly
patients. Better cognitive outcome is achieved fol-
lowing coronary artery bypass surgery in adults
when slow rewarming (2 ◦C difference between
nasopharyngeal and CPB perfusate temperature) is
compared to more standard rewarming (4–6◦C dif-
ference between nasopharyngeal and CPB perfusate
temperature).
Enthusiasm for homogenous somatic rewarming
should also be tempered by the fact that brain tem-
perature continues to increase for at least 6 hours
following CPB procedures. Postoperatively, actual
brain temperature is underestimated by esophageal,
tympanic and rectal temperatures and may rise to
levels that exacerbate neuronal injury. The maxi-
mum postoperative temperature as measured by a
PA catheter in the ﬁrst 24 hours is weakly associated
with a greater amount of cognitive dysfunction after
cardiac surgery in adults.
Despite homogeneous core rewarming, it is not
uncommon for the patient’s core temperature to
drop 2–3◦C in the hour after termination of CPB.
This is due to reperfusion of the cold extrem-
ities, which results in a re-equilibration of the
patient’s temperature at a lower core temperature.
The greater the difference between the nasopharyn-
geal and the rectal or urinary bladder temperatureAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch10” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 353 — #31
Managementof Cardiopulmonary Bypass 353
when CPB is terminated, the greater will be the
expected temperature afterdrop. This temperature
afterdrop may result in arterial vasoconstriction and
shivering, which will increase myocardial oxygen
consumption. Infusing sodium nitroprusside or pro-
viding vasodilatation with an inhalational anes-
thetic while maintaining MAP greater than or equal
to 50–70 mmHg by increasing pump ﬂow has been
advocated as a method of decreasing afterdrop. This
method allows the poorly perfused cold extremities
to be perfused with warmed blood before termina-
tion of CPB. Therefore, the caloric load of peripheral
rewarming is in large partassumed by t he heat
exchanger and not the patient. Warmed, humidiﬁed
airway gases have notbeen found t o be beneﬁcial
in decreasing afterdrop in adults because humidi-
ﬁers contribute relatively little heat to the large heat
deﬁcit that exists at the termination of CPB. The use
of heat exchange systems utilizing circulating water
in pads in direct contact with the have been found
to be beneﬁcial in preventing afterdrop in adults,
infants, and children. In infants and children, con-
vection systems utilizing forced warm air are useful
as well due to the larger surface-area-to-volume
ratio in these patients.
Ensure adequate anesthesia and
muscle relaxation
Awareness is unlikely to exist during systemic
hypothermia but may occur during rewarming.
Unfortunately, this has not been well studied.
Appropriate care dictates that some provision
for amnesia be made as rewarming occurs.
Volatile anesthetic agents may be continued dur-
ing this interval to assure amnesia. A benzo-
diazepine such as midazolam 0.05–0.15 mg/kg,
or lorazepam 0.025–0.05 mg/kg, administered as
rewarming commences, can be used. Alternatively,
a propofol infusion can be initiated. A muscle relax-
ant should be titrated to ensure adequate relax-
ation as the hypothermic attenuation of mechanical
muscle function is reversed.
Perform an air drill
After procedures in which the heart chambers are
opened, or in closed procedures in which air may
have ent ered a heartchamber, itis necessary t o
evacuate all intracardiac air before termination of
CPB to avoid systemic air embolism. In some cen-
ters, the surgeon ﬂoods the ﬁeld with carbon dioxide
during open procedures to reduce entrainment of
air. Itis feltt hatt he higher solubilit y of carbon
dioxide in blood and tissue (25 times > air) may
reduce the risk of air embolic mediated neurologic
events.
TEE is invaluable during deairing as itallows t he
effectiveness of the previously described procedures
to be monitored on line. Air is particularly likely
to be retained in the LV apex, LA, right coronary
sinus, and the pulmonary veins. The right upper
pulmonary veins in particular tend to entrain air
given their more vertical entry into the LA. Removal
of retained air requires ﬂow through the pulmonary
circulation and the heart. TEE surveillance, com-
bined with the joint efforts of the surgeon, anesthe-
siologist, and perfusionist, are necessary to prevent
systemic air emboli during evacuation procedures.
Ejected air will tend to track along the anterior
aspect of the aorta (air rises). The ﬁrst manifes-
tation of small amounts of ejected air may be ST
segments elevations in the territory of the anterior
rightcoronary art ery (leads II, II, aVF). In the cases
of anteriorly placed coronary artery bypass grafts the
distribution will tend to be more global.
To remove detected air, the following steps are
useful:
• The patient is placed in the head-down position.
• The lungs are ventilated and the table is rolled
from side to side to help remove sequestered air
from the pulmonary veins.
• With the open atrium under a pool of blood,
the venous line is partially clamped and the lungs
are ventilated so that the ventricle becomes ﬁlled
with blood. The ventricle is then freed of air either
by aspiration on a vent line or by apical needle
aspiration while the heart is elevated and massaged.
• The atriotomy or vent insertion site is closed
under a pool of blood or ﬂuid.
• The proximal aorta is evacuated of air either
through the cardioplegia cannula or through a
needle placed in the aorta.
• The aortic cross-clamp is not removed until the
heart and aorta are free of air so that no air is ejected
systemically.Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch10” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 354 — #32
354 Chapter 10
• The LV may be vented directly through the apex
with an 18-gauge needle by the surgeon. After
venting, the puncture site is sutured closed.
Determine factors that may make
termination of CPB difﬁcult
Communication with the surgeon is essential here.
Itis bestt o know aboutt he possibilit y of residual
defects or incomplete revascularization before ter-
mination of CPB. Such information will affect the
management of the patient if termination of CPB
is difﬁcult or impossible. Factors that increase the
likelihood of a need for inotropic support to termi-
nate CPB include: poor preoperative systolic func-
tion, a history of congestive heart failure, pre- or
intraoperative inotropic support, poor myocardial
preservation, a long cross-clamp time, incomplete
revascularization, advanced age, female gender all
increase the likelihood that post-CPB inotropic
supportwill be needed.
Deﬁbrillation
After rewarming and removal of the aortic cross-
clamp, it may be necessary to deﬁbrillate the heart.
Several factors have been shown to be important
in determining the ease of deﬁbrillation after aortic
cross-clamp removal:
• A serum potassium level of approximately
5 mEq/L decreases the deﬁbrillation threshold
compared with levels approximately 0.5 mEq/L
lower. In many institutions where potassium
cardioplegia solution is used, serum potassium
levels are in the 5 mEq/L range at the time
of aortic cross-clamp removal. If deﬁbrillation is
unsuccessful in the presence of a low serum
potassium, infusion of potassium should be
considered.
• Aortic perfusion pressure and the duration of
reperfusion after aortic cross-clamp removal are
important. Recall that subendocardial perfusion is
compromised during ventricular ﬁbrillation on CPB.
A longer reperfusion period after aortic cross-clamp
removal allows for washout of the products of
anaerobic metabolism and for replenishment of
energy stores. For these reasons, a mean aortic
blood pressure of atleast50 mmHg for great er
than 5 minutes is likely to increase the success of
deﬁbrillation.
• Myocardial temperature at the time of deﬁbril-
lation should be greater than 30 ◦C. Recall that
spontaneous ﬁbrillation occurs at a myocardial
temperature of 28◦C.
• Patients with valvular heart disease are more
likely to need multiple deﬁbrillation attempts com-
pared with patients without valvular disease. This
does not appear to be due to the increased heart
weight and size often associated with valvular heart
disease.
• Lidocaine reduces the number and the energy
dose of DC shocks required for ventricular deﬁbril-
lation. Lidocaine 1 mg/kg is given 5 minutes before
aortic cross-clamp removal. Prophylactic lidocaine
infusions are unnecessary. Lidocaine infusions ini-
tiated after CPB in coronary artery bypass patients
have been shown to slightly decrease the incidence
of nonsustained ventricular tachycardia with no
apparentclinical beneﬁt . Infusions of lidocaine are
warranted for treatment of high grade ventricular
ectopy.
• Hypomagnesemia occurs in up to 70% of patients
after CPB and may predispose ventricular and
supraventricular tachyarrhythmias. As a result,
some centers supplement magnesium (2.0–4.0 g or
100 mg/kg in children) before or immediately after
termination of CPB.
After optimization of conditions as described
above, ventricular deﬁbrillation is accomplished by
the use of internal paddles. Much lower energy lev-
els are required than for transthoracic deﬁbrillation;
2.5–20.0 J or watt-seconds using internal paddles is
sufﬁcient to deﬁbrillate most hearts. Deﬁbrillation
energy is started at 2.5 J and increased in 2.5–5.0-J
increments. Inability to deﬁbrillate a heart of a
patient in whom conditions have been optimized
suggests ongoing myocardial ischemia from poor
revascularization or from coronary air or particu-
late emboli. Coronary air embolus is particularly
common in procedures in which the left heart
has been opened. When coronary air embolus is
suspected, efforts should be made to increase per-
fusion pressure to break up bubbles and move
them through to the venous side of the circula-
tion. Increasing MAP on CPB will increase coronaryAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch10” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 355 — #33
Managementof Cardiopulmonary Bypass 355
perfusion pressure. This in combination with nitro-
glycerine administration to dilate the epicardial
coronary arteries and phenylephrine administra-
tion to further elevate MAP may be helpful in this
situation.
Potassium and acid-base balance
Hypokalemia will compromise deﬁbrillation and
has been discussed. Hyperkalemia presents other
problems. As the serum potassium level climbs
greater than 5 mEq/L, the PR and QT intervals
shorten and the T waves become peaked. A serum
potassium level greater than 6 mEq/L will increase
the incidence of dysrhythmias and conduction
abnormalities due to a reduction in the threshold for
membrane depolarization. This may predispose the
patient to pacemaker-induced dysrhythmias. Pac-
ing may not be possible as the serum potassium
approaches 7 mEq/L. As levels reach 9–10 mEq/L
idioventricular rhythm progresses to ventricular
asystole and ﬁbrillation.
Immediate treatment of elevated serum potas-
sium with electrocardiogram (ECG) changes is
indicated. IV calcium chloride 10 mg/kg or cal-
cium gluconate 50 mg/kg, sodium bicarbonate
0.5–1.0 mEq/kg, or 1 mL/kg of 50% dextrose and
0.1 unit/kg of regular insulin all work immediately
to reduce serum potassium by shifting it intracel-
lularly. Where severe hyperkalemia exists, diuretic
therapy will be necessary to increase the excretion
of potassium as well. Alpha-stat pH management
should continue as the patient is warmed. Total car-
bon dioxide, Pa CO2, and pH should be corrected
if necessary before termination of CPB. It may be
necessary to give sodium bicarbonate to treat a
metabolic acidosis or to adjust oxygenator gas ﬂow
to correct PaCO2.
In patients with compromised renal function,
efforts must be made to avoid hyperkalemia result-
ing from use of potassium cardioplegia. It is possible
to scavenge the cardioplegic solution from the coro-
nary sinus so t hatitdoes notend up in t he pump and
elevate the serum potassium. In addition, it also is
possible to use cold crystalloid cardioplegia without
potassium in these patients. ZBUF may also be used
to reduce serum potassium prior to termination of
CPB in these patients.
Obtain pacing
After the aortic cross-clamp has been removed, the
heart has been deﬁbrillated, and potassium and
acid-base status has been corrected, it may be neces-
sary to obtain pacing. Although many patients will
be in sinus rhythm, slow rates may compromise
cardiac output, and therefore pacing is beneﬁcial.
In other patients, sinus rhythm is not immediately
present at CPB termination. Pacing is initiated with
use of epicardial pacing wires. Epicardial pacing can
be bipolar (two wires on the heart) or unipolar
(one wire on the heart, one through the skin of
the epigastric area). Atrial, ventricular, or atrial and
ventricular wires may be placed. Atrial wires usually
are placed at or near the RA appendage. Ventricular
wires are placed on the free wall of the RV. The wires
are brought out through the skin in the epigastric
area and can be removed easily postoperatively. By
convention, the atrial wires are brought out on the
right side of the epigastric area and the ventricular
wires are broughtouton t he leftside. The combi-
nation of atrial and ventricular wires allows atrial,
ventricular, or atrial ventricular sequential pacing
when used in combination with a dual output (atrial
and ventricular) sequential external pacemaker.
An additional set of leads placed on the LV
allows biventricular pacing. Pacing of the RV alone
produces septal wall dyskinesis and asynchronous
delayed activation of the LV. Biventricular pacing
improves septal wall motion and produces simul-
taneous activation of the right and left ventri-
cles. Biventricular pacing improves global systolic
function in patients with low ejection fraction.
Because electrocautery is used extensively in
the post-CPB period, the sensing threshold (milli-
volts) of the pacemaker may have to be increased
toward the nonsensing or asynchronous mode to
prevent inhibition of the pacemaker by electro-
cautery radiofrequency current. In general asyn-
chronous (nonsensing) pacing is used post-CPB to
avoid electromagnetic interference (EMI) from elec-
trocautery. If the SA node rate is slow and AV node
conduction is intact atrial pacing (AOO) should be
provided as activation of ventricular contraction
via the native conduction system provides opti-
mal ventricular synchrony. When both SA and AV
node dysfunction exist AV sequential pacing (DOO)Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch10” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 356 — #34
356 Chapter 10
will be necessary and the optimal AV interval to
provide AV synchrony will need to be determined.
Generally, an interval of 150 ms is chosen to start
in adults and then varied within the 120–200-ms
range as needed to optimize ventricular ﬁlling and
cardiac output. Infants will need a shorter PR inter-
val. At pacing rates of 150–170 b/min this interval
will likely be 100–120 ms in duration.
An alternative to DOO pacing when AV nodal
block or a very prolonged AV interval exists in the
presence of normal SA node function is DDD pac-
ing. This mode will allow tracking (sensing) of the
atrial rate with subsequent ventricular sensing and
pacing t o a setmaximum rat e atwhich pointt he
pacemaker will produce Wenchebach type block.
The disadvantage of this mode of pacing is that it
is susceptible to EMI interference.
The currentout put(milliamperes) of t he pace-
maker is increased slowly until the desired cardiac
chamber is captured. Each pacemaker spike must
result in appropriate atrial and/or ventricular cap-
ture and contraction. There also must be appropriate
sequential contraction of the atria and ventricles
when atrial ventricular sequential pacing is desired.
It is necessary to look at both the ECG trace and the
heart to ensure capture. After the minimum current
output necessary for capture has been determined
(usually 5–10 mA), the current output is increased
by 5 more milliamperes to ensure continued cap-
ture. In patients having undergone previous cardiac
surgery (redos), atrial and ventricular scarring may
necessitate higher current outputs than normal to
obtain capture. In some instances, capture may not
be possible until the epicardial pacer wire is moved
to a site with less scarring.
Arterial pressure and pump ﬂow
After the aortic cross-clamp has been removed, the
MAP should be maintained in the 60–80 mmHg
range to allow adequate reperfusion of the heart
to replenish adenosine 5-triphosphate (ATP) stores
and remove anaerobic metabolites. In preparation
for termination of CPB, it is best to accomplish this
by maintaining a calculated SVR in the range of
1000–1500 dynes s/cm5 and adjusting pump ﬂows
accordingly. SVR can be varied with the use of either
phenylephrine or nitroprusside as needed.
Hematocrit
Generally, a hematocrit greater than 25% is sought
as CPB terminates. Advance planning is needed to
achieve this goal. Reduction of the prime volume
may be needed for some patients, as described pre-
viously. Vigorous diuresis during CPB may resultin
hemoconcentration; likewise, the use of an ultra-
ﬁltration device during CPB will achieve the same
end. Transfusion of red blood cells may be neces-
sary if these methods fail or are not appropriate
due to low venous reservoir levels on CPB. Low
hematocrit levels ( <22%) as CPB terminates at
37◦C may resultin low SVR due t o decreased
viscosity.
Resume ventilation
Before terminating CPB, it is necessary to be cer-
tain that the lungs are easily reinﬂated, that if the
pleural cavity is not opened that no pneumothorax
exists, and that all ﬂuid is removed from open chest
cavities. Caution should be exercised when reinﬂat-
ing the lungs of patients with internal mammary
artery (IMA) grafts to avoid stretching or avulsing
the grafts. It also is necessary to resume ventilation
at minute ventilation that will prevent hypercarbia
after CPB terminates. Large increases in pulmonary
vascular resistance (PVR) are seen with small eleva-
tions in arterial carbon dioxide after cardiac surgery.
Such elevations in PVR may cause RV failure in
patients with compromised RV systolic function. It
should be remembered that carbon dioxide pro-
duction is likely to be higher at the termination of
CPB than it was before initiation of CPB due to the
differences in body temperature.
For infants and children, it may be desirable to
maintain mild hypercarbia in certain instances. In
patients undergoing systemic to PA shunt proce-
dures, pulmonary overperfusion (recirculation of
pulmonary venous blood into the pulmonary cir-
culation) may occur if the shunt is large and PVR
is low. Hypercarbia may provide protection from
overperfusion by increasing PVR. Conversely, high
pulmonary vascular resistance and high airway
pressures will compromise pulmonary blood ﬂow in
children having undergone the Fontan procedure
(total cavopulmonary connection) due to the low
driving pressure for pulmonary blood ﬂow.Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch10” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 357 — #35
Managementof Cardiopulmonary Bypass 357
Termination of CPB
Termination of CPB is accomplished after the heart
has been de-aired, ventilation has been resumed,
electrolyte (particularly calcium and potassium)
homeostasis has been achieved, and adequate
myocardial contractility, rate and rhythm have been
established. A coordinated effort between surgeon,
perfusionist, and anesthesiologist is then directed
toward allowing the heart to ﬁll and eject as venous
drainage into the CPB reservoir is reduced and
ﬁnally terminated.
Volume infusion following termination of CPB
is guided by both direct and TEE visualization of
heartsize and by analysis of int racardiac pressures
and systemic blood pressure. Because volume can
initially be delivered intravenously or via the arte-
rial cannula, communication between the surgeon,
anesthesiologist, and perfusionist is necessary. The
range of ﬁlling pressures expected to provide opti-
mal preload for a particular patient should be dis-
cussed before termination of CPB. Visual inspection
of the heart will provide information on distension
and wall mot ion butitmustbe remembered t hat
it is primarily the free wall of the RV that is visi-
ble through a median sternotomy. The functional
status of the RV is not necessarily the same as that
of the LV. TEE allows visualization of the LV.
The endpointof volume infusion is opt imiza-
tion of preload recruitable stroke work. If preload
recruitable stroke work exists then volume infusion
should induce an increase in blood pressure with
little or no elevation in ventricular end-diastolic
pressure as measured by atrial pressures. If further
infusion of volume results in an increase in heart
size and elevation of pulmonary artery occlusion
pressure (PAOP) or leftat rial pressure (LAP) and/or
right atrial pressure (RAP) with no increase in blood
pressure than it can be assumed that preload is
optimized. Further volume infusion at this point
will notimprove art erial blood pressure and will
likely distend the heart, elevate ventricular end-
diastolic pressure and wall stress, and compromise
subendocardial perfusion leading to a decrease in
arterial blood pressure.
If inotropic support is anticipated to be neces-
sary for termination of CPB, it should be started
5 minutes before termination of CPB. Starting the
infusion of inotropic agents too soon increases
myocardial oxygen consumption while the heart
is being reperfused on CPB. This compromises the
replenishmentof energy st ores and serves no useful
purpose.
CPB should be terminated at a pump ﬂow and
SVR that are reasonable for the patient. If the perfu-
sionistis pumping 5 L/min wit h a MAP of 50 mmHg,
then the patient will have to have a cardiac out-
put greater than 5 L/min to maintain a MAP of
70 mmHg after CPB has been terminated. If such an
output is an unreasonable expectation, then efforts
must be made to increase SVR to a normal range
before termination of CPB. This will allow termina-
tion of CPB at the desired MAP with a cardiac output
that the patient can realistically produce. Recall that
on CPB, SVR = (MAP × 80)/pump ﬂow, with the
normal range 1000–1500 dynes s/cm5.
CPB is terminated by gradually clamping the
venous line so that venous return to the reservoir
is impeded. Simultaneously, the perfusionist slows
the rate of the arterial pump head. This results in
gradual transfusion of blood to the patient via the
arterial cannula. The volume of blood in the venous
reservoir will slowly drop as the process continues.
When adequate preload is obtained as assessed by
PAOP, RAP, visual inspection of the heart, and TEE
the transfusion is terminated.
As the heart ﬁlls with blood, ejection is noted.
The simplest way to assess this is by observing
the arterial waveform. Elevation of ﬁlling pres-
sures with evidence of poor ejection is indicative
of contractility/afterload mismatch. There is either
poor systolic function or a level of afterload that
is excessive for the inotropic state of the heart.
If SVR has been normalized before termination of
CPB, efforts can be directed toward increasing the
contractile state of the heart with inotropes.
Administration of calcium salts at this time is
controversial. In some institutions, calcium chlo-
ride 5–10 mg/kg or calcium gluconate 25–50 mg/kg
is used as the ﬁrst intervention in this setting.
Calcium chloride increases the inotropic state of
the myocardium and induces an increase in SVR
that outlasts the inotropic effects. Often, this
intervention is all that is required to completeAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch10” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 358 — #36
358 Chapter 10
termination of CPB. There is evidence, however,
that calcium chloride administration is contraindi-
cated at this time because of the compromised
calcium homeostasis that accompanies the insult
of aortic cross-clamping. Administration of calcium
may exacerbate ischemic damage by causing accu-
mulation of intracellular calcium. Beta-adrenergic
agents, on the other hand, increase intracellular
calcium but also promote its reuptake into the sarco-
plasmic reticulum and may be more appropriate in
this setting.
Before therapy for low arterial pressure is ini-
tiated, the possibility that a discrepancy exists
between the intra-arterial radial arterial pressure
and the central aortic or femoral artery pressure
should be investigated. This can be determined by
simultaneous observation of the central aortic and
radial artery pressures and will prevent unnecessary
therapeutic interventions. Central aortic pressure
can be monitored easily by having the surgeon place
a small needle in the ascending aorta or aortic can-
nula attached to a length of pressure tubing that is
passed over the drapes to a transducer. After CPB,
intra-arterial radial arterial systolic pressure may
underestimate central aortic, brachial, or femoral
artery systolic pressure by as much as 40–50 mmHg
in a signiﬁcant number of both children and adults.
This effectis mostpronounced following periods
of DHCA. It has been demonstrated that the gra-
dient develops upon initiation of CPB and is not
affected by vasodilators or vasopressors. Because
this discrepancy may persist for up to 90 minutes
after the termination of CPB, it may be necessary
to place a femoral arterial line for continued mon-
itoring. The etiology of this discrepancy appears to
be a reduction in pulse wave velocity implying an
acute reduction in radial arterial elastance leading to
reduced pulsatility in the peripheral arteries. Both
arterial-to-venous shunting in forearm blood ves-
sels and peripheral vasospasm have been implicated
as well.
If the patient separates from CPB with high
ﬁlling pressures, ventricular distension, low car-
diac index (below 2 L/min/m 2), and low MAP
(under 40 mmHg), prolonged efforts to correct the
hemodynamics of CPB should notbe made. Rein-
stitution of CPB will prevent the downward spiral
induced by subendocardial ischemia and elevated
wall tension. In addition, it will allow reperfusion
of the heart during a low energy consumption state.
After CPB has been reinstituted several questions
mustbe addressed:
• Was the ventricular failure biventricular or was
only one ventricle involved?
• Was there PA hypertension and RV failure?
• Was there RV or LV ischemia?
• Is the prosthetic valve working properly?
• Is all of the monitoring equipment functioning
properly and giving accurate information?
• Are there other unsuspected lesions such as pre-
viously clinically insigniﬁcant mitral regurgitation
(MR)?
• Is the repair of the congenital lesion complete and
successful? Is there a residual defect that requires
repair?
• Is the heart rate and rhythm optimized?
• Is the appropriate type of pacing being per-
formed and is the pacemaker capturing the desired
chambers?
Having addressed these questions, therapy directed
toward speciﬁc problems can be instituted, and
another attempt can be made to terminate CPB.
Post-CPB management
After termination of CPB, it is necessary to stabilize
the patient and to reverse heparinization to allow
decannulation and chest closure.
Protamine administration
Protamine is a polyvalent cation derived from
salmon sperm that is currently used to neutral-
ize systemic UFH. Protamine is given after stable
hemodynamics are maintained after termination of
CPB. It should not be administered until the likeli-
hood that having to reinstitute CPB is small. After
protamine neutralization of UFH begins, the car-
diotomy suction should not be used and removal
of the arterial and venous cannulas should proceed.
This prevents contamination of the heparinized CPB
circuit with protamine should prompt reinstitu-
tion of CPB be necessary and prevents thrombus
formation on the cannulas.Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch10” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 359 — #37
Managementof Cardiopulmonary Bypass 359
There are several approaches to the neutralization
of UFH with protamine:
• Reverse extrapolation. Some centers use 1.0 mg of
protamine for each 100 USP units of UFH deter-
mined to exist at the termination of CPB. This ratio
is based on the in vitro protamine to UFH neutral-
ization ratio of 1:1. Some institutions believe this
ratio to be more like 1.3:1.0. An ACT is obtained
when CPB terminates and reverse extrapolation of
the patient’s UFH dose response curve is used to
correlate the ACT with the amount of UFH present.
This method has been criticized because the ACT
obtained at the termination of CPB is prolonged
by factors other than UFH, such as CPB-induced
platelet dysfunction and hemodilution. This may
result in an overestimation of the UFH present at
the termination of CPB and a larger than necessary
protamine dose.
• Empiric dosing. Some centers simply administer
a ﬁxed dose. This method does not rely on any
post -CPB assessmentof residual UFH effectsuch as
ACT to determine the protamine dose. Nonethe-
less, these methods have been shown to result in
adequate UFH reversal. In the case of the ﬁxed
dose regimen, UFH reversal is obtained at much
lower protamine doses than predicted by the reverse
extrapolation method. The dose of protamine is
based on either the patient’s weight (3–4 mg/kg)
regardless of the UFH dose, or 1.0 mg of protamine
for each 100 USP units of UFH administered at the
onsetof CPB.
• Anti-factor Xa assay.This UFH assay is used to cal-
culate the protamine dose based on the patient’s
blood volume and a neutralization ratio of 1:1.
Despit e t he factt hatnotall UFH presentin blood
exerts an anticoagulant effect and need be neu-
tralized, this method has been shown to provide
adequate UFH reversal with low doses of protamine.
• In vitro protamine titration. This method requires
ACT tubes (celite or kaolin) containing protamine.
Assuming a protamine to heparin neutralization
ratio of 1:1 this method allows determination of
the whole blood heparin level. Typically the results
of this test are used in combination with an
estimate of the patient’s blood volume to deter-
mine the appropriate protamine dose to neutralize
circulating UFH.
Both the protamine response test (PRT,
Hemochron®) and the heparin/protamine titration
test (HPT, Medtronic Hemotec ®) provide in vitro
protamine titration. The HPT method measures clot-
ting times enhanced by addition of thromboplastin
in several channels that contain varying quantities
of protamine. The ﬁrst channel to clot is the chan-
nel in which the protamine to heparin ratio is closest
to neutralization. The absolute clotting time is not
important; only the determination of the channel
with the appropriate ratio. Therefore, the determi-
nation should be independent of non-UFH factors
that prolong the ACT. This method results in ade-
quate UFH reversal at lower doses of protamine than
predicted by the reverse extrapolation using only a
post-CPB ACT.
The PRT uses two channels. One channel is the
native ACT (post-CPB) the other channel is an ACT
(post-CPB) with either 20 or 40 µg of added pro-
tamine. The results of the clotting times in these
two tubes are used to construct a linear protamine
dose–response relationship extrapolated back to a
baseline (pre-CPB) ACT. In combination with an
estimate of the patient’s blood volume the neutral-
izing dose of protamine can be determined with
reverse extrapolation. This determination will not
be independent of non-UFH factors that prolong
the ACT.
The ACT should be checked after administra-
tion of the selected protamine dose. The goal is to
return the ACT to a normal value. Excess pro-
tamine is clearly detrimental to platelet function
by nature of its inhibitory effects on the platelet
receptor GPIb/IX/V interaction with vWF that is a
critical component of platelet adhesion and aggre-
gation. Administration of additional protamine is
not benign and tends to delay detection and treat-
ment of thrombocytopenia, platelet dysfunction,
and coagulation factor deﬁciencies.
There are several potential adverse reactions asso-
ciated with protamine administration. These pro-
tamine reactions occur in both children and adults.
The incidence of protamine reactions in children
following cardiac surgery is lower than in adults
(approximately 10%); on the order of 1.76–2.88%
depending on the stringency of criteria linking the
episode to protamine administration. Risk factorsAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch10” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 360 — #38
360 Chapter 10
for these reactions (NPH insulin use, previous drug
reaction, or an allergy to protamine or ﬁsh) may
exist in up to 40% of cardiac surgical patients.
Reactions to protamine (deﬁned as arterial
hypotension, pulmonary hypertension, or both) are
associated with increased mortality following coro-
nary artery bypass surgery. It is unclear whether
intervention to treat these events reduces mortality
or whether there is a cause and effect relationship
between the hemodynamic events and mortality.
It is possible that the hemodynamic events are a
surrogate marker for the ultimate cause such as an
enhanced pro-inﬂammatory response.
The reactions associated with protamine
administration are described in the sections that
follow.
Systemichypotension
This is the most common reaction to pro-
tamine administration and it is more common
in patients with poor ventricular function. The
decrease in systemic blood pressure is multifactorial.
A decrease in SVR mediated via a nitric oxide/cyclic
guanosine monophosphate (NO/cGMP) depen-
dent and endothelial-mediated mechanism has
been implicated, as has pulmonary histamine
release. Protamine-induced platelet aggregation
and release of vasoactive substances also may
produce systemic hypotension, particularly when
platelet concentrates are infused in association
with protamine. Protamine induced reduction in
myocardial contractility has also been implicated.
The incidence of this reaction appears to be
related to the speed of infusion. Regardless of
the infusion site (right atrium, LA, aorta, periph-
eral vein) this reaction can be avoided or at least
decreased in severity when a slow infusion (over
more than 3 minutes) of protamine is used. Some
centers advocate prophylactic administration of cal-
cium chloride/gluconate or H1 and H2 blockers to
attenuate this reaction. These interventions are of
unproven beneﬁt.
Pulmonaryhypertension
Pulmonary hypertension after protamine may be
so profound as to result in RV failure and circu-
latory collapse. This reaction is idiosyncratic and
is associated with high levels of thromboxanes
and C5a anaphylatoxins, which result in broncho-
constriction and pulmonary vasoconstriction in sus-
ceptible patients after protamine administration.
Heparin-protamine complexes are the likely ini-
tiating mechanism. This reaction seems to occur
in susceptible patients regardless of whether the
protamine is infused into the right or LA, admin-
istered as a bolus, or given as a slow infusion.
Patients with pre-existing pulmonary hyperten-
sion are not at greater risk for this reaction.
Fortunately, this reaction is rare, occurring in less
than 3% of cases. Pulmonary hypertensive episodes
in children following protamine administration are
very rare.
Trueallergic(anaphylacticand
anaphylactoid)reactions
True allergic reactions require the presence of
immunoglobulin E (IgE) or immunoglobulin G
(IgG) antibodies to the substance in question. Typ-
ical manifestations of this type of reaction include
hypotension, ﬂushing, urticaria, bronchospasm,
and pulmonary edema secondary to capillary leak.
IgE-mediated reactions are the result of IgE-antigen
complex causing mastcells degranulat ion. IgG
mediated reactions are the result of activation of the
complement cascade by the IgG-antigen complex.
Formation of these antibodies is enhanced in
patients who have been exposed previously to the
allergen or to a substance that is similar to the aller-
gen. An increased incidence of protamine reactions
has been reported to occur in:
• Patients taking NPH insulin.These patients are pre-
sumed to be pre-sensitized to protamine from the
insulin preparation. An incidence of reactions as
high as 27% has been reported, but prospective
studies suggest an incidence of approximately 0.6%.
• Patients with ﬁsh (not shellﬁsh) allergies. These
patients are believed to be at higher risk due to sev-
eral case reports but prospective analysis does not
support this contention.
• Vasectomized men. IgG (antisperm) antibodies to
protamine are found in 29% of vasectomized men
but they are present in low titers and prospective
analysis does not support the contention that these
patients are at higher risk.Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch10” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 361 — #39
Managementof Cardiopulmonary Bypass 361
• Previous protamine reaction. These are the
highest risk patients.
The risk of an adverse response to protamine
is 25 times higher in patients with protamine-
speciﬁc IgG antibody and 95 times higher in patients
with protamine-speciﬁc IgE antibody. However, the
percentage of patients exposed to protamine or
protamine-like substances that go on to develop
IgG or IgE antibodies is low. Furthermore, not
all patients with IgG antibodies to protamine
develop reactions to protamine. Therefore, the
overall risk of true allergic reactions in patients
who were previously sensitized to protamine seems
to be low.
Efforts have been made to identify patients sus-
pected to be at risk for protamine may be tested
for IgE and IgG antibodies. Skin testing commonly
is used to test for IgE-mediated hypersensitiv-
ity. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs)
and radioallergosorbent tests (RASTs) are used to
detect minute quantities of circulating IgG and IgE
to an allergen. Both skin testing and ELISA in
patients at risk for protamine reactions have been
shown to have a high false-positive rate and poor
speciﬁcity. In other words, many patients with a
positive test for protamine antibodies do not go on
to develop a reaction. This severely limits the value
of this type of testing.
Noncardiogenicpulmonaryedema
This reaction has been reported to occur as both
an immediate and a delayed reaction (more than
20 minutes after administration) to protamine in a
small number of case report s. Itis notent irely clear
that protamine alone is responsible for this reaction,
as concomitant blood product administration also
has been implicated.
Heparinrebound
Heparin rebound may occur after protamine
administration. This phenomenon is deﬁned as a
re-prolongation of the ACT occurring 1–8 hours
after adequate UFH neutralization. The elevated
ACT renormalizes with additional protamine. Sev-
eral etiologies have been suggested. A large quantity
of UFH remains bound to plasma proteins for up to
6 hours after clinically adequate neutralization of
UFH with protamine. As protamine is cleared, the
protein-bound UFH dissociates slowly and binds
to AT-III to produce an anticoagulant effect. It is
not surprising, then, that the incidence of heparin
rebound is reduced when a heparinization proto-
col that uses lower UFH doses is compared with
one t hatuses higher doses. Concurrentprot amine
metabolism also may be a factor. Heparin rebound
also may be due to enhancement of residual UFH
by infusion of blood components such as FFP that
elevate AT-III levels.
Recommendations for protamine
administration
• Slow administration (25–50 mg/min) of the cho-
sen protamine dose into the right atrium via a
central venous catheter. The central venous route
is chosen over peripheral venous administration to
ensure that the drug reaches the central circulation
just as with UFH administration.
• If systemic hypotension due to a decrease in
SVR occurs, the protamine infusion should be
stopped. The SVR should be elevated with an
α-agonist(phenylephrine, norepinephrine) and
preload should be optimized with volume infusion.
The protamine infusion can then be restarted slowly
while SVR and preload are maintained.
• If pulmonary hypertension occurs, immediate
action is necessary. The protamine should be
stopped in an effort to reduce pulmonary vascu-
lar resistance while the circulation is supported.
Infusion of epinephrine may be necessary to pro-
vide inotropic support of the RV. If pulmonary
hypertension persists, infusion of nitroglycerin, or
prostaglandin E1 (started at 0.01–0.05 µg/kg/min)
into the right atrium will help reduce PVR and
improve RV function. Inhaled NO may be a bet-
ter alternative, as it will not exacerbate systemic
hypotension. In either case, simultaneous infusion
of norepinephrine into a left atrial catheter pro-
vides treatment for both elevated PVR and reduced
SVR. Protamine infusion may have to continue
with continued vasopressor vasodilator therapy. In
severe cases, reinstitution of CPB may be neces-
sary to provide cardiopulmonary support. Follow-
ing subsequent discontinuation of CPB protamine
administration may have to be avoided.Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch10” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 362 — #40
362 Chapter 10
• If an anaphylactic or anaphylactoid reaction
occurs in association with protamine administra-
tion, therapy with epinephrine, steroids, H2 blockers,
and bronchodilators is warranted.
• An ACT should be repeated after protamine infu-
sion. If the ACT remains elevated above normal
(120 ± 40), an additional 0.25–0.50 mg/kg of pro-
tamine can be administered and the ACT rechecked
(essentially in vivo protamine titration). No change
in the ACT will essentially eliminate excess
protamine as the source of ACT elevation.
Alternatively, a heparinase ACT test can be
performed. Two-chamber cartridges are available
(Medtronic Hemotec ®). Both chambers contain
kaolin and calcium chloride. One chamber con-
tains highly puriﬁed heparinase capable of rapidly
neutralizing 6 USP unit/mL of UFH. A >10–15%
elevation of the native ACT relative to the hepari-
nase ACT is indicative of the need for additional
protamine regardless of the absolute ACT values as
follows:
a If the heparinase ACT is normal and the nonhep-
arinase ACT is within 10–15% of this value, then
the UFH has been neutralized and no additional
protamine is necessary.
b If the heparinase ACT is normal and the nonhep-
arinase ACT is elevated, then UFH is present and
more protamine is warranted.
c If both the heparinase ACT and the nonhepari-
nase ACT are elevated above normal and are within
10–15% of each other, the patient should be evalu-
ated for other causes of an elevated ACT besides UFH
such as factor deﬁciencies (intrinsic and common
pathway). No further protamine is necessary.
d If both the heparinase ACT and the nonhep-
arinase ACT are elevated above normal and the
nonheparinase ACT is elevated more than 10–15%
above the value of the heparinase ACT, the patient
has both UFH and other factors as a cause.
Additional protamine and evaluation for factor
deﬁciencies both are warranted.
In vitro protamine dose assay (PDAO,
Hemochron®) can be done as well. This test uses
a two-channel system in which one channel is
the native ACT and the other has 10 µg pro-
tamine added. Reverse extrapolation of the two
results back to a baseline ACT in combination with
the patient’s blood volume yields the supplemental
protamine dose. Administration of additional pro-
tamine is not benign and tends to delay detection
and treatment of thrombocytopenia, platelet dys-
function, and coagulation factor deﬁciencies by the
surgical team.
• If heparin rebound is suspected, the ACT should
be rechecked and use of the one of the methods
to detect residual UFH described above considered.
Additional protamine 0.25–0.50 mg/kg should then
be administered. This usually is adequate to treat
heparin rebound.
Causes of impaired hemostasis
following protamine administration
Hemostasis following termination of CPB and
protamine administration can be problematic for
a number of reasons.
Surgicalbleeding
The surgical ﬁeld mustbe assessed carefully for
bleeding sites. This inspection must include the cut
sternal edges, the harvest site of the mammary
artery, and the back of the heart. Many of the sur-
gical procedures involve long suture lines in vessels
with systemic pressures. In addition portions of the
suture line such as the posterior aortic wall may
be concealed making detection and control of the
bleeding site challenging.
Plateletfunctiondefects
In adults, this is the most common cause of bleed-
ing after CPB once heparin has been reversed and
surgical bleeding has been controlled. Platelet dys-
function may be secondary to CPB, particularly if
the CPB time >2 hours or to preoperative anti-
platelet therapy with aspirin, nonselective non-
steroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs (NSAID), platelet
GPIIb/IIIa-receptor antagonists, or ATP recep-
tor (P2Y 12) blockers (thienopyridines). Platelet
functional defects tend to compound hemostasis
problems from all other causes.
Transient defects in platelet plug formation and
aggregation are seen in all patients after CPB. Gen-
erally, platelet function returns to near normal
status 2–4 hours after CPB. This transient dysfunc-
tion is caused by platelet surface glycoprotein (GP)Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch10” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 363 — #41
Managementof Cardiopulmonary Bypass 363
receptors that are redistributed internally into
platelets during CPB. The presence of plasmin is
responsible for this inactivation or redistribution
of GP receptors. These GP receptors are essential
for platelet adhesion and aggregation. Tethering,
translocation and stable arrest of platelets lead-
ing to platelet adhesion and aggregation in arte-
rioles requires atleastfour plat eletGP recept ors
(GPVI, GPIb/IX/V, GPIa/IIa, GPIIb/IIIa) and three
ligands (von Willebrand factor (vWF), collagen,
ﬁbrinogen).
Platelet GPIIb/IIIa receptors are the ﬁnal common
pathway in platelet aggregation. They bind with
high afﬁnity to ﬁbrinogen and mediate platelet-
to-platelet aggregation via a ﬁbrinogen bridge.
The GPIIb/IIIa antagonists abciximab (Reopro ®),
eptiﬁbatide (Integrilin®) and tiroﬁban (Aggrastat®)
inhibit this aggregation irrespective of the platelet-
activating stimulus. These agents are commonly
used in patients who present for surgery following
percutaneous interventional coronary arterial pro-
cedures such as angioplasty and stent placement.
Both eptiﬁbatide and tiroﬁban bind competitively
and have short(2 hours) half-lives. As a resultt hey
generally do notcause bleeding problems. Abcix-
imab is a large monoclonal antibody that binds
irreversibly and sterically blocks the receptor for the
life of the platelet. Patients presenting for surgery
following administration of this agent within a
1–2 week time frame usually require aggressive
replacement of platelets following CPB.
Aspirin (acetylsalicylic acid) ingestion irreversibly
inhibits platelet cyclo-oxygenase 1 (COX-1) for the
10–15 day life span of the platelet. This results
in inhibition of platelet thromboxane A 2 produc-
tion. Thromboxane A 2 is potent vasoconstrictor
and stimulant for platelet activation and aggre-
gation. Preoperative aspirin ingestion has been
shown to increase blood loss after CPB by exac-
erbating CPB-induced platelet dysfunction. Addi-
tionally, 15–20% of patients who ingest aspirin
are hyper-responders, which further contributes to
platelet dysfunction. Nonselective NSAID have sim-
ilar effects to aspirin lastly only as long as signiﬁcant
blood levels are maintained.
Thienopyridines (clopidogrel, ticlopidine) are
agents that selectively and irreversibly block platelet
adenosine diphosphate (ADP) receptors P2Y 1 and
P2Y12. These receptors are responsible for ADP-
induced platelet activation and aggregation. Both
receptor pathways must be intact for normal platelet
responses to occur. P2Y 1 linked to the G q path-
way is responsible for platelet shape change and
transient aggregation triggered via an increase in
intracellular calcium. P2Y12 linked to the Gi path-
way is responsible for completion and ampliﬁcation
of the aggregation response via inhibition of adeny-
lyl cyclase. Clopidogrel is used almostexclusively as
ticlopidine use is associated with an unacceptable
incidence of neutropenia.
The anti-platelet effects of aspirin and clopido-
grel are synergistic. Ideally, aspirin and clopidogrel
would have to be discontinued for 10–15 days prior
to surgery for termination of their clinical effect.
There may reluctance to discontinue these med-
ications prior to surgery, as discontinuation has
been associated with acute coronary syndrome and
coronary stent thrombosis.
Desmopressin acetate (DDAVP) in a dose of
0.3 µg/kg increases levels of factor VIII and vWF.
Von Willebrand’s factor is known to mediate
platelet aggregation and adherence on thrombo-
genic surfaces. The increased levels of vWF that
resultfrom DDAVP infusion may be responsible
for improving platelet function post-CPB. Despite
this, DDAVP is not consistently effective in reducing
blood loss or homologous transfusion requirements
in pediatric and adult cardiac surgical patients when
given after CPB and protamine administration. Of
particular importance DDAVP is not consistently
been effective in the subset of adult CABG patients
taking preoperative aspirin.
Thromboelastography may be useful in identi-
fying patients who will beneﬁt from DDAVP after
CPB and protamine reversal of UFH. Patients with
an maximal amplitude (MA) < 50 mm indicative
of reduced platelet function demonstrate less blood
loss and a reduction in homologous transfusion
requirements after CABG surgery with DDAVP
compared with placebo.
DDAVP relaxes vascular smooth muscle and
should be administered slowly (over 20–30 minutes)
to avoid reductions in SVR with subsequent
hypotension.Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch10” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 364 — #42
364 Chapter 10
Thrombocytopenia
Platelet counts decrease during CPB, but generally
they do not fall below 100 000 in adults. In gen-
eral, the fall in platelet counts on CPB is slightly
greater than what would be expected with hemod-
ilution, with the difference being due to platelet
adherence to synthetic surfaces, platelet destruc-
tion, platelet sequestration in the lungs, and platelet
consumption in wounds. Because platelet func-
tion defects are so prevalent, thrombocytopenia,
when it does exist, is an important cause of altered
hemostasis.
In infants and children, platelet functional defects
induced by CPB are overshadowed by the presence
of CPB-induced dilutional thrombocytopenia. Dilu-
tional thrombocytopenia is a problem in neonates
and infants given the relatively large CPB pump
prime volumes and the absence of platelets in all
prime solutions except fresh, unrefrigerated whole
blood. Whole blood stored for more than 48 hours
using ACD or CPD at4◦C is devoid of platelets.
In centers where refrigerated whole blood
(<1 week old) is used to prime a 300 mL CPB cir-
cuit for infants and neonates (2–5 kg) there is a
50–80% immediate post-CPB reduction in preop-
erative platelet count. The largest reductions are
seen in the smallest patients undergoing the longest
procedures.
Prophylactic platelet transfusion after CPB is not
warranted; however, when there is post-CPB bleed-
ing unrelated to residual heparin or surgical bleed-
ing, platelets should always be administered as a
ﬁrst-line treatment. A unit of platelets contains
5.5 × 1010 platelets; 0.1 unit/kg generally will raise
t he plat eletcountby 50 000–80 000. In mostcases,
this will control the bleeding. For cases in which
other deﬁciencies exist, platelet therapy will prevent
platelet defects from compounding the problem.
Platelet transfusions of 0.5–1.0 unit/kg may be
necessary to normalize the post CPB platelet count
(250–600 K/µL) in neonates and infants. Thrombo-
cytopenia just prior to termination of CPB or
following protamine administration consistently
correlates with excessive postoperative blood loss
in children. Since platelets are suspended in FFP,
platelet transfusions in these patients also provide a
substantial FFP transfusion. The minimum volume
of FFP suspension for 1 unit of platelets is 20 mL
(concentrated platelets) while the usual volume
is 40 mL. Therefore, a 2-unitplat elett ransfusion
would provide a 4-kg patient with a 10–20 mL/kg
FFP transfusion.
Dilutionofclottingfactors
The extent to which dilution of coagulation factors is
present depends on the size of the patient, the extent
of pre-existing factor deﬁciencies, and the volume
and composition of the CPB pump prime.
In adults, factor levels rarely fall below the 30%
level, leaving the coagulation system intact. Like-
wise, the ﬁbrinogen level is reduced by dilution
during and after CPB but rarely falls below the
crit ical 100 mg/dL level. Itis notsurprising, t hen,
that the prophylactic administration of FFP has not
been shown to reduce bleeding after routine CPB
procedures in adult patients without preexisting
coagulopathies.
Dilution of coagulation factors in neonates and
infants is less likely if the CPB pump prime con-
sists of whole blood or reconstituted whole blood
(packed red blood cells and FFP). Dilution of coagu-
lation factors is particularly likely to occur when the
patient is polycythemic (reduced plasma volume).
Signiﬁcant dilution of coagulation factors is likely
if an asangeous colloid or crystalloid prime is used.
Dilution of coagulation factors and red cells can be
mitigated by use of conventional or MUF. Children
whose transfusion requirements in the immedi-
ate post-CPB period are met with whole blood
that is less than 48 hours old have total transfu-
sion requirements 85% less than those treated with
componentt herapy.
Cryoprecipitate may be indicated in some cir-
cumstances. Both hypoﬁbrinogenemia and reduced
factor XIII are correlated with postoperative
blood loss. Cryoprecipitate contains ﬁbrinogen,
factor VIII/vWF, and factor XIII. One unit of cryo-
precipitate (20–30 mL) contains 150 mg of ﬁbrino-
gen and 80–120 units of factor VIII/vWF. This
quantity of ﬁbrinogen is comparable to what
would be found in 75 mL of FFP. This quantity of
factor VIII/vWF is comparable to what would be
found in 80–120 mL of FFP. In small patients, where
volume constraints limit transfusion, cryoprecipitateAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch10” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 365 — #43
Managementof Cardiopulmonary Bypass 365
is a much more efﬁcientsource of ﬁbrinogen,
factor XIII and factor VIII/vWF. In children
cryoprecipitate 0.5–1.0 unit/kg is transfused for
bleeding that persists following normalization of
platelet count. In adults, cryoprecipitate is usually
transfused at 0.25–0.50 unit/kg.
Fibrinolysis
The continued generation of thrombin during CPB
despite heparinization is largely responsible for
induction of ongoing ﬁbrinolysis. Adjuvant therapy
to improve hemostasis post-CPB is directed toward
use of anti-ﬁbrinolytic agents. Sequential cleavage
of ﬁbrin by the serine protease plasmin is responsi-
ble for ﬁbrinolysis. Plasmin is the activated form of
plasminogen. Plasminogen contains 5-lysine bind-
ing domains or kringles that allow it to bind to
the lysine residues on partially lysed ﬁbrin. Fibrin
bound plasminogen is subsequently cleaved to plas-
min by tissue plasminogen activator (t-PA). t-PA
also contains lysine binding domains that allows
binding to ﬁbrin. Free t-PA is capable of convert-
ing ﬁbrin bound plasminogen to plasmin but t-PA
bound to ﬁbrin lysine residues stimulates activa-
tion of plasminogen to plasmin by two orders of
magnitude.
Antiﬁbrinolytic agents
Three antiﬁbrinolytic agents currently are in use.
Each improves hemostasis after CPB. Ideally, these
agents are administered before CPB and before
stimulation of the coagulation and ﬁbrinolytic pro-
cesses. The three agents epsilon ( ε)-aminocaproic
acid (EACA), tranexamic acid (TXA), and aprotinin
are summarized below.
Lysineanalogs
The lysine analogs TXA and EACA inhibitﬁbrinoly-
sis by: (i) binding to plasminogen thus rendering
it incapable of binding to the lysine residues on
ﬁbrin; and (ii) inhibiting the proteolytic action of
plasmin. The reduction in plasmin generation is
also beneﬁcial in that plasmin is a potent platelet
activator. Subsequent to plasmin induced platelet
activation the platelet adhesion molecule GPIb/IX/V
undergoes proteolysis or translocation away from
the platelet surface. TXA is 6–10 times more potent
than EACA.
Aprotinin
Aprotinin is naturally occurring (bovine lung)
59-amino-acid polypeptide that is a serine protease
inhibitor. Aprotinin is a potent inhibitor of ﬁbri-
nolysis and prevents plasmin activation of platelets
even at low doses. Plasma concentrations of apro-
tinin inhibit the action of plasmin and kallikrein
by reversible binding to the active serine sites of
these enzymes. Because aprotinin binds 30 times
more avidly to plasmin than kallikrein, a higher
plasma concentration of aprotinin is needed to
inhibitkallikrein as compared wit h plasmin. Con-
centrations of aprotinin high enough to inhibit
kallikrein are not maintained throughout CPB,
even when high doses are used. Therefore, inhi-
bition of the contact activation system probably
is not as important to the action of aprotinin as
inhibition of plasmin induced ﬁbrinolysis. Admin-
istration of aprotinin to patients undergoing CPB
results in reduced formation of ﬁbrin degradation
products, increased α-antiplasmin (an inhibitor of
plasmin) and plasminogen activator inhibitor activ-
ities, and decreased tissue plasminogen activator
release.
In addition to its effects on plasmin, aprotinin
has direct effects on platelets that serve to reduce
platelet activation. Thrombin, a serine protease,
is the main effector protease of the coagulation
cascade and arguably the most important phys-
iologic platelet agonist. It has now been estab-
lished that thrombin activation of platelets occurs
via G-protein coupled protease activated receptors
(PAR). Human platelets express PAR-1 and PAR-4.
PARs are essentially receptors that carry their own
tethered ligand. Thrombin recognizes and binds to
the NH2-terminal extracellular domain of PAR-1
and PAR-4. Subsequent proteolysis by thrombin
results in exposure of a new NH 2-terminus that
binds intramolecularly to the body of the recep-
tor producing transmembrane signaling. This PAR-1
ligand-receptor coupling mediates platelet activa-
tion at physiologic thrombin concentrations. Apro-
tinin blocks thrombin proteolysis of PAR-1 and
as a result prevents thrombin induced platelet
activation. Aprotinin does not however inhibit
platelet activation via epinephrine, ADP, or
collagen.Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch10” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 366 — #44
366 Chapter 10
Aprotinin is also capable of inhibiting monocyte
expression of TF induced by CPB. TF production
during CPB results in thrombin generation via the
TF-factor VIIa pathway. Aprotinin also counteracts
heparin-induced reduction of platelet contractile
force similar to that seen with protamine reversal
of heparin. Aprotinin also blunts the inﬂamma-
tory response induced by CPB and heart and lung
reperfusion in a manner similar to that of methyl-
prednisolone by inhibiting release of interleukins
and tumor necrosis factor.
Dosage and administration of
antiﬁbrinolytic agents
Prophylactic administration of these agents
(before commencementof CPB) is superior t o
administration following commencement of CPB.
ε-aminocaproicacid
This drug is typically given as 100–150 mg/kg IV
after induction and 10–15 mg/kg/h, usually for
5–6 hours. Higher doses (as much as 40 g) have been
used, butno dose-response dat a existt o support
them. A smaller loading dose with a higher infu-
sion rate may provide more stable plasma levels.
In adults an ε-aminocaproic acid (EACA) loading
infusion of 50 mg/kg given over 20 minutes and a
maintenance infusion of 25 mg/kg/h maintains a
constant therapeutic plasma concentration of EACA
(>130 µg/mL). In children ranging in age from
5 months to 4 years, and in weight from 7.2 to
18.9 kg, with CPB prime volumes of 650–850 mL,
a bolus of 75 mg/kg over 10 minutes, 75 mg/kg
in the CPB prime, and a continuous infusion
of 75 mg/kg/h following the bolus maintains the
same therapeutic plasma concentration. The drug
is renally concentrated and the infusion rate should
probably be decreased in accordance with creatinine
clearance.
Tranexamicacid
This drug can be given as a single bolus of
50–100 mg/kg IV following induction. More typ-
ically itis given as 10–20 mg/kg IV aft er induc-
tion and 1–2 mg/kg/h, usually for 5–6 hours.
A smaller loading dose with a higher infusion rate
may provide more stable plasma levels. In adults,
tranexamic acid (TXA) administered as a bolus dose
of 12.5 mg/kg over 30 minutes, 1 mg/kg in the CPB
prime, and a continuous infusion of 6.5 mg/kg/h
results in a constant therapeutic plasma concentra-
tion of 53µg/mL. Similarly, TXA administered as a
bolus dose of 30 mg/kg over 30 minutes, 2 mg/kg
in the CPB prime, and a continuous infusion of
16 mg/kg/h should resultin a const antt herapeu-
tic plasma concentration of 126 µg/mL. In chil-
dren undergoing re-operative procedures, TXA in
a dose of 100 mg/kg as a bolus over 30 minutes,
100 mg/kg in the CPB prime, and as a continuous
intra-operative infusion of 10 mg/kg/h is superior
to placebo in reducing blood loss, total transfusion
requirements and total donor unit exposure. The
drug is renally concentrated and the infusion rate
should be decreased in accordance with creatinine
clearance.
Aprotinin
Aprotinin is dosed in kallikrein inhibition units
(KIU). A KIU is deﬁned as the quantity of aprotinin
that produces 50% inhibition of 2 kallikrein units.
Aprotinin is packaged to contain 10 000 KIU/mL
that is equivalent to 1.4 mg/mL. Aprotinin is admin-
istered to adults on a ﬁxed dose protocol. The high
dose or Hammersmith regimen consists of:
• 2 million KIU (280 mg) as an IV loading dose over
30 minutes after induction.
• 500 000 KIU/h (70 mg/h) as an intraoperative
infusion.
• 2 million KIU (280 mg) in the pump prime.
Recent evidence suggests that dosing on a per
kilogram basis provides more consistent plasma
aprotinin levels than a ﬁxed dose regimen. In
infants and children dosing on a per kilogram basis
is more common. Given the discrepancy between
weightand body surface area (BSA) in infant s and
neonates and small children it has been suggested
that dosing on a per meter squared basis in this
patient population will produce more consistent
aprotinin concentrations and less likelihood of sub-
and supra-therapeutic aprotinin levels than dosing
on a per kilogram basis. In addition, more consistent
plasma levels are achieved if the CPB prime dose is
notbased on pat ientweightor BSA buton t he act ual
volume of the CPB circuit relative to either of theseAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch10” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 367 — #45
Managementof Cardiopulmonary Bypass 367
two variables. Nonetheless, two commonly used
aprotinin dosing regimens for infants and children
are as follows:
• 30 000 KIU/kg as bolus to the patient and added to
the CPB prime in addition to a continuous infusion
of 10 000 KIU/kg/kg.
• 1.7 × 106 KIU/m2 (240 mg/m2) as a bolus to
the patient and added to the CPB prime in addi-
tion to a continuous infusion of 4× 105 KIU/m2/h
(56 mg/m2/h).
The incidence of both mild and severe allergic
reactions to aprotinin following initial exposure
is similar in children and adults and is approxi-
mately 0.5–1.0%. The incidence of both mild and
severe allergic reactions on re-exposure in adults
and children is similar and is approximately 2.8%.
Up to 9% of the re-exposure reactions may be
fatal. The likelihood of a reaction on re-exposure is
increased if the re-exposure occurs within 6 months
of the initial exposure with 95% of all reported
re-exposure events occurring within 6 months of
initial exposure. Patients who are likely to have
previous exposure are those who have undergone
prior cardiac surgical procedures including chil-
dren undergoing staged procedures. In particular,
bridge to cardiac transplant patients are likely to
have prior exposure. A second exposure is likely at
the time of device explantation and cardiac trans-
plantation. Aprotinin use also has been extended
to noncardiac surgical procedures (orthopedics, ear,
nose and throat (ENT)) and previously was used for
treatment of pancreatitis.
Neither skin testing, nor antiaprotinin IgG nor IgE
antibody testing is speciﬁc enough to be clinically
useful for prediction of anaphylaxis on re-exposure.
Very high levels of antiaprotinin IgG antibodies may
help identify patients at risk. It is recommended that
a test dose of aprotinin 0.5 or 1.0 mL be adminis-
tered before both initial and subsequent adminis-
trations keeping in mind that test doses have been
reported to trigger acute reactions. If there is no
reaction after 10 minutes, the bolus dose can be
given. Pre-treatment with H1,H 2 antagonists and
corticosteroids prior to re-exposure has been rec-
ommended but this practice has not been critically
evaluated. In a patient with a history of prior expo-
sure is probably prudent to delaying injection of the
test dose until the surgeon is ready to commence
CPB so that circulatory support can be initiated
immediately in case of a reaction. In all patients,
aprotinin should not be added to the CPB pump
prime until it is certain that the patient has not
reacted to the test dose or bolus dose.
Efﬁcacy of antiﬁbrinolytics agents
There are many studies examining the efﬁcacy
of EACA, TXA, and aprotinin in reducing blood
loss and allogeneric transfusion requirements.
Most studies compare these agents to placebo,
but some head-to-head comparison studies exist.
Comparisons are complicated by the fact that not
all groups use comparable dosages of these agents.
In children, such determinations are more compli-
cated given the large variability in patient size, type
of operative procedure, age-related distribution and
elimination kinetics, CPB prime volume and the
use of ultraﬁltration. There are anecdotal reports of
adverse thrombotic events such as shunt thrombosis
and premature fenestration closure associated with
use of lysine analogs and aprotinin in children. To
date, there exists little objective evidence to accu-
rately quantify the risk of such events with use of
these agents.
Aprotinin
• Meta-analysis of trials of aprotinin compared to a
placebo control group in adults demonstrates that
high-dose aprotinin in effective in reducing the
number of patients who require transfusion fol-
lowing CABG, redo-CABG, CABG/valve, and valve
surgery. High-dose aprotinin also reduces the inci-
dence of postoperative re-exploration for bleeding
following surgery.
• High-dose aprotinin has been demonstrated to
reduce blood loss and transfusion requirements
in patients undergoing heart, heart-hung, and
lung transplantation. In addition, aprotinin reduces
blood loss and transfusion requirements in patients
receiving mechanical circulatory assist devices.
• High-dose aprotinin has been demonstrated
to reduce blood loss and transfusion require-
ments in patients taking perioperative aspirin.
Similar efﬁcacy of high-dose aprotinin has been
demonstrated in patients taking perioperative
clopidogrel discontinued <5 days prior to surgery.Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch10” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 368 — #46
368 Chapter 10
• High-dose aprotinin has been demonstrated to
reduce blood loss and transfusion requirements
in patients undergoing off-pump coronary artery
bypass (OBCAB).
• In children with congenital heart disease under-
going cardiac surgery, meta-analysis of appropriate
trials indicates that while aprotinin use reduces
the proportion of children of children receiving
allogeneric t ransfusions itdoes notreduce chest
tube drainage or the total volume of blood trans-
fused. This analysis is plagued by the limitation
that both intra-study and inter-study variability
in a number of parameters involving the patient
(age, weight, cyanotic versus noncyanotic, proce-
dure type, redo versus primary surgery), the CPB
circuit (prime volume and composition, ultraﬁltra-
tion use), the aprotinin dose (ﬁxed, per kg, per m2),
and the outcome variables (blood loss, transfu-
sion requirement, cost analysis) make comparisons
between studies difﬁcult.
Lysineanalogs
• Atcomparable doses, TXA and EACA have
comparable efﬁcacy.
• EACA and TXA are better than placebo in limiting
the number of patients transfused after CABG.
• TXA and EACA are comparable to high-dose
aprotinin in limiting the number of patients
transfused following CABG.
• High-dose aprotinin may be superior to TXA or
EACA in limiting transfusion following CABG/valve
surgery or redos. A recentpropensit y score analysis
suggests that TXA and aprotinin have comparable
efﬁcacy in this high-risk group.
• In pediatric patients undergoing primary and
repeatsurgery, TXA and EACA, as compared t o
placebo, reduce the number of patients being trans-
fused, total blood product exposure and blood loss
across a wide age range. A well-controlled trial com-
paring aprotinin to lysine analogs in children has
notbeen conduct ed.
Special considerations regarding
use of aprotinin
Activatedclottingtime
Kaolin ACT are used to measure Activated clotting
time (ACT) in conjunction with aprotinin use. Celite
ACT are prolonged in the presence of aprotinin due
to aprotinin inhibition of contact activation as well
as the ability of aprotinin to preferentially inhibit
celite mediated activation in vitro. Concern exists
as to whether this aprotinin induced in vitro pro-
longation is correlated within vivo anticoagulation.
Kaolin ACT is unaffected by aprotinin except at very
high plasma levels (400 KIU/mL) because kaolin is
a more potent contact activating agent than celite
and kaolin binds aprotinin. While adequate hep-
arinization for CPB has been demonstrated using
celite ACT in conjunction with a lower heparin
dose than would be used with a kaolin ACT, the
majority of centers use the kaolin ACT in conjunc-
tion with aprotinin. Therapeutic plasma levels of
aprotinin also prolong both the activated partial
thromboplastin time (aPTT) and the R of the throm-
boelastograph (TEG) but not the prothrombin time
(PT) as a resultof aprot inin’s effecton cont actact i-
vation. This makes use of these parameters difﬁcult
in post-CPB bleeding treatment algorithms.
Renalfunction
Aprotinin is ﬁltered; rapidly bound to the brush
border of the proximal convoluted tubules and sub-
sequently enters the cytoplasm of these tubules
by pinocytosis. Ninety percent of the administered
dose appears in the cytoplasm in a few hours and
remains there for 12–14 hours until metabolized.
Aprotinin compromises deep cortical and medullary
perfusion and autoregulation via its tubule based
effects on kallikrein–kinin pathways and via renal
afferent arteriolar vasoconstriction. These effects are
exacerbated by hypothermia.
High-dose aprotinin administration in adults
is associated with tubular proteinuria and tran-
sient(1–7 days) mild plasma creat inine eleva-
tions (0.5 mg/dL). Similar creatinine elevations
are seen with low-dose aprotinin (30 000 KIU/kg
in the pump prime) in pediatric cardiac surgi-
cal patients. The vast majority of data to date
indicates that aprotinin administration has min-
imal adverse clinical effecton renal funct ion.
However, recent investigations have associated
aprotinin use with an increased risk of renal dys-
function (creatinine increase) and renal failure
requiring dialysis. In addition, preoperative use of
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors inAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch10” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 369 — #47
Managementof Cardiopulmonary Bypass 369
combination with intraoperative aprotinin use is
associated with a higher incidence of acute renal
failure. With these issues in mind, aprotinin should
be used at a reduced dosage in patients with pre-
existing renal dysfunction and should not be admin-
istered to patients taking ACE inhibitors at the time
of surgery.
Coronaryarterybypassgraftpatency
Concerns that aprotinin use may contribute to
early graft occlusion or postoperative myocardial
infarction have not been substantiated.
Deephypothermiccirculatoryarrest
Concern has been raised regarding the use of apro-
tinin in association with Deep hypothermic circu-
latory arrest (DHCA) due to reports of increased
mortality, renal failure, myocardial infarction, dis-
seminated intravascular coagulation, and death.
Others report signiﬁcant reductions in homologous
blood requirements and a trend toward improved
outcome with aprotinin despite signiﬁcant, tran-
sientrenal dysfunct ion. Itis unlikely t hataprot inin
alone can be implicated in the development of renal
failure following DHCA. Previously itwas t hought
that aprotinin use was associated with thrombosis
in association with DHCA, however, this thrombo-
sis was due to a failure to appreciate the aprotinin
effect on celite ACT resulting in sub-therapeutic
heparinization. More recent reports of thrombosis
have occurred in the setting of adequate hepariniza-
tion emphasizing that use of aprotinin during DHCA
requires further elucidation.
Post-CPB bleeding and point of
care testing
Transfusion algorithms utilizing Post-CPB bleed-
ing and point of care testing (POCT) can reduce
transfusions following cardiac surgery in adults by
appropriately directing the use of nonerythrocyte
blood products to deal with speciﬁc coagulation
abnormalities. Two such protocols utilizing POCT
including TEG are provided in Fig. 10.13.
Itshould be emphasized t hatuse of t hese algo-
rithms are complicated by the use of aprotinin,
which prolongs the aPTT, the celite ACT (and to
a lesser extent the kaolin ACT), and the R of
the TEG.
Decannulation
Generally, the venous cannula is removed ﬁrst.
With the arterial cannula in place, urgent reinsti-
tution of CPB can be accomplished quickly. Hemo-
dynamic compromise due to atrial dysrhythmias
and volume loss may accompany removal of the
atrial cannula. As long as only a small portion of
the protamine has been infused, volume infusion
via the arterial cannula can be undertaken safely.
To avoid undue stress on the aortotomy and
to allow its easy closure, the aortic systolic blood
pressure should be 100–120 mmHg in adults.
Vasodilator therapy may be necessary to achieve
this goal.
Pericardial and chest closure
The pericardium is not routinely closed after all
cardiac surgical procedures. When a normal peri-
cardium, small ventricular volumes, and low ﬁll-
ing pressures exist, pericardial closure does not
affect left ventricular diastolic or systolic function.
For patients with distended ventricles, myocar-
dial edema, and poor systolic function after CPB,
pericardial closure may further compromise hemo-
dynamics secondary to extrinsic reduction in dias-
tolic ﬁlling. Chest closure may produce the same
effects. In patients with severe post-CPB ventricular
dysfunction, this compromise may prohibit peri-
cardial and/or chest closure despite initiation or
acceleration of inotropic and vasodilator therapy.
In these patients, the chest is left open and covered
with a piece of nonlatex rubber or an adhesive plas-
tic drape, with closure accomplished 2–3 days after
the procedure.
On occasion, one or both of the epicardial pacer
wires may shortoutand become nonfunct ional
when the chest is closed. Therefore, atrial and ven-
tricular epicardial pacing should be checked after
the sternal edges are allowed to fall together but
before chestclosure. If t he wires become nonfunc-
tional, it may be necessary for the surgeon to move
them to alternate sites on the atrium and ventricle
before chestclosure.Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch10” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 370 — #48
370 Chapter 10
Microvascular bleeding
by observation of
surgical field
Coagulation tests
performed
All
normal
Surgical
re-exploration
of chest
Fibrinogen
<144 mg/dL
Point-of-
care
aPTT > 57 s
Point-of-
care
PT >16.6 s
Thromb MA
< 48 mm
PLT
<102 K/mm3
and/orand/or
Platelet transfusion or
DDAVP administration
Fresh frozen plasma
transfusion
Cryoprecipitate
transfusion
Microvascular bleeding
Fibrinogen
Fibrinogen <100 mg/dLTEG LY30 < 7.5%hTEG R > 20 mmTEG R > 2X hTEG R
1. Protamine Platelets FFP EACA Cryoprecipitate2. 3. 4.
Platelet count < 100 K
and MA < 45 mm
Platelet count Celite TEG
with/without heparinase
Fig. 10.13 Two adult transfusion algorithms using
point-of-care testing to determine nonerythrocyte
transfusion requirements. aPTT, activated partial
thromboplastin time; EACA, ε-aminocaproic acid; FFP,
fresh frozen plasma; hTEG, heparinase
thromboelastograph; MA, TEG maximal amplitude;
LY30, TEG % lysis at 30 minutes; PT, prothrombin time;
R, TEG reaction time; TEG, thromboelastograph.
(From Shore-Lesserson L, Manspeizer HE, DePerio M
et al. Thromboelastography-guided transfusion algorithm
reduces transfusions in complex cardiac surgery.Anesth
Analg 1999;88:314 and Nuttall GA, Oliver WC,
Santrach PJ et al. Efﬁcacy of a simple intraoperative
transfusion algorithm for non-erythrocyte component
utilization after cardiopulmonary bypass.Anesthesiology
2001;94:775, with permission.)
Management of unusual
problems on CPB
For patients requiring CPB, there are several
condit ions t hatpresentdifﬁcultmanagement
problems.
Cold-reactive proteins
Cold-reactive proteins are proteins that, when
cooled below a speciﬁc temperature (their thermal
amplitude or critical temperature) precipitate or
cause red cell agglutination. The subsequent
microvascular occlusion can lead to cerebral and
myocardial ischemia and infarction as well as
hepatic and renal dysfunction. Subsequent hemo-
lysis also can complicate the picture. Patients with
these proteins present difﬁcult management prob-
lems for procedures in which systemic hypother-
mia and cold cardioplegic solutions are normally
used. Cold reactive proteins can be classiﬁedAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch10” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 371 — #49
Managementof Cardiopulmonary Bypass 371
as follows:
• Cold agglutinins (CA). These are monoclonal or
polyclonal immunoglobulin M (IgM) antibodies
directed against the I or i antigen of the red
cell membrane. These ant ibodies reactmostefﬁ-
ciently with red cells at low temperatures. The
result is agglutination of red cells, complement ﬁxa-
tion with subsequent microvascular occlusion, and
ischemia. Ant ibody binding occurs bestatlow t em-
peratures, whereas complement ﬁxation occurs best
at high temperatures. Hemolysis occurs in the ther-
mal range of 10–30 ◦C because this is the optimal
range of overlap between antibody binding and
complementﬁxat ion.
CA are more common in patients with infec-
tious or lymphoproliferative diseases as well as in
human immunodeﬁciency virus/acquired immun-
odeﬁciency syndrome (HIV/AIDS) patients. An
idiopathic form of CA disease also exists. The idio-
pathic form is more common in older patients and
women, and usually involves monoclonal IgM anti-
bodies to the I antigen of the red cell membrane. The
infectious forms such as Myoplasma pneumonia
tend to involve polyclonal IgM antibodies while the
lymphoproliferative disorders involve monoclonal
IgM antibodies. Normal persons have low titers
of anti-I antibodies that react at low temperatures
<20◦C) and are notclinically signiﬁcant .
Most cases involving cold-reactive proteins and
CPB are in patients with CA.
• Cryoglobulins. These are serum proteins or
protein complexes that undergo reversible precip-
itation at low temperatures. The result is multi-
organ ischemia and dysfunction from microvas-
cular occlusion. Type I cryoglobulins consistof
monoclonal IgG (multiple myeloma) or IgM
(Waldenstrom’s macroglobulinemia). Type II cryo-
globulins consists of monoclonal IgM directed
againstpolyclonal IgG and usually are associat ed
with autoimmune, infectious, and lymphoprolif-
erative disorders. Type III cryoglobulins consist of
polyclonal IgM directed against polyclonal IgG and
are associated with infections and autoimmune
diseases.
There is limited experience (three reported
cases) in patients with cryoglobulins undergoing
procedures requiring CPB.
• Paroxysmal cold hemoglobinuria. These IgG anti-
bodies are associated with syphilis, have a crit-
ical temperature below 20 ◦C, and are potent
hemolysins. There are no case reports of CPB in
patients with this disorder.
Recommendations for patients with CA
1 Detection of CA over clinically relevant temper-
atures can be accomplished at the time of cross-
matching by direct Coombs’ tests done at 4◦C, 25◦C,
and 37 ◦C. If this is positive, titers at the various
temperatures can be performed. This will give an
accurate but not precise determination of thermal
amplitude and titers preoperatively.
2 Systemic temperatures are kept above the ther-
mal amplitude of the CA. If DHCA is planned,
the thermal amplitude of the CA must be known
to determine whether temperatures <20◦C are
feasible.
3 Myocardial preservation can be accomplished as
follows:
a Cardioplegia can be avoided entirely and warm
ischemic arrestcan be used. This met hod is unac-
ceptable when long cross-clamp times are expected
or when preoperative myocardial dysfunction
exists.
b Warm crystalloid or blood cardioplegia can be
used, but the advantages of hypothermia in reduc-
ing myocardial oxygen consumption are lost. In
addition, frequent instillations of cardioplegia will
be needed to keep the heart arrested.
c Cold crystalloid cardioplegia can be used as in
normal circumstances. However, the temperature
of the cardioplegia (4–8 ◦C) generally is below the
critical temperature and will initiate autoaggluti-
nation. This may result in micovascular thrombus
formation and infarction, nonhomogenous delivery
of cardioplegia, and hemolysis.
d Delivery of warm cardioplegia followed by deliv-
ery of cold cardioplegia. The rightheartis com-
pletely isolated with the use of bicaval cannulation
and tourniquets. The right atrium is then opened
to allow visualization of the coronary sinus. Warm
crystalloid cardioplegia is infused until all of the
blood is washed outof t he coronaries. Cold crys-
talloid cardioplegia is then delivered. The pres-
ence of noncoronary collaterals may add bloodAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch10” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 372 — #50
372 Chapter 10
to the coronary circulation despite aortic cross-
clamping. Therefore, efforts must be made to reduce
noncoronary collateral ﬂow by keeping perfusion
pressures on CPB low as discussed previously.
e For patients who have CA detected preopera-
tively and in whom the thermal amplitude and titers
are high, plasmapheresis may be used to decrease
the cold agglutinin titer and increase the margin
of safety for use of hypothermia. Plasmapheresis
carries the risk of large volume shifts in patients
with limited cardiac reserve. Further, it is expen-
sive, carries an infectious risk, and is of uncertain
efﬁcacy.
f Efforts should be made to warm all IV ﬂuids.
g Efforts to avoid nonautologous transfusions
should be made because donor red cells will notbe
coated with C3d. C3d is a component of the com-
plement system, which coats some of the patient’s
red cells after an episode of agglutination and affords
some protection from subsequent agglutination and
lysis.
h Steroids may help prevent or mitigate the
agglutination and lysis process.
Sickle cell disease
Sickle cell disease (SCD) and sickle cell trait (SCT)
are heredity hemoglobinopathies resulting from a
mutant form of the β-globin gene on chromo-
some 11. This gene normally codes for the produc-
tion of theβ-globin chains of hemoglobin A (Hb A).
The mutant gene codes for production of Hb S.
SCD is present in patients who are homozygous for
hemoglobin S (Hb SS). SCT is present in patients
who are heterozygous for hemoglobin S (Hb AS).
Two other hemoglobinopathies exist which include
hemoglobin S: Hb SC and Hb S/ β-thalassemia.
Some patients with these two hemoglobinopathies
have disease manifestations as severe as Hb SS
patients.
Concern in these patients centers largely on the
use of hypothermic CPB. Hypothermia without the
beneﬁt of hemodilution can potentially increase
blood viscosity, reduce capillary perfusion, pro-
mote stasis, and thus increase the risk of sickling.
Furthermore, hypoxia and acidosis promote sick-
ling because sickling occurs when the red cell is
in the deoxygenated state. Preoperative therapy
focuses on:
• reducing Hb S (the substrate for sickling);
• increasing normal Hb A (the substrate for
oxygen-carrying capacity).
Experience suggests that a target of Hb S< 30%
and Hct > 30% is reasonable in high-risk (Hb SS,
Hb SC and Hb S/thalassemia) patients prior to ini-
tiation of hypothermic CPB. Transfusion alone is
usually sufﬁcientt o reach a t argetHctof 30%
and exchange transfusions are generally required to
reach both targets. Hb AS patients have been treated
with exchange transfusions prior to CPB proce-
dures, but recent experience with these patients
indicates that hypothermic CPB can be used with-
out prior exchange transfusions if hemodilution is
used and hypoxia and acidosis are avoided.
Heparin induced thrombocytopenia (HIT)
Heparin administration normally causes an immedi-
ate, transient, reversible reduction in platelet count
following due to induction of platelet aggrega-
tion. This is commonly referred to as Type I HIT.
HIT Type II (unfortunately, also commonly just
called HIT) is an immunological process involving
the development of anti-heparin platelet factor 4
(PF4) antibodies. Heparin binds with high afﬁn-
ity to PF4 and induces a conformational change
in PF4 exposing two or three epitopes capable of
binding primarily IgG butalso IgA and IgM ant i-
bodies. The IgG-heparin-PF4 complex then binds to
platelets via their Fc γRIIa receptors. Cross-linking
of the receptors leads to platelet activation and
release of PF4 from α-granules. Platelet bound PF4
on activated platelets complexes with heparin and
IgG binds to this complex via its Fab domain leav-
ing its Fc domain free to bind to and activate
an adjacentplat eletvia it s Fc γRIIa receptor. This
ampliﬁcation process leads to intense platelet acti-
vation and aggregation with subsequent production
of procoagulantmicropart icles.
HIT is a clinicopathologic syndrome generally
deﬁned as a ≥50% reduction in platelet count
and a positive assay for anti-heparin/PF4 antibodies
occurring between 5 and 10 days following expo-
sure to UFH. Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia
with thrombosis or skin lesions (HITT) is a severe
form of HIT with high morbidity and mortality.Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch10” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 373 — #51
Managementof Cardiopulmonary Bypass 373
Two types of assays (antigenic and functional/
biologic) are currently used for detection of anti-
heparin PF4 antibodies. ELISA capable of detecting
IgG, IgA, and IgM antibodies to PF4 are com-
mercially available. The mostcommonly ut ilized
functional assay is the 14C-serotonin release assay
(SRA). Washed donor platelets previously incu-
bated with 14C-serotonin are mixed with subject
plasma suspected to contain to anti-heparin PF4
antibodies. In vitro platelet activation is quanti-
tated by measurement of released 14C-serotonin.
As such this assay is capable of detecting only
titers of anti-heparin PF4 antibodies high enough
to induce platelet aggregation. This assay is techni-
cally demanding to perform and requires specially
designed equipment.
The incidence of anti-heparin PF4 antibody for-
mation in cardiac surgical patients prior to surgery
is approximately 13–19%, while the incidence fol-
lowing cardiac surgery is approximately 50% by
ELISA and 20% by SRA. In the absence of continued
exposure to UFH there should be clearance of anti-
heparin PF4 antibodies within 2–6 weeks. Clinical
HIT occurs in approximately 2% of patients follow-
ing cardiac surgery with about half of those patients
experiencing associated thrombosis.
In a patient suspected of having HIT prior to car-
diac surgery or in a patient with a previous history
of HIT scheduled for cardiac surgery the algorithm
presented in Fig. 10.14 is useful.
The best available strategies for anticoagulation
for CPB in patients with anti-heparin PF4 antibodies
can be summarized as follows:
• Direct thrombin inhibitors (DTI) without UFH . The
active-site pocket of thrombin catalyzes most of the
functions of thrombin while the ﬁbrinogen-binding
site (exosite 1) mediates binding of thrombin to
ﬁbrinogen. Exosite 2 is the heparin-binding site.
Hirudin is the most potent DTI known, isolated
from the salivary glands of the medicinal leech. It is
Positive Negative
YesNo
Avoid UFH before and after surgery
and
CPB anticoagulation with UFH
Alternative CPB anticoagulation
(see text)
Wait until anti-heparin PF4
antibody test is negative
(2–6 weeks)
Urgent surgery
Suspected HIT
OR
Previous history of HIT
Anti-heparin PF4 antibody testing
Fig. 10.14 Algorithm outlining care of patients with heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) or suspected HIT.
CPB, cardiopulmonary bypass; UFH, unfractionated heparin; PF4, platelet factor 4.Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch10” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 374 — #52
374 Chapter 10
a bivalent thrombin inhibitor as it binds to both pre-
viously described active sites. It binds to both soluble
and ﬁbrin bound thrombin. The clinically available
direct thrombin inhibitors used in place of UFH for
CPB are:
a Lepirudin (recombinanthirudin) is an irreversibly
binding bivalent thrombin inhibitor.
b Bivalirudin is a synthetic peptide analog of
hirudin and is a bivalent thrombin inhibitor. Unlike
lepirudin it reversibly binds to thrombin.
c Argatroban is a monovalent synthetic thrombin
inhibitor with reversible activity at the active-site
pocket of thrombin. Argatroban does not bind to
exosite 1.
There is no antidote available for the reversal of
the anticoagulant effect of DTI in the sense that
UFH is reversible with protamine. Termination of
DTI effectis dependenton met abolism, redist ri-
bution, and elimination of the drug. In the case
of bivalirudin and argatroban disassociation of the
drug from thrombin also plays a role.
The ecarin clotting time (ECT) is used to monitor
the anticoagulant effect of lepirudin and bivalirudin.
The ECT is a modiﬁcation of the ACT that uses ecarin
as an activator. Ecarin activates prothrombin to
the intermediate thrombin product meizothrombin.
Meizothrombin has limited procoagulant activity
as compared to thrombin. However, like throm-
bin it binds to lepirudin and bivalirudin with 1:1
stoichiometry. The ECT will thus be prolonged
by DTI with the ECT determined by the relative
concentrations of meizothrombin and lepirudin or
bivalirudin. There is good correlation between ECT
and plasma levels of lepirudin and bivalirudin.
Unfortunately, the ECT is not commercially avail-
able for point of care testing and must be run in a
hospital-based laboratory.
• Platelet inhibition in association with standard UFH
use. Heparin dependant platelet activation in the
presence of HIT antibodies can be achieved with a
continuous IV infusion of prostaglandin I2 (prosta-
cyclin). Iloprost and Flolan (epoprostenol) are stable
forms of prostacyclin that have been used success-
fully in conjunction with standard UFH doses for
CPB. Success has also been reported with use of con-
tinuous IV infusion of prostaglandin E2 butt his has
not been as rigorously investigated. Other platelet
inhibiting drugs such as dipyridamole and aspirin
have been used in conjunction with these agents
as well. Recently, success with use of a continuous
IV infusion of tiroﬁban (a short acting GP IIb/IIIa
inhibitor) in conjunction with standard UFH has
been reported.
Suggested reading
Arnold DM, Fergusson DA, Chan AKet al. Avoiding trans-
fusions in children undergoing cardiac surgery: a meta-
analysis of randomized trials of aprotinin.Anesth Analg
2006;102:731–7.
Barak M, Katz Y. Microbubbles: pathophysiology and
clinical implications. Chest 2005;128:2918–32.
Despotis GJ, Gravlee G, Filos K, Levy J. Anticoagulation
monitoring during cardiac surgery: a review of cur-
rentand emerging t echniques. Anesthesiology 1999;91:
1122–51.
Kanazawa M, Fukuyama H, Kinefuchi Y, Takiguchi M,
Suzuki T. Relationship between aortic-to-radial arte-
rial pressure gradientaft er cardiopulmonary bypass and
changes in arterial elasticity. Anesthesiology 2003;99:
48–53.
Kimmel SE, Sekeres MA, Berlin JA et al . Risk factors
for clinically important adverse events after protamine
administration following cardiopulmonary bypass.JA m
Coll Cardiol 1998;32:1916–22.
McKinlay KH, Schinderle DB, Swaminathan M et al .
Predictors of inotrope use during separation from
cardiopulmonary bypass. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth
2004;18:404–8.
Viaro F, Dalio MB, Evora PR. Catastrophic cardiovascular
adverse reactions to protamine are nitric oxide/cyclic
guanosine monophosphate dependent and endothe-
lium mediated: should methylene blue be the treatment
of choice? Chest 2002;122:1061–6.
Warkentin TE, Greinacher A. Heparin-induced throm-
bocytopenia and cardiac surgery. Ann Thorac Surg
2003;76:2121–31.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch11” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 375 — #1
CHAPTER 11
MechanicalCirculatorySupport
This chapter focuses on mechanical circulatory
support devices currently available for clinical use
intheUnitedStates.Theintra-aorticballoonpump
(IABP),centrifugalpumps,axialﬂowpumps,ven-
tricularassistdevices(VAD),andthetotalartiﬁcial
heart (TAH) will be covered. These devices are
summarizedinTables11.1–11.3.
Indications for mechanical
circulatory support
The indications for mechanical circulatory support
are the presence of left ventricular (LV) failure,
right ventricular (RV) failure, or both in the set-
tingofmaximalintravenous(IV)inotropicsupport
following correction of acid-base and electrolyte
abnormalitiesandhypovolemia.Maximalinotropic
support is deﬁned as use of two or more of the
following:
• Dobutamine >10 µg/kg/min.
• Dopamine >10 µg/kg/min.
• Epinephrine >0.2 µg/kg/min.
• Milrinone >0.75 µg/kg/min,afteraloadingdose
of50 µg/kg/min.
Ventricular failure is deﬁned as one or both of the
following:
• LVdysfunction:
a cardiacindex <1.8–2.0L/min/m2;
b systolic blood pressure < 90mmHg or mean
arterialpressure(MAP) <70mmHg;
c leftatrial(LA)pressure >18–25mmHg;
• RVdysfunction:
a cardiacindex <1.8–2.0L/min/m2;
b systolic blood pressure< 90mmHg or MAP <
70mmHg;
c rightatrial(RA)pressure >18–20mmHg.
Device selection
The type of mechanical circulatory device selected
depends, in large part, on the setting in which the
device is to be used. The goal of mechanical sup-
port is to initiate support prior to development of
end-organ dysfunction and to prevent end-organ
dysfunction from developing. Mechanical circula-
toryassistdevicesarecurrentlyusedinthreemajor
capacities.
Bridge to recovery
Temporarycirculatorysupportisusedinthesubset
ofpatientswithcardiogenicshockinwhomrecov-
ery of signiﬁcant myocardial function is expected.
Patientsinthiscategoryreceiveshort-termtointer-
mediate (days to weeks) mechanical circulatory
support during a critical interval while ventricular
functionrecovers.Theassistdeviceisthenweaned
and explanted. The most common indications for
thistypeofcirculatorysupportare:
• Postcardiotomy cardiogenic shock. This is esti-
matedtooccurin2–6%ofallpatientsundergoing
surgery for coronary revascularization or valve
repair or replacement. One percent of all these
375AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch11” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 376 — #2
376 Chapter11
Table 11.1 Extracorporealdevices.
Device Mechanism Support Indications
IABP Pneumatic counterpulsation LVAD Short term
• postcardiotomy
ECMO Centrifugal or Partial or total CPB Short term (adults)
nonocclusive roller head • postcardiotomy
Nonpulsatile • post-cardiac arrest
Short to intermediate term
(infants/children)
• postcardiotomy
• post-cardiac arrest
• bridge-to-transplant
BioMedicus Centrifugal LVAD and/or RVAD Short term
Nonpulsatile In parallel • postcardiotomy
TandemHeart Centrifugal LVAD Short term
Nonpulsatile In parallel • postcardiotomy
• post-catheter intervention
Abiomed Pneumatic membrane LVAD and/or RVAD Short term
BVS 5000 Pulsatile In parallel • postcardiotomy
Thoratec Pneumatic membrane LVAD and/or RVAD Short to intermediate term
Pulsatile In series or in parallel • postcardiotomy
• bridge-to-transplant
Abiomed Pneumatic membrane LVAD and/or RVAD Short to intermediate term
AB5000 Pulsatile In series or in parallel • postcardiotomy
• bridge-to-transplant
Berlin Heart Pneumatic membrane LVAD and/or RVAD Short to intermediate term
Pulsatile In series or in parallel • postcardiotomy
• bridge-to-transplant
• pediatric sizes
Medos VAD Pneumatic membrane LVAD and/or RVAD Short to intermediate term
Pulsatile In series or in parallel • postcardiotomy
• bridge-to-transplant
• pediatric sizes
ECMO, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation; LVAD, left ventricular assist device; RVAD, right ventricular assist device;
VAD, ventricular assist device.
postcardiotomy patients require mechanical circu-
latory support. This is probably the largest patient
subsetrequiringbridgetorecoverysupport.Theuse
ofcentrifugalpumpsandVADastemporarycircula-
torysupportinpatientswithcardiogenicshockafter
cardiac surgical procedures has been less success-
ful than the bridge to transplantation experience.
Althoughsmallindividualserieshavesurvivalrates
as high as 40%, the Combined Registry for the
ClinicalUseofMechanicalVentricularAssistPumps
andArtiﬁcialHeartsreportsthattheoverallhospi-
tal discharge rate is 25%. This low survival rate is
similar for patients supported with both VAD and
centrifugal pumps. Factors that have been asso-
ciated with poor outcome include renal failure,
perioperative myocardial infarction, and infection.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch11” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 377 — #3
MechanicalCirculatorySupport 377
Table 11.2 Intracorporealdevices.
Device Mechanism Support Indications
HeartMate IP Pneumatic pusher plate LVAD Intermediate to long term
Pulsatile In series • bridge-to-transplant
• destination therapy
HeartMate XVE Electric pusher plate LVAD Intermediate to long term
Pulsatile In series • bridge-to-transplant
• destination therapy
Novacor Electric pusher plate LVAD Intermediate to long term
Pulsatile In series • bridge-to-transplant
• destination therapy
Jarvik 2000 Electric axial ﬂow LVAD Intermediate to long term
Nonpulsatile In series • bridge-to-transplant
• destination therapy
MicroMed VAD Electric axial ﬂow LVAD Intermediate to long term
Nonpulsatile In series • bridge-to-transplant
• destination therapy
• pediatric version
HeartMate II Electric axial ﬂow LVAD Intermediate to long term
Nonpulsatile In series • bridge-to-transplant
• destination therapy
LVAD, left ventricular assist device; VAD, ventricular assist device.
Table 11.3 Orthotopicprostheticventricles.
Device Mechanism Support Indications
CardioWest Pneumatic membrane Total artiﬁcial heart Intermediate to long term
Pulsatile • bridge-to-transplant
Abiocor Electrohydralic membrane Total artiﬁcial heart Intermediate to long term
Pulsatile • bridge-to-transplant
• destination therapy
Most patients who do survive are New York Heart
Association(NYHA)functionalclassIorII.
• Postacute-myocardialinfarction(MI)cardiogenic
shock.
• Myocarditis-inducedcardiogenicshock.
• Support during medical or ablative therapy for
intractabledysrhythmias.
• Support during or following complicated
interventionalcardiaccatheterizationprocedures.
Bridge to cardiac transplantation
Inthecaseofabridgetotransplantation,amechan-
ical assist device is implanted with the intention
of providing intermediate to long-term (weeks to
months) support until a suitable donor heart is
found or until the patient dies from irreversible
damagetootherorgansystems.Devicesusedfora
bridgetotransplantationmustallowpatientmobi-
lization and discharge from an intensive care unitAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch11” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 378 — #4
378 Chapter11
Table 11.4 Criteriaforleftventricularassistdevice
(LVAD)placementasabridgetocardiactransplantation.
Inclusion criteria
1 Patient is a transplant candidate
2 Hemodynamic data:
Cardiac index < 2.0 L/min/m2
Systolic BP < 80 mmHg
PAOP > 20 mmHg
Exclusion criteria
1 Technical issues:
BSA < 1.5 m2
Aortic valve insufﬁciency (if valve not repaired or
replaced with a bioprosthesis)
Right-to-left intracardiac shunt (if left unrepaired)
Severe aortic atherosclerotic disease
Abdominal aortic aneurysm
Mechanical cardiac valves
LV thrombus
2 Fixed PVR with PVR > 8 Wood units
3 Factors deemed to increase perioperative risk:
Mechanical ventilation
Urine output < 30 mL/h
Pyrexia
Elevated WBC count
RAP > 16 mmHg
PT > 16 seconds
Re-operation
BP, blood pressure; BSA, body surface area; LV, left ventricle;
PAOP, pulmonary artery occlusion pressure; PT, prothrom-
bin time; PVR, pulmonary vascular resistance; RAP, right
atrial pressure; WBC, white blood cell.
(ICU) setting because the wait for a donor heart
maybelong.Thecriteriaforuseofaleftventricular
assist device (LVAD) as a bridge to transplantation
areshowninTable11.4.
At present, the limiting factor in the number of
patients who can be offered a heart transplant is
theavailabilityofdonorhearts.Itisestimatedthat
while 5–10% of the total population suffers from
end-stage, refractory heart failure that could ben-
eﬁt from a heart transplant, only approximately
2500 donor hearts are available per year. Further-
more,25–30%ofsuitabletransplantcandidatesdie
before a donor heart can be found. In the subset
ofheartfailurepatientseligibleformechanicalsup-
portupto70%willdiewithoutmechanicalsupport
while awaiting transplant. As a result, mechanical
assist devices and the TAH are being used with
greater frequency as a bridge to cardiac trans-
plantation. For transplant candidates at immediate
risk of end-organ dysfunction, these devices pro-
videmechanicalcirculatorysupportuntilasuitable
donorheartisfound.
The outcome after bridge to transplantation
is very good. Currently, approximately 70% of
patients who receive an assist device as a bridge
survive to transplant and 70% of those patients
go on to hospital discharge. After hospital dis-
charge, LVAD patients without pre-existing organ
dysfunction have 1- and 2-year actuarial survival
rates similar to patients receiving orthotopic heart
transplantation without mechanical circulatory
support.
The HeartMate (IP, XVE, and II), Novacor,
MicroMed, and Jarvik 2000 devices are all intra-
corporeal (implantable) devices used exclusively
for bridge to transplantation in patients requiring
only LV support. The Thoratec VAD and Abiomed
AB5000alsocanbeusedinthiscapacity.Bridgeto
transplantation patients who require biventricular
assist device (BiVAD) support are candidates for a
TAH, the Thoratec VAD, or the Abiomed AB5000.
In infants and small children the Berlin Heart or
MedosVADcouldservethispurpose.
Destination therapy
In this setting permanently implanted LVAD serve
as an alternative to chronic medical therapy in
patientswhoarenotcardiactransplantcandidates.
In general, patients selected for destination ther-
apy are older (age>65years) with end-organ dys-
function from diabetes or other chronic medical
problemsandwithothersigniﬁcantphysicaland/or
psychiatric co-morbidities. The REMATCH trial,
which made use of the HeartMate XVE device
demonstratedimprovedsurvivalandqualityoflife
overa2-yearperiodinpatientswithanimplanted
VADascomparedtopatientsreceivingchronicmed-
icaltherapy.Currently,theHeartMateXVEdeviceis
FoodandDrugAdministration(FDA)approvedfor
thispurposeandtheNovacordeviceisundergoing
trials for this use in the RELIANT Trial. As shownAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch11” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 379 — #5
MechanicalCirculatorySupport 379
inTable11.2,otherdevicesarelikelytobeusedin
thiscapacityinthefuture.
Complications
Thromboembolism,perioperativehemorrhage,and
infection are the three major complications associ-
ated with use of circulatory assist devices and the
TAH,particularlywhenusedlongtermforabridge
totransplantationordestinationtherapy.
Classiﬁcation of devices
Several classiﬁcations of mechanical circulatory
support devices exist, and there is considerable
overlapbetweenclassiﬁcations.
Orthotopic and heterotopic prosthetic
ventricles
Heterotopic prosthetic ventricles provide mechan-
ical support in parallel or in series with the intact
native ventricles. These devices are commonly
called ventricular assist devices (VAD). Some VAD
are designed only for LV support, whereas others
maybeusedforleftventricular(LVAD),rightven-
tricular(RVAD),orbiventricularsupport(BiVAD).
Table 11.1 summarizes the uses of the clinically
availabledevices.
Orthotopicdevicesprovidemechanicalsupportin
place of the excised native ventricles. The native
atria are surgically placed in continuity with the
prosthetic ventricles. Orthotopic prosthetic ventri-
clesaredescribedmorecommonlyastotalartiﬁcial
hearts(TAH).
Series versus parallel circulatory
support
Acirculatorysupportdevicemaybeusedinparal-
lel or in series with the native ventricular system,
depending on how cannulation for the device is
achieved. When inﬂow to the device is achieved
via cannulation of the native atrium and outﬂow
isviacannulationofthecorrespondinggreatvessel,
thedeviceissaidtobe“inparallel”withthenative
ventricular system. When inﬂow to the device is
achieved via cannulation of the apex of the native
Ao LA P A RA
LRL
Ao Apex
(a) (b)
Fig. 11.1 (a)SchematicofaThoratecventricular
assistdevice(VAD)inparallelwiththeleftheart.
(b)SchematicofaThoratecVADinparallelwiththe
rightheartandinserieswiththeleftheart.Ao,aorta;
LA,leftatrium;PA,pulmonaryartery;RA,rightatrium.
ventricleandoutﬂowisviacannulationofthecor-
responding great vessel, the device is said to be
“in series” with the native ventricle. Some devices
always are used in series with the native ventri-
cle,somearealwaysusedinparallel,andsomecan
be used in either a series or parallel arrangement.
Figure11.1a,billustratesparallelandseriesarrange-
ment.Tables11.1and11.2describewhichdevices
areusedinseriesandinparallel.
Ingeneral,theseriesarrangementprovidesbetter
ﬁlling and a higher device output for two rea-
sons. First, the device does not compete with the
native ventricle for atrial blood the way it must in
a parallel arrangement. Second, native ventricular
systole serves to ﬁll the prosthetic ventricle. The
series arrangement also provides the native ven-
tricle with a low-impedance outﬂow tract into the
prosthetic ventricle, which greatly reduces native
ventricular diameter and systolic wall stress. The
major disadvantage of a series arrangement is that
the ventricular apex may become akinetic or dys-
kineticafterremovaloftheventricularcannula.For
patients who are to be transplanted, this is not an
important issue. However, it is a very important
issueforpatientswhoareultimatelytobeweaned
offmechanicalsupport.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch11” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 380 — #6
380 Chapter11
Pulsatile versus nonpulsatile ﬂow
Both orthotopic and heterotopic prosthetic ventri-
clesprovidepulsatileﬂow,whereascentrifugaland
axialpumpsprovidenonpulsatileﬂow.Twotypesof
pulsatile prosthetic ventricles are currently in use:
pneumatic and electromechanical. Pulsatile pneu-
matic pumps use pressurized air to eject blood
from the prosthetic ventricular chamber. Pulsatile
electromechanicalpumpsconvertelectricalenergy
to the mechanical energy necessary to eject blood
fromtheprostheticventricularchamber.
Extracorporeal versus intracorporeal
(implantable) devices
Some devices are extracorporeal, whereas others
areintracorporeal.Withextracorporealdevices,the
pumping device is located outside the body, with
both the inﬂow and outﬂow conduits entering
the patient’s thoracic cavity. Implantable devices
are implanted in the patient’s pericardial cavity
or pre-peritoneally. Anatomical constraints gen-
erally make it difﬁcult to implant intracorporeal
devices into patients with a body surface area
(BSA) <1.5m2.
Triggering modes and percentage of
systole
Pulsatile pumps have a number of different ways
in which ejection can be triggered. In the case of
TAH, the ejection rate is set by the operator and is
analogoustotheheartrate.BecauseVADareused
in conjunction with the native ventricular system,
moreoptionsareavailabletotriggeraVADejection
cycle.
Manual
Thismode,alsoknownasthesinglestrokemode,is
usedforde-airingofthedeviceafterimplantation.
Itallowsasingleejectionwiththetouchofabutton.
Asynchronous
Intheasynchronousmode,theVADejectsatarate
decideduponbytheoperator.Thisproducesaﬁxed
rate,variablestrokevolumemodeofoperation.At
higher device rates, the time available for diastolic
ﬁllingwillbereduced.Thiscaninpartbeoffsetby
increasingpreloadtothedevice.Inthismodethere
willbebeatsinwhichthedeviceandtheventricle
ejectatthesametime.
Fill-to-empty
Inthismode,alsoknownasthevolumemode,the
deviceisprogrammedtotriggerejectiononlywhen
the VAD is ﬁlled with blood in diastole. This pro-
duces a ﬁxed stroke volume variable rate mode of
operation. In this triggering mode, the VAD ejec-
tion rate will vary with preload. When preload to
theVADishigh,theVADejectionratewillbehigh;
likewise,whenpreloadtotheVADispoor,theVAD
ejectionratewillbelow.
Device and ventricular ejection rates will dif-
fer and will vary phasically. In the case of series
LVAD, aortic valve opening is rarely seen at rest
in this mode but may be present during exercise.
In a series device, when device ﬁlling coincides
with LV diastole, ﬁlling is said to be synchronous.
In this setting, LV volume at the commencement
of LV contraction is small and ejection is insufﬁ-
cient to open the aortic valve. In a series device,
whendeviceﬁllingcoincideswithLVsystole,ﬁlling
is said to be counter-synchronous. In this setting,
there is no ejection out of the aortic valve as the
low-impedance pathway during native ventricular
systoleisintothedevice.
Synchronous
Inthesynchronousmode,anexternalelectricalsig-
nal, usually the R wave of the electrocardiogram
(ECG)isusedtotriggerVADejection.Usingapro-
grammable delay, the operator can use this mode
to reduce ventricular afterload by preventing the
device from ejecting into the aorta or pulmonary
arteryatthesametimeasthenativeventricle.
In addition to having various triggering modes,
somedevicesallowtheoperatortoprogramtheper-
centageofsystole.Thisallowstheoperatortodecide
whatpercentageofeachprostheticventricularcycle
is devoted to ejection. Obviously, as the prosthetic
ventricularejectionrateincreases,thetimebetween
cycles diminishes. The advantage of reducing the
percentageofsystoleisthatitallowsagreaterpro-
portion of each cycle to be devoted to prosthetic
ventricular ﬁlling. However, for a given ejection
rate, reducing the percentage of systole increasesAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch11” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 381 — #7
MechanicalCirculatorySupport 381
the rapidity of the ejection phase. The more rapid
the ejection phase, the more likely are turbulent
ﬂow and damage to formed blood elements with
resultanthemolysis.
Device description
Intra-aortic balloon pump
The Intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP), ﬁrst intro-
duced into clinical use in 1968, has become an
importantmethodofprovidingcirculatorysupport
inawidevarietyofpatients.
TheIABPconsistsofacatheter-mountedballoon,
apump,agassource,andamicroprocessorconsole.
Theballoonisthin-walled,measures2 ×20cm,and
contains 30–40mL of volume when inﬂated. The
catheterhasahollowcentrallumen,whichallows
percutaneousplacementoveraguidewire,aswell
astherecordingofcentralaorticpressure.Thepump
inﬂates and deﬂates the balloon at precisely timed
intervals, with either carbon dioxide or helium as
the inﬂating or shuttle gas. Carbon dioxide car-
ries less of an embolic risk if the balloon ruptures
because it is absorbed quickly. Helium has a lower
density,allowingfasterinﬂationanddeﬂation,and
currently is the preferred gas. The console displays
the ECG, the arterial waveform, and the balloon
pressure trace. The console controls exactly when
thepumpinﬂatesanddeﬂatestheballoon.
Proper functioning of the IABP depends on
the precise timing of balloon inﬂation and
deﬂation relative to the cardiac cycle. Balloon
inﬂation (Fig. 11.2) optimally occurs immediately
after the closure of the aortic valve as represented
by the dicrotic notch on the central arterial pres-
suretracing.Theresultantincreaseinaorticvolume
increases diastolic arterial pressure (diastolic aug-
mentation) and improves systemic and coronary
artery perfusion pressure. The increase in aortic
diastolic pressure depends on a number of vari-
ables: the nonaugmented aortic diastolic pressure,
thecomplianceoftheaorta,thesizeoftheballoon,
andthevolumeofgasintheballoon(fromminimal
tofullvolume).Ballooninﬂationinthenoncompli-
antaortaofanelderlypatientwillproduceahigher
augmenteddiastolicpressurethanthesameballoon
inacompliantaorta.
Inflation
Fig. 11.2 Aproperlypositionedintra-aorticballoon
pump(IABP)inﬂatingintheproximaldescendingaorta.
In the absence of coronary stenoses, augmen-
tation of aortic diastolic blood pressure increases
coronarybloodﬂowinboththeproximalanddistal
coronary arteries. In the presence of critical coro-
narystenoses,theIABPdoesnotimprovecoronary
blood ﬂow distal to the stenoses. It is conceivable
that coronary beds distal to a stenosis could have
improved coronary perfusion with IABP counter-
pulsationifcollateralsfromanonstenosedcoronary
arterysupplythebeds.
Deﬂationoftheballoon(Fig.11.3)isadjustedto
occur immediately before LV ejection, at the onset
of the upstroke of the central arterial waveform.
Optimal balloon deﬂation is established when the
arterial diastolic pressure is maximally reduced
(unloading).Thedurationofisovolumiccontraction
of the left ventricle is determined by the pres-
sure gradient between the left ventricle and the
proximal aorta. Balloon deﬂation quickly lowers
proximalaorticpressure,therebyreducingafterload
bydecreasingtheimpedancetoejectionouttheleft
ventricle. This shortens the duration of isovolumic
contraction,whichinturnreducesmyocardialoxy-
genconsumption.Reductionofmyocardialoxygen
consumption, rather than augmentation of coro-
nary blood ﬂow, is the primary method by which
theIABPamelioratesmyocardialischemia.
In addition to reducing myocardial oxygen con-
sumption,properlytimedIABPdeﬂationimprovesAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch11” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 382 — #8
382 Chapter11
Deflation
Fig. 11.3 Aproperlypositionedintra-aorticballoon
pump(IABP)deﬂatingintheproximaldescending
aorta.
LV systolic function on a beat-to-beat basis by
decreasingsystolicwallstress.Increasesinejection
phase indices of systolic function, such as ejection
fraction, are directly proportional to IABP-induced
decreasesinsystolicwallstress.
Indicationsandcontraindications
The indications for IABP use are summarized
below:
1 Patientswithrefractorymyocardialischemia.
2 Patientswithcardiogenicshock:
a myocardialinfarction;
b myocarditis;
c cardiomyopathy;
d pharmacologicdepression.
3 Stabilizationofpatientsbeforecardiacsurgery:
a myocardialinfarction;
b postinfarctionventricularseptaldefect(VSD);
c mitralregurgitation;
d bridgetocardiactransplantation.
4 Supportofpatientsaftercardiacsurgery:
a reversibleLVdysfunction;
b intraoperativemyocardialinfarction;
c allograftdysfunctionafterhearttransplantation.
5 Supportofnoncardiacsurgicalpatients:
a support during percutaneous coronary
angioplasty;
b tomaintaincoronaryarterypatencyafterthrom-
bolytictherapyorangioplastyinthesettingofacute
myocardialinfarction;
c supportduringnoncardiacsurgicalprocedures.
Therearefewabsolutecontraindicationstotheuse
of the IABP. Aortic valve incompetence is a con-
traindication because balloon inﬂation in diastole
will increase the regurgitant fraction. Aortic dis-
section and aortic aneurysm are contraindications
becauseballooninﬂationcouldpromotefrankaor-
ticrupture.Severeperipheralvasculardiseasemay
makeplacementoftheIABPviathefemoralartery
impossible.
Insertion
Most IABP catheters are inserted percutaneously
usingtheSeldingertechniqueviathefemoralartery
retrograde into the descending aorta. Surgical cut
down to expose the femoral artery, followed by
cannulationofthearteryunderdirectvisionusing
the modiﬁed Seldinger technique, is reserved for
situations in which location of the femoral artery
percutaneously may be difﬁcult, such as with
hypotension, lack of pulsatile ﬂow on cardiopul-
monarybypass(CPB),obesity,andperipheralvas-
cular disease. The IABP usually is placed through
an arterial sheath, but newer models allow place-
mentoftheIABPcatheterdirectlyintothefemoral
artery without a sheath. This is a useful alterna-
tiveforpatientswithsmallfemoralarteriesorwith
peripheralvasculardisease.
The balloon should be placed so that the prox-
imal tip is distal to the left subclavian artery and
the distal end is proximal to the renal arter-
ies. The length of IABP catheter required is esti-
mated by the distance from the femoral artery to
the sternomanubrial junction. Final position can
be veriﬁed with a chest radiograph, ﬂuoroscopy,
transesophageal echocardiography (TEE), or direct
palpation of the descending aorta by the
surgeon.
When severe peripheral vascular disease pre-
cludes retrograde insertion via the femoral artery,
the balloon catheter can be placed antegrade in
the descending thoracic aorta via the right subcla-
vian artery, the axillary artery, or the ascending
aorta. Placement via the ascending aorta requiresAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch11” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 383 — #9
MechanicalCirculatorySupport 383
a sternotomy. The technique is used only for
postcardiotomy patients who cannot otherwise be
weaned from CPB and necessitates subsequent
removalunderanesthesiaintheoperatingroom.
Complications
The incidence of complications from intra-aortic
balloon counterpulsation that are severe enough
torequireballoonremovalorsurgicalintervention
ranges from 17 to 35%. The most common com-
plication is lower limb ischemia. However, there
are reports of every major branch of the aorta
being occluded by thrombus, embolus, or balloon-
induced dissection. Other complications include
thrombocytopeniaandballoonorconsolefailure.
ManagementoftheIABP
Optimal performance of the IABP depends on
propertriggeringandtiming.Themicroprocessoris
capable of using a number of signal modalities to
triggerIABPinﬂationanddeﬂation.
• ECG. This is the signal most commonly used to
trigger the IABP. The R wave is used as the cen-
tral timing event that directs balloon inﬂation to
occur during the T wave (diastole) and balloon
deﬂation immediately before the subsequent QRS
complex (onset of systole). Due to the time neces-
saryforRwavedetection,andforthetimenecessary
to shuttle helium out of the balloon, triggering
IABP deﬂation from the immediately preceding
R wave generally results in less than optimal tim-
ing and unloading. As a result, consoles detect the
R wave and inﬂate in diastole after a preset inter-
val that allows completion of mechanical systole.
After another preset interval, the balloon deﬂates
inanticipationofthenextmechanicalsystole.
The ECG signal to the IABP console can be
the ECG transmitted by a cable from the oper-
ating room monitor or the ECG derived from a
separate set of patient leads directly to the IABP
console. The former is preferable if the skin leads
havenotbeenplacedbeforesurgicalpreppingand
draping. Radiofrequency current from the electro-
cautery used in the operating room can interfere
withtheECGtrigger.TheIABPleadshaveaspecial
builtinradiofrequencyﬁlterthathelpsalleviatethis
problem. Alternatively, using the operating room
monitor in the more heavily ﬁltered nondiagnos-
tic mode will help ﬁlter out some of the noise.
Othermaneuversthatdiminishtheeffectofradio-
frequency current include placing all ECG leads in
a single frontal plane, which reduces the potential
difference between any of the leads, and using
the lowest electrocautery current setting possible,
in short bursts. In the ECG triggering mode pacer
spikes are rejected as a triggering stimulus by the
microprocessor.
• Arterial waveform. The upstroke of the arterial
waveform can be used by the microprocessor in a
manner similar to the R wave of the ECG. A pres-
sure trigger threshold (systolic pulse height from
baseline)between7and30mmHgcanbeset.
• Internal.Thismodeisusedduringasystole,CPB
or ventricular ﬁbrillation. A ﬁxed rate of 80b/min
oravariablerateof40–120b/mininincrementsof
ﬁve can be set. Some models allow ﬁxed internal
ratesof40,60,80or120b/min.
• Pacerspikes.Atrial,ventricular,andatrioventricu-
lar(AV)sequentialpacerspikescancomplicatebal-
loontriggering.IABPconsolescanbeprogrammed
tousetheatrialand/orventricularpacerspikesasa
triggerortoignore(“reject”)thepacerspikes.With
someconsoles,whentheballoonisintheECGtrig-
germode,pacerspikerejectionisautomatic.Ifthe
microprocessorhasdifﬁcultyignoringapacerspike,
theuseofbipolarpacingorECGleadsthatminimize
thepacerspikesmaybenecessary.Pacerspikesare
used as triggers only when an ECG trigger is not
effective.
Although the ECG is normally used to trigger
balloon inﬂation and deﬂation, proper counter-
pulsation timing can only be conﬁrmed by exam-
ination of an arterial pressure waveform. When
the radial artery is transduced, there is a 60ms
delay in waveform transmission from the central
aorta. When the femoral artery is used, there is a
120ms delay in waveform transmission from the
centralaorta.Inﬂationusingthesearterialpressure-
monitoringsitesmustbeadjustedaccordingly.Ide-
ally,ballooninﬂationoccursatthedicroticnotchin
the central aorta. When the radial artery pressure
ismonitored,inﬂationshouldbeadjustedtooccur
60msbeforetheradialarterydicroticnotch.When
the femoral artery pressure is monitored, balloonAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch11” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 384 — #10
384 Chapter11
140
120mmHg
100
Assisted
systole
Diastolic
augmentation
Assisted aortic
end diastolic
pressure
Assisted
systole
80
Fig. 11.4 Arterialpressuretracefrom
apatientreceiving1:1intra-aortic
balloonpump(IABP)supportwith
propertiming.
140
Unassisted systole
Unassisted aortic
end diastolic
pressure
Assisted aortic
end diastolic
pressure
120
100
80
Assisted
systole
Diastolic
augmentation
mmHg
Fig. 11.5 Arterialpressuretracefrom
apatientreceiving1:2intra-aortic
balloonpump(IABP)supportwith
propertiming.
inﬂationshouldbeadjustedtooccur120msbefore
thefemoralarterydicroticnotch.
The details of proper timing are illustrated in
Figs 11.4–11.7. Proper timing requires that the
IABP be triggered every second or third R wave
(1:2or1:3).Thisallowsobservationofassistedand
unassisted systole and of assisted and unassisted
aortic end-diastolic pressure. Some IABP consoles
containa“verify”optionthathighlightstheperiod
of balloon inﬂation in real time on the arterial
waveform (Fig. 11.8). This feature is a useful aid
inobtainingpropertiming.Timingmaybeaccom-
plishedintheautomaticormanualmode.Theauto-
maticmodeusestheRwaveandanalgorithmthat
triggersballooninﬂationafteranintervalbasedon
heartrate,whichallowscompletionofmechanical
systole.Balloondeﬂationistriggeredafteranother
preset interval based on heart rate. Fine-tuning of
timingisobtainedbyuseoftheinﬂationanddeﬂa-
tioncontrolsontheconsole(Fig.11.9).Inﬂationis
madetooccurlaterinthecardiaccyclebyusingthe
rightward facing “Later” arrow or by moving the
inﬂation slide “out” or to the right on older mod-
els.Inﬂationismadetooccurearlierinthecardiac
cyclebyusingtheleftwardfacing“Earlier”arrowor
by moving the inﬂation slide “in” or to the left on
oldermodels.Asimilarcontrolslideisusedtoﬁne
tune deﬂation. In the manual mode, the inﬂation
anddeﬂationslidesaremuchmoreresponsiveand
causegreaterchangesintimingthantheydointhe
automatic mode. In the manual mode, changes in
heartrate >10b/minrequireretiming.Intheauto-
matic mode, changes in heart rate are adjusted for
automatically.
Observation of the balloon pressure waveform
alsoyieldsusefulinformationaboutIABPfunction
(Figs11.10–11.12).
Timing will be complicated by the presence of
arrhythmias and large variations in heart rate.
RecallthatthetimingofballoondeﬂationinsystoleAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch11” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 385 — #11
MechanicalCirculatorySupport 385
    Inflation of the IAB prior to aortic valve closure
    Waveform characteristics:
     • Inflation of IAB prior to dicrotic notch
     • Diastolic augmentation encroaches onto
      systole (may be unable to distinguish)
    Physiologic effects:
     • Potential premature closure of aortic valve
     • Potential increase in LVEDV and LVEDP or PCWP
     • Increased left ventricular wall stress or afterload
     • Aortic regurgitation
     • Increased MVO2 demand
  
    Inflation of the IAB markedly after closure
    of the aortic valve
    Waveform characteristics:
     • Inflation of the IAB after the dicrotic notch
     • Absense of sharp V
     • Sub-optimal diastolic augmentation
    Physiologic effects:
      • Sub-optimal coronary artery perfusion
Unassisted
systole
Diastolic
augmentation
Assisted
systole
Assisted aortic
end diastolic
pressure
Unassisted
systole Diastolic
augmentation
Assisted systole
Dicrotic
notch
Assisted aortic
end diastolic
pressure
(a)  Early inflation
(b)  Late inflation
Fig. 11.6 Arterialwaveformsresultingfrom(a)earlyballooninﬂationand(b)fromlateballooninﬂation.The
physiologicconsequencesofthesetimingerrorsaresummarized.IAB,intra-aorticballoon;LVEDP,leftventricular
end-diastolicpressure;LVEDV,leftventricularend-diastolicvolume;PCWP,pulmonarycapillarywedgepressure.
isdeterminedbyapresetintervalfromtheprevious
QRS.Asaresult,prematurebeatsoracuteincreases
ordecreasesinheartratemayresultinpoortiming.
Newersoftwareallowsbetteradjustmentoftiming
totheseevents.Randomratechangesasseenwith
atrial ﬁbrillation are problematic as timing cannot
beeasilydeﬁnedbythemicroprocessor.Asaresult,
software has been developed that allows timing to
be changed from predictive to R-wave triggered
deﬂation.Thetradeoffislessaccurateballoondeﬂa-
tiontiminginfavorofpreventingballooninﬂation
insystole.
At very high heart rates (>130–140b/min), the
IABP may be incapable of inﬂation and deﬂation
rapidenoughtoprovidepropertiming.Inthisset-
ting, using the balloon pump at a 1:2 ratio usually
isnecessary.Atslowheartrates,prematureballoon
deﬂationwilloccurinpumpsthathaveapresetlimit
onthedurationofinﬂation.
Anticoagulation
Anticoagulationisnecessarybothtopreventthrom-
bus formation on the balloon or catheter and in
the cannulated peripheral vessel. An unfraction-
ated heparin (UFH) infusion is used to maintain
an activated clotting time (ACT) between 150 and
200secondsorapartialthromboplastintime(PTT)
between 60 and 80seconds (1.5–2.0 times con-
trol).Inthepostoperativesetting,initiationofhep-
arin infusion may be delayed for 12–24hours or
until chest tube drainage is minimal. Alternative
approachesincludeaspirinorlow-molecularweight
dextraninplaceoforinadditiontoUFH.
CardioWest TAH
TheCardioWestTAHisthedirectdescendentofthe
Symbion(Jarvik)J7-70TAH.Becauseimplantation
of the TAH requires excision of the native ventri-
cles, this device is used only as a bridge to cardiacAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch11” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 386 — #12
386 Chapter11
 
   Premature deflation of the IAB
   during the diastolic phase
   Waveform characteristics:
    • Deflation of IAB is seen as a sharp
     drop following diastolic augmentation
    • Suboptimal diastolic augmentation
    • Assisted aortic end diastolic pressure
     may be equal to or less than the
     unassisted aortic end diastolic pressure
    • Assisted systolic pressure may rise
   Physiologic effects:
    • Sub-optimal coronary perfusion
    • Potential for retrograde coronary and
     cartoid blood flow
    • Angina may occur as a result of retrograde
     coronary blood flow
    • Sub-optimal afterload reduction
    • Increased MVO2 demand
    Waveform characteristics:
    • Assisted aortic end-diastolic pressure may
     be equal to the unassisted aortic end
     diastolic pressure
    • Rate of rise of assisted systole is prolonged
    • Diastolic augmentation may appear widened
    Physiologic effects:
    • Afterload reduction is essentially absent
    • Increased MVO2 consumption due to the
     left ventricle ejecting against a greater
     resistance and a prolonged isovolumetric
     contraction phase
    • IAB may impede left ventricular
     ejection and increase the afterload
Unassisted
aortic
end-diastolic
pressure
Diastolic
augmentation
Assisted
systole
Assisted aortic
end-diastolic
pressure
Diastolic
augmentation
Prolonged rate
of rise of
assisted systole
Unassisted
systole
Widened
appearance
Assisted aortic
end-diastolic
pressure
(a)  Early deflation
(b)  Late deflation
Fig. 11.7 Arterialwaveformsresultingfrom(a)earlyballoondeﬂationand(b)fromlateballoondeﬂation.The
physiologicconsequencesofthesetimingerrorsaresummarized.IAB,intra-aorticballoon.
transplantation.Patientswhoarenotsuitablecandi-
datesforcardiactransplantationarenotcandidates
fortheTAH.
TheCardioWesthasa70-mLstrokevolumeand
can deliver cardiac outputs of 9.5L/min. It is a
pneumaticallydrivendeviceandeachventriclehas
apneumaticdriveline.Thedrivelinesareattachedto
adriveconsoleonwheels.Thedriveconsoleislarge
becauseitcontainsfouraircompressors,aprimary
andabackupforeachventricle(Fig.11.13).
The prosthetic ventricles are rigid polyurethane,
Dacron mesh shells divided into a blood and
apneumaticchamberbyafour-layerpolyurethane
diaphragm. The diaphragm is ﬂexible but non-
compliant and each layer is separated by a small
amount of graphite for lubrication. Unidirectional
Medtronic-Halltiltingdiscvalvesarelocatedinthe
bloodchamber.Theventriclesareidentical,except
that the spacing between the inﬂow and outﬂow
valves in the right ventricle is larger to allow for
aortic outﬂow when the ventricles are attached
togetherwithaVelcropatch(Fig.11.14).
The pneumatic chamber communicates with
the pneumatic drive system via the pneumaticAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch11” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 387 — #13
MechanicalCirculatorySupport 387
Fig. 11.8 Useofthe“verify”featurehighlightsthe
periodofballooninﬂationinrealtimeonthearterial
waveform.Aballoonpressurewaveformisdisplayedon
thethirdchannel.
driveline. As pressurized air is introduced into the
pneumatic chamber, the diaphragm moves such
thatthebloodchamberbecomespressurizedaswell.
When the pressure in the blood chamber exceeds
the device ﬁlling pressure, the inﬂow valve will
close.Whenpressureinthebloodchamberexceeds
aortic or pulmonary artery pressure, the outﬂow
valve opens and ejection commences. These pro-
cessesconstitutetheisovolumicandejectionphases
ofsystoleintheprostheticventricle(Fig.11.15a,b).
Attheendofsystole,airisventedpassivelyfrom
thepneumaticchambertotheatmosphereandthe
pressureinthebloodchamberfalls.Thisconstitutes
isovolumic relaxation. When the pressure in the
rightatriumandleftatriumexceedsthepressurein
thebloodchamberofthecorrespondingprosthetic
ventricle, the inﬂow valve opens. The diaphragm
is free to move in such a manner that virtually
Fig. 11.9 Intra-aorticballoonpump(IABP)controlconsoleshowingtheinﬂationanddeﬂation“Earlier”and“Later”
buttonstoﬁneballoontiming.Earliermodelshadactualslides.IAB,intra-aorticballoon.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch11” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 388 — #14
388 Chapter11
Peak inflation
(positive overshoot)
Plateau (full inflation of IAB)
IAB
deflation
IAB
inflation
Return to zero baseline
Peak deflation
(negative
overshoot)
Zero baseline
Fig. 11.10 Anormalballoonpressurewaveform.IAB,
intra-aorticballoon.
Catheter kink
Rounded balloon
pressure waveform.
Loss of plateau resulting
from kink or obstruction
Of shuttle gas. This may
be caused by a kink in catheter
tubing, improper IAB catheter
position, the sheath not pulled
back to allow inflation of IAB,
IAB too large for aorta, IAB is
not fully unwrapped, or H2O condensation in external tubing.
Fig. 11.11 Aballoonpressurewaveformfromakinked
ballooncatheter.IAB,IAB,intra-aorticballoon.
Gas loss
Leak in the closed
system causing the
balloon pressure
waveform to fall below
zero baseline.
This may be due to a
loose connection, leak in IAB
catheter, H2O condensation in external
tubing, or a patient who is tachycardic and febrile which causes increase
gas diffusion through the IAB membrane.
Fig. 11.12 Aballoonpressurewaveformfromaballoon
withagasleak.IAB,intra-aorticballoon.
the entire volume of the prosthetic ventricle can
ﬁll with blood as all the air leaves the pneumatic
chamber.Thisconstitutesdiastoleintheprosthetic
ventricle(seeFig.11.15).
Insertion
Placement of the TAH requires CPB with aortic
cross-clampingandbicavalcannulation.Thedevice
Fig. 11.13 SchematicoftheCardioWesttotalartiﬁcial
heart(TAH)showingthepneumaticdrivelines,drive
console,andcardiacoutputmonitoranddeviceunit
(COMDU).
34976
RIGHT
34938
LEFT
Fig. 11.14 Close-upoftheCardioWesttotalartiﬁcial
heart(TAH)prostheticventriclesjoinedbyaVelcro
patch.Theatrialinﬂowcuffsareshowninthe
background.TheDacronoutﬂowgraftsareshowninthe
foreground.Thepneumaticdrivelinesareatthebottom
ofthepicture.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch11” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 389 — #15
MechanicalCirculatorySupport 389
Fig. 11.15 Schematicofthe
CardioWesttotalartiﬁcialheart(TAH)
in(a)end-diastoleand(b)end-systole.
Blood flow
(a) (b)
Blood
Air Air
AirAir exhausted
Arterial graft
Housing
Diaphragm
Base
Blood flow
Atrial cuff
Stroke
volume
isplacedinthepatient’spericardialcavitywiththe
RV and LV pneumatic drivelines exiting through
theskin.Thepatient’snativeventriclesareexcised,
leaving a large cuff of right and left atrium. The
inﬂow cuff of each ventricle is anastomosed to
the appropriate atrium. End-to-end anastomoses
are created between the outﬂow graft of the pros-
thetic ventricle and the appropriate great vessel.
The TAH has been placed in patients weighing as
little as 50kg, but the best ﬁt is in patients with
weightsinthe80-kgrange(BSA >1.7m2)withlarge
hearts. Closure of the chest after device implan-
tation in patients who are too small can produce
pulmonary and systemic venous obstruction. The
inferior vena cava (IVC) and the left upper and
left lower pulmonary veins are at particular risk
of obstruction. Venous obstruction limits device
outputandisultimatelyfatal.
ManagementoftheTAH
TheTAHismonitoredwiththecardiacoutputmon-
itoranddiagnosticunit(COMDU).COMDUallows
analysisofairexhaustﬂowduringdiastolethrough
transductionofapneumotach.Theﬂowisdisplayed
asacurvewithrespecttotime(Figs11.16&11.17).
Integration of this curve yields the volume of air
displacedfromthepneumaticchamberduringdias-
tole.Whenaveragedoverseveralbeats,thisisequal
to cardiac output. The system allows computation
of cardiac output for each ventricle. In addition,
transductionofthedrivelinepressureallowsdevice
ﬁllingandemptyingtobemonitoredovertime,as
illustratedinFigs11.18and11.19.
The heart rate and percentage of systole are set
bytheoperatorandcompleteejectionissoughton
12
Air
Driver
3-way
valve
Start of
integration
Fill volume
12
Diastole
Inflow valve
opens
Systole
Flow (L /min)
Flow
transducer
Air
3-way valve opened
to vacuum or 
room air
Fig. 11.16 SchematicoftheCardioWesttotalartiﬁcial
heart(TAH)pneumotachandtheresultingﬁll-ratecurve
derivedfromairﬂowoutofthedeviceindiastole.
each cycle. The drive pressures are set just high
enough to completely empty the ventricle. The
occurrenceofafullejectpatternisthenseenonthe
air-pressurewaveform.Thedeviceisnotallowedto
ﬁllcompletelyoneachbeat.Thisallowsautomatic
adjustment for the difference in volumes pumped
bythetwoventricles;theLVpumpsmorethanthe
RV because of the existence of bronchial ﬂow. It
alsoprovidesforpreloadreserve.Asvenousreturn
increases(suchaswithpatientpositionchangesor
exercise),strokevolumecanincreaseuptothelimit
ofthe70mL.
Themaximumend-diastolicvolumeofthepros-
thetic ventricle may be difﬁcult to achieve when
diastoleisshort(slowejectionrate,highpercentage
of systole) and ﬁlling pressure is low. The pneu-
matic drive system of the CardioWest TAH allows
vacuum to be applied to the pneumatic chamberAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch11” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 390 — #16
390 Chapter11
50
40
30
20
Filling rate (L /min)10
0.1 0.2
Seconds
80 b/min
0.3
Complete
filling
of right
ventricle
LFV= 77
RFV=75
LCO=6.2
RCO=6.0
Fig. 11.17 ActualﬁllratecurvefromaCardioWesttotal
artiﬁcialheart(TAH)patient.Thereiscompleteﬁllingof
therightventricle.Leftﬁllvolume(LFV)andrightﬁll
volume(RFV)areobtainedbyintegratingtheareaunder
theleftandrightﬁllratecurves.TheproductofLFVand
devicerate(80b/min)yieldstheleftcardiacoutput
(LCO).TheproductofRFVanddevicerate(80b/min)
yieldstherightcardiacoutput(RCO).
1
Air
AirAirAir
2
213
DiastoleSystole
Outflow
valve
opens
3-way valve
opened to
air supply
Full
ejection
3
Pressure
transducer
Driver
3-way
valve
Pressure (mmHg)
Air
Fig. 11.18 SchematicoftheCardioWesttotalartiﬁcial
heart(TAH)pressuretransducerandtheresulting
pressurewaveforminsystoleanddiastole.
during isovolumic relaxation and diastole to has-
tenthefallinbloodchamberpressureandenhance
diastolicﬁlling.Toreducethelikelihoodofentrain-
ingairaroundanastomoticsitesandintroducingthe
riskofairembolism,vacuumgenerallyisnotapplied
untilthepatient’schestisclosed.Normally, −25to
−50mmHgofvacuumisapplied.
Anticoagulation
Anticoagulation generally is started after pro-
tamine reversal of intraoperative UFH and chest
Ejection
phase
Incomplete
ejection
Complete
ejection
point
Complete
ejection
plateau
Diastole
Systole
Complete
filling
deflection
Fig.11.19 ActualpressurewaveformfromaCardioWest
totalartiﬁcialheart(TAH)patient.Thesecondwaveform
fromtheleftindicatesincompleteemptyingofthe
prostheticventricle.Thiscanberectiﬁedeitherby
afterloadreductionorbyincreasingdrivelinepressure.
Thethirdwaveformfromtheleftindicatesdriveline
pressurejusthighenoughtoensurecompleteemptying
oftheprostheticventricle.Thefourthwaveformfromthe
leftalsoindicatescompleteemptyingoftheprosthetic
ventricle.Anexcessiveplateauisindicativeofadriveline
pressurethatishigherthannecessary.Completeﬁllingof
theprostheticventricleisindicatedbythenegative
deﬂectioninthepressurewaveformduringdiastole.This
isproducedbythecompliantdiaphragmrebounding
overtheairexhaustportinthebaseoftheprosthetic
ventricle.Intheinstanceillustratedhere,completeﬁlling
oftheprostheticventricleoccursatend-diastole
followingthesecondwaveform.
tube drainage less than 100mL/h for 3 con-
secutive hours. Low-molecular-weight dextran
(dextran 40) infused at 25mL/h and oral or naso-
gastricdipyridamole(75–100mg3–4times/day)are
started. When chest tube drainage is minimal and
serous, the dextran is stopped and a continu-
ous UFH infusion is initiated; the goal is to keep
the PTT 1.5–2.0 times control. At 1–2weeks post-
operatively,theUFHisdiscontinuedandcoumadin
is started; the goal is an international normalized
ratio (INR) of 1.5–2.0. Some centers add aspirin
(325–975mg/day)aswell.
Thoratec VAD system
The Thoratec VAD or Pierce–Donachy VAD
(Figs11.19&11.20)isanextracorporeal,pulsatile
VAD that can be used in parallel with the RV and
in parallel or in series with the LV. The device hasAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch11” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 391 — #17
MechanicalCirculatorySupport 391
Fig. 11.20 Thoratecventricularassistdevice(VAD).The
inﬂowtothedeviceisontherightandtheoutﬂowison
theleft.Thepneumaticdriveandincorporatedelectric
cableareatthebottomofthedevice.
aneffectivestrokevolumeof65mLandcandeliver
acardiacoutputof6.5L/min.Itisapneumatically
driven device and has a pneumatic driveline. The
driveline is attached to a drive console on wheels.
Thedriveconsoleislargebecauseitcontainsfourair
compressors, two for each driver, a primary and a
backup.AHallsensorbuiltintotherigidcasemon-
itors movement of the pump diaphragm. A small
magnetmountedonthediaphragmtriggerstheHall
sensorwhenthetwocomeincontact.Thisinforma-
tion is transmitted to the console via an electrical
cableandallowsthecontrolconsoletoknowwhen
thebloodchamberisfull.Inaddition,transduction
of the driveline pressure allows device ﬁlling and
emptying to be monitored over time as described
fortheCardioWestTAH.
The prosthetic ventricle is a rigid polysulfone
case divided into a blood and a pneumatic cham-
ber by a ﬂexible, noncompliant polyurethane
diaphragm.UnidirectionalBjork–Shileymonostrut
Derlininﬂowandoutﬂowvalvesarelocatedinthe
blood chamber. The pneumatic chamber commu-
nicates with the pneumatic drive system via the
pneumatic driveline. The same principles for sys-
tole and diastole as described for the CardioWest
TAHapply.
Insertion
The device rests on the anterior abdominal wall.
Thedeviceisextracorporealtherebylimitingpatient
mobility.Theinﬂowandoutﬂowconduitsaretun-
neledintothethoraciccavity.ForuseasanRVAD,
the inﬂow cannula is inserted in the right atrium
and the Dacron outﬂow conduit is anastomosed
end-to-side to the pulmonary artery. For use as a
parallelLVAD,theinﬂowcannulaisinsertedinthe
leftatriumandtheDacronoutﬂowconduitisanas-
tomosedend-to-sidetotheaorta.Foruseasaseries
LVAD,theinﬂowconduitisinsertedintheLVapex
and the Dacron outﬂow conduit is anastomosed
end-to-sidetotheaorta.
Insertion requires a median sternotomy. In the
postcardiotomy setting, CPB already is in use
becausefailuretoweanfromCPBistheindication
forplacementofthedevice.Postcardiotomysupport
is generally accomplished with atrial cannulation
ratherthancannulationoftheLVapex.Thisfacili-
tatessubsequentweaningofthedevice.Forpatients
with a bridge to transplantation, CPB is necessary
forLVapicalcannulation.
ManagementoftheThoratecVAD
Fourtriggeringmodesareavailable:manual,asyn-
chronous, ﬁll-to-empty, and synchronous. In the
asynchronous mode, the operator chooses the
pumpingrateandpercentageofsystole.Intheﬁll-
to-emptymode,theHallsensordetectsafullblood
chamberandtriggersejection.Thedevicetypicallyis
usedintheﬁll-to-emptymode.Inthismode,device
output is calculated by the console as the product
of stroke volume (65mL) and device rate. Device
output, as determined by the console, is accurate
onlywhencompleteﬁllingoccurs.
The drive pressures are set approximately
100mmHg higher than systolic pressure (230–
250mmHg for the LVAD and 140–160mmHg for
the RVAD). The percentage of systole is set toAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch11” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 392 — #18
392 Chapter11
equal one-half the device rate (percentage of sys-
tole at 60b/min = 30%; percentage of systole at
80b/min = 40%). These measures produce com-
pleteemptyingwithanejectiontimeof300ms.The
occurrence of a full eject pattern is then seen on
the air pressure waveform (see Fig. 11.19). Com-
pletedeviceﬁllingalsocanbeseenonthepressure
waveform(seeFig.11.19).
Themaximumend-diastolicvolumeofthepros-
thetic ventricle may be difﬁcult to achieve when
diastole is short (slow ejection rate, high percent-
age of systole) and ﬁlling pressure is low. Vacuum
can be applied to the pneumatic chamber during
diastoleasdescribedfortheCardioWestTAH.
Anticoagulation
Anticoagulation is as described for the
CardioWestTAH.
Abiomed AB5000, Medos VAD, and
Berlin Heart
ThesedevicesareverysimilartotheThoratecVAD.
Theyareextracorporeal,pulsatileVADthatcanbe
used in parallel with the RV and in parallel or in
serieswiththeLV.Theprostheticventricleisarigid
casedividedintoabloodandapneumaticchamber
by a ﬂexible, noncompliant diaphragm. Unidirec-
tionalinﬂowandoutﬂowvalvesarelocatedinthe
blood chamber. The pneumatic chamber commu-
nicates with the pneumatic drive system via the
pneumaticdriveline.Vacuumcanbeappliedtothe
pneumaticchamberduringdiastole.Theindications
for use and anticoagulation management of these
devicesarethesameastheThoratecVAD.Thefol-
lowing important differences exist between these
devicesandtheThoratecVAD:
• Neither the Medos VAD nor Berlin Heart
has a Hall sensor and therefore cannot oper-
ate autonomously in a ﬁll-to-empty mode (ﬁxed
stroke volume, variable rate). They operate asyn-
chronously in a ﬁxed rate (set by the operator)
variable stroke volume mode. They all allow con-
trolofpercentsystole,devicerate,andrightandleft
drive pressures. The Medos VAD and Berlin Heart
are applicable to the pediatric population as they
havepumpsofvariablebloodchambervolume.
TheMedossystemhasfoursizes:
a Infant.RVAD9mL,LVAD10mL;
b Pediatric.RVAD22.5mL,LVAD25mL;
c Adult.RVAD54mL,LVAD60mL;
d Adult.RVAD72mL,LVAD80mL.
The Berlin Heart has six sizes; 10, 25, 30, 50, 60,
and80mLforeitherRVADorLVADuse.
• TheAbiomedAB5000hasa120mLbloodcham-
berwitha95mLstrokevolumeanda25mLresid-
ual end-systolic volume. This device has a sensor
that triggers ejection when full ﬁlling (cessation of
diastolicgasﬂow)isdetected.Becauseejectionpres-
sure is ﬁxed (420mmHg for LVAD, 300mmHg for
RVAD) the ejection time for complete emptying
increasesasafterloadincreases.Thedeviceoperates
autonomouslyinaﬁll-to-emptymode(ﬁxedstroke
volume, variable rate). Increases in afterload and
decreases in preload will decrease pump output as
aresultofdecreasedpumpratewithaﬁxedstroke
volume.
HeartMate IP and XVE left ventricular
assist system
The HeartMate VAD (Figs 11.21–11.23a,b) is an
implantable, pulsatile LVAD used in series with
the native heart. The device has a stroke volume
of 83mL and is capable of providing 11L/min of
cardiacoutput.Itisavailableinpneumatically(IP)
andelectromechanically(XVE)drivenversions.The
pneumatic version has an external driveline. The
driveline is connected to the pneumatic drive sys-
tem and system controller, which are on wheels.
The pneumatic drive system and system controller
are small because there are no air compressors.
An electric motor is used to drive a diaphragm air
pump.Theelectromechanicallydriven,ventedelec-
tricversionhasapercutaneouselectricandairvent
line that attaches to a portable system controller
and battery pack that can be worn by the patient.
Thesealedelectric(SE)versionunderdevelopment
is totally implantable and has power transduction
occurring through transcutaneous induction coils
withnopercutaneouslines.
Theoutershellofthedeviceistitanium;theinner
blood-contacting surface of the shell is lined with
sinteredtitaniummicrospheres.Arigidpusherplate
coveredbyaﬂexible,biocompatible,polyurethaneAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch11” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 393 — #19
MechanicalCirculatorySupport 393
Aorta
Heart
Diaphragm
Heartmate
blood pump Connection to
external air
power supply
Fig. 11.21 Schematicofanimplantedpneumatic
HeartMateIPleftventricularassistsystem(LVAS).
Cannulationoftheleftventricle(LV)apexandthe
end-to-sideanastomosistotheaortaaredepicted.
Thepercutaneousdrivelineisdepictedexitingthe
abdominalwall.
Fig. 11.22 PhotographoftheHeartMateIPleft
ventricularassistsystem(LVAS).Deviceinﬂowison
theleftandoutﬂowtotheDacrongraftisontheleft.
Thepneumaticdrivelineisbeingheld.
diaphragm divides the prosthetic ventricle in two.
Ononesideofthepusherplateisthebloodcham-
ber; on the other side is the pneumatic or electro-
mechanical pumping mechanism. 25mm porcine
unidirectionalinﬂowandoutﬂowvalvesareplaced
Outlet Full pump
Empty pump
Air
Inlet
Flexible diaphragm
Rigid pusher-plate
Stroke limiter
Stroke sensor
Stroke magnet
(a)
(b)
Fig. 11.23 Schematiccross-sectionofthepneumatic
HeartMateIPLVAS.Bothdiastole(a)andsystole(b)are
depicted.
in the blood chamber. The textured surfaces are
intended to promote formation of a pseudointimal
liningaftercontactwithblood.
Inthepneumaticversion,apresetvolumeofair
is delivered to the blood pump during each beat.
Eachstrokeoftheconsoleairpumpcorrespondsto
one beat of the blood pump delivered via a piston
thatdrivesthepusherplateintothebloodchamber.
Intheelectromechanicalversion,therotarymotion
of a low-speed torque motor is converted to the
linear action of the pusher plate via helical cams.
Energy is transferred to a copper coil, creating an
intra-LVAD electromagnetic ﬁeld to actuate rotor
assembly rotation. One revolution of the motor is
requiredforcompleteexcursionofthepusherplate.
Inbothinstances,theexcursionofthepusherplate
reduces the volume of and pressurizes the blood
chamber.
Whenthepressureinthebloodchamberexceeds
native LV pressure, the inﬂow valve closes. When
the pressure in the blood chamber exceeds aor-
ticpressure,theoutﬂowvalveopensandpumping
commences. This represents the isovolumic and
ejectionphasesofdevicesystole.
When the pneumatic piston or the motor is
switched off, air is vented to the atmosphere fromAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch11” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 394 — #20
394 Chapter11
the pumping chamber and the pusher plate is free
tomove.Whenthepressureinthenativeleftven-
tricle (the chamber ﬁlling the prosthetic ventricle)
exceeds the pressure in the blood chamber, the
inﬂowvalveopensanddiastolicﬁllingcommences.
AHallsensorinthepneumaticpumpdetectsafull
blood chamber and triggers ejection. This allows
beat-to-beatstrokevolumeanddeviceoutputdata
tobederivedanddisplayed.Inaddition,asix-beat
movingaverageofLVADoutputalsoisdisplayed.
Insertion
Thedevicecanbeimplantedintraperitoneallyorin
apreperitonealpocketintheleftupperquandrant.
Theinﬂowandoutﬂowconduitsaretunneledinto
the thoracic cavity. The inﬂow conduit is inserted
into the LV cavity via the LV apex and the Dacron
outﬂow conduit is anastomosed end-to-side to the
ascending aorta. Insertion requires a median ster-
notomy and use of CPB. A single cable containing
the necessary electrical and pneumatic conduits to
power, control and vent air from the device is
tunneledthroughtheabdominalwall.
ManagementoftheHeartMatedevices
The pneumatic device can function in the asyn-
chronous, ﬁll-to-empty, or synchronous modes.
The device usually is operated in the ﬁll-to-empty
mode with pump ejection triggered by the trans-
ducer when the pump is full. LVAD ejection dura-
tioncanbesetbytheoperatorfrom200to450ms
to achieve complete emptying of the device with-
out compromising device ﬁlling. Because minimal
LVADﬁllingtimeis50%oftheselectedLVADejec-
tiondurationLVADratevariesinverselywithejec-
tionduration.TheLVADratevariesfrom89b/min
at an ejection duration of 450ms to 140b/min at
an ejection duration of 200ms. The control con-
solemonitorsdeviceoutputastheproductofdevice
strokevolumeandrateonabeat-to-beatbasis.
The vented electric version does not use a
Hall sensor to measure diaphragm displacement.
Ejection duration is constant and LVAD rate
varies by automatic changes in LVAD ﬁlling
time as determined by the pump controller.
This is feasible because the device is rela-
tively afterload-insensitive. As preload increases,
the pump controller detects a shorter interval
between diaphragm and rotor interaction and
subsequentlyshortensLVADﬁllingtime.
Anticoagulation
Formationofthepseudointimalmembraneobviates
the need for full anticoagulation with heparin or
coumadin. Aspirin (81mg/day) and dipyridamole
(75mgthreetimes/day)havebeenusedasthesole
long-termanticoagulants.Coumadinmaybeadded
forpatientswithpre-existingthrombusinthenative
heart.
Novacor LVAD
The Novacor LVAD (Figs 11.24–11.26a–c) is an
implantablepulsatileLVADusedinserieswiththe
native heart. The device has a stroke volume of
70mL and is capable of providing 10L/min of car-
diac output. It is the prototypical pulsatile electro-
mechanical pump, conﬁgured to convert electrical
energytothemechanicalenergynecessarytoeject
bloodfromtheprostheticventricularchamber.The
newest version of the Novacor has a percutaneous
electric conduit and air vent line, which attaches
Fig. 11.24 Schematicofanimplanted
electromechanicallydrivenNovacorleftventricularassist
system(LVAS)device.Cannulationoftheleftventricle
(LV)apexandtheend-to-sideanastomosistotheaorta
aredepicted.Thepercutaneousdrivelineisdepicted
exitingtheabdominalwall.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch11” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 395 — #21
MechanicalCirculatorySupport 395
Fig. 11.25 PhotographoftheNovacorleftventricular
assistsystem(LVAS)device.Deviceinﬂowwiththeleft
ventricle(LV)apexcannulainplaceisontherightand
deviceoutﬂowtotheDacrongraftisontheleft.The
drivelinewithenclosedelectricalcablesisseenlooped
underthepump.
toaportablemicroprocessor/systemcontrollerand
batterypackthatcanbewornbythepatient.
This prosthetic ventricle consists of a bio-
compatible sac bonded to symmetrically opposed
pusherplateshousedinalightweightshell.21mm
Carpentier–Edwards porcine unidirectional inﬂow
andoutﬂowvalvesareplacedinthebloodchamber.
Asolenoidenergyconverterisusedtotransferelec-
trical energy to mechanical energy via preloaded
beam springs, which then drive the pusher plates.
Whenthesolenoidisopen, energyisstoredinthe
beam springs, the pusher plates and blood sac are
free to expand, and diastolic ﬁlling of the pros-
thetic ventricle via the left ventricle takes place.
Whenthesolenoidisclosed,theenergystoredinthe
beamspringsisreleased.Theresultingcompression
of the blood sac between the pusher plates cre-
ates the pressure necessary for the isovolumic and
ejection phases of systole. Displacement transduc-
ers within the solenoid energy converter monitor
pusher-plate position. This allows beat-to-beat ﬁll
volume,residualvolume,andstrokevolumetobe
determined.Thisinformation,incombinationwith
devicerate,allowsdeviceoutputdatatobederived
anddisplayed.
Insertion
DeviceinsertionisasdescribedfortheHeartMateIP
andXVEleftventricularassistsystem(LVAS).
ManagementoftheNovacor
Thesystemwasoriginallydesignedtooperateinthe
ﬁll rate trigger mode. In the ﬁll rate trigger mode,
the rate at which the pump ﬁlls is used to trigger
ejection.Atthestartofdeviceﬁlling,thepumpﬁll
rate is high. Toward the end of device ﬁlling, the
pumpﬁllratefalls.Byadjustingthe endofﬁllthresh-
oldsetting,thepercentagebywhichtheﬁllratemust
fall to trigger device ejection can be set. In actual
clinicalpractice,ﬁllingoftheNovacoroccursduring
LV diastole in some beats and during LV systole in
otherbeatswhileintheﬁllratetriggermode.This
occursastheresultofchangesinpreloadandheart
rate with changes in patient activity level. Despite
this,theaorticvalverarelyopens.Patientswhohave
beendischargedfromthehospitalwiththeNovacor
devicehavethe endofﬁllthreshold setto100%.This
allowsthedevicetofunctionasifinaﬁll-to-empty
mode. This allows reliable pump function with no
operatorintervention.Thecontrolconsoledisplays
beat-to-beat LVAD output as the product of LVAD
stroke volume and rate. Beat-to-beat visualization
oftheﬁll-ratecurvealsoisavailable.
Anticoagulation
AnticoagulationisasdescribedfortheTAH.
Abiomed BVS 5000
TheAbiomedBVS5000(Fig.11.27)isanextracor-
porealpulsatileVADusedinparallelwiththenative
ventricles. The device has an effective stroke vol-
ume of 80mL and a cardiac output of 5L/min. It
is a pneumatically driven system and has a pneu-
matic driveline attached to a computerized control
consoleonwheels.
Thedeviceconsistsofatrialandventricularcham-
bers arranged vertically in a rigid polycarbonate
housing (Fig. 11.28). The atrial and ventricular
chambers are polyurethane bladders. The ventric-
ularchambercontainspolyurethaneunidirectional
tri-leaﬂetinﬂowandoutﬂowvalves.
The atrial bladder ﬁlls continuously by gravity
from the patient’s native atrium. The ventricularAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch11” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 396 — #22
396 Chapter11
Solenoid core Main spring
Preload spring
Pusher plate
Frame
Pump sac
Pump housing ring
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 11.26 Schematiccross-sectionoftheNovacorleftventricularassistsystem(LVAS).(a)Thepumpisﬁlled,the
solenoidisopened.Thepreloadspringlimitsexpansionofthepumpsacto70mL.(b)Thesolenoidisclosedand
magneticallylatched.Thisconstitutesisovolumiccontraction.(c)Endofejectionwithcompletepumpemptying.
bladder is pressurized by introduction of pressur-
ized air into rigid air chamber around the bladder.
When the pressure in the air chamber is atmo-
spheric, atrial bladder pressure exceeds ventricular
bladder pressure, the inﬂow valve opens, and the
ventricularbladderﬁllswithblood.Thisconstitutes
diastole in the device. When the ventricular blad-
der is full, the air chamber is pressurized. When
ventricular bladder pressure exceeds atrial bladder
pressure, the inﬂow valve closes. When pressure
in the ventricular bladder exceeds aortic or pul-
monary artery pressure, the outﬂow valve opensAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch11” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 397 — #23
MechanicalCirculatorySupport 397
Heart
Left heart
BVS pump
Right heart
BVS pump
BVS drive console
BVS
cannulae
Fig. 11.27 SchematicofanimplantedpneumaticallydrivenAbiomedBVS5000usedasabiventricularassistdevice
(BiVAD).Cannulationoftheleftatrium(LA)andtheend-to-sideanastomosistotheaortaaredepicted,asare
cannulationoftherightatrium(RA)andtheend-to-sideanastomosistothemainpulmonaryartery.Thepercutaneous
drivelinesaredepictedexitingtheabdominalwall.Thedeviceisseentobelocatedbelowthelevelofthepatient’sheart.
andejectioncommences.Theseprocessesconstitute
theisovolumicandejectionphasesofsystoleinthe
prostheticventricle(Fig.11.29a,b).
Insertion
ThedeviceismountedonIVpolesbelowthelevelof
thepatient’sheart.Polyvinylchloride(PVC)tubing
broughtthroughthechestwallconnectstheinﬂow
and outﬂow cannulas to the device. For use as an
RVAD, the inﬂow cannula is inserted in the right
atrium and the Dacron outﬂow conduit is anas-
tomosed end-to-side to the pulmonary artery. For
use as an LVAD, the inﬂow cannula is inserted in
the left atrium and the Dacron outﬂow conduit
is anastomosed end-to-side to the aorta. Insertion
requires a median sternotomy. Although CPB is
notabsolutelynecessaryforinsertionofthedevice,
it is commonly used. In the postcardiotomy set-
ting,CPBalreadyisinusebecausefailuretowean
from CPB is the indication for placement of the
device. When intermediate- to long-term support
is needed the inﬂow and outﬂow cannula of the
BVS5000 can be used with the Abiomed AB5000
system so that a device “device swap” can take
place.
ManagementoftheAbiomedBVS5000
The pneumatic control console monitors pump
function by analysis of air return from the pneu-
matic driveline. Pump rate and diastolic/systolic
intervals are determined automatically and the
pump functions in the ﬁll-to-empty mode. DeviceAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch11” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 398 — #24
398 Chapter11
Fig. 11.28 PhotographoftheAbiomed
BVS5000device.Deviceinﬂowisatthetop,outﬂowisat
thebottom.Thepneumaticdrivelineisseenenteringthe
bottomthirdofthedeviceontheleft.
output is monitored and displaced by the control
console.Auniquefeatureofthisdeviceisthatthe
system is operator-independent. Therefore, engi-
neeringandperfusionstaffisnotnecessaryduring
operationofthedevice.
WhenthedeviceisusedasaBiVAD,differential
recovery of the RV and LV function requires care-
fulmanagementduetothelimitationof5L/minon
device output. As RV function recovers, total pul-
monaryoutputwillbeacombinationofRVADout-
putandnativeRVoutput.Ifatthesametimethereis
noLVrecovery,systemicoutputwillbedetermined
byLVADoutput.Ifthecombinedpulmonaryoutput
exceedsthemaximaloutputoftheLVAD(5L/min),
thenLV,LA,andpulmonaryvenouscongestionwill
occur. The solution is to reduce RVAD output so
thatpulmonaryandsystemicoutputsarematched.
AsimilarscenariocanbedescribedforLVrecovery
intheabsenceofRVrecovery.
Anticoagulation
AnticoagulationismaintainedwithanUFHinfusion
tokeeptheACTat150–200seconds.
Blood inflow
from patient
Blood inflow
from patient
Inflow
bladder
fills
Inflow
valve
closes
Outflow
bladder
ejects
Outflow
valve
opens
Air
pressure
applied
Air
exhaust
Vent
Inflow
bladder
empties
Inflow
valve
opens
Outflow
bladder
fills
Outflow
valve
closes
Vent
Blood outflow
to patient
Arterial
pressure
(a) (b)
⇐ ⇐
⇐⇐
⇐
⇐
⇐
⇐
Fig. 11.29 Schematiccross-sectionoftheAbiomed
BVS5000device.(a)End-systoleand(b)end-diastoleare
depicted.
Centrifugal pumps
Centrifugalpumpsareextracorporeal,nonpulsatile
pumps used in parallel with the native ventricles
(Fig.11.30).TheBioMedicuspumpcanbeusedas
both a RVAD and LVAD. This device is capable of
providing outputs of 2.0–6.0L/min. The Tandem-
Heart is intended for LVAD use. It is small with
a 7mL prime volume and can provide ﬂows of
3.5–4.0L/min.
Centrifugal pumps use a constrained vortex to
impartkineticenergytoﬂuidinarotatinghead.The
rotating head consists of a series of concentrically
arrangedconesorﬁnscontainedwithinarigidplas-
tic shell (see Fig. 10.3). Rotary motion is imparted
to the cones or ﬁns by a drive console. Coupling
of the drive console to the pump head is accom-
plishedwithmagnetsinthebaseofthepumphead.
Rotationoftheconesorﬁnscreatesavortexthatis
constrainedbytherigidplastichousing.Thiscreates
lowerpressureatthecenterofthepumpthanatthe
periphery. The pressure gradient draws blood intoAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch11” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 399 — #25
MechanicalCirculatorySupport 399
Fig. 11.30 Schematicofacentrifugalpumpusedforleft
ventricularsupport.Cannulationoftheleftatriumand
theaortaaredepicted.Thecentrifugalpumpdrive
consoleisnotshown.
thecenterofthepumpandimpartspressuretothe
bloodasitleavesthepumpattheperiphery.
This arrangement produces a pump that is very
afterloadandpreloaddependent.Asaresult,pump
outputatagivenrevolutions/mincanvarygreatly.
At a given revolutions/min increasing outlet pres-
sureordecreasingpreloadwillreducepumpoutput.
Outlet pressure is a combination of the pressure
dropacrosstheoutletcannulaandtheresistanceof
therecipientvascularbed.Forexample,atanout-
letpressureof200mmHg,aBio-Medicuspumpcan
generate 4L/min of ﬂow at 200revolutions/min.
Increasing outlet pressure to 400mmHg requires
3000revolutions/mintomaintain4L/minofﬂow.
Attheextremes,clampingtheinﬂoworoutﬂow
line will result in no pump output despite the fact
that the pump head continues to rotate. Because
pump output decreases as afterload increases, line
pressure in a centrifugal pump can never reach
the point at which connections will come apart or
the pumping mechanism will fail. This is a major
advantageofcentrifugalpumpsoverocclusiveroller
pumps.Becausepumpoutputdoesnotvarydirectly
withrevolutions/min,monitoringcentrifugalpump
outputrequiresuseofaDopplerorelectromagnetic
ﬂowprobeontheoutﬂowline.
Another advantage of centrifugal pumps over
occlusive roller pumps is the reduced potential to
pump air into the circulation. Inadvertently intro-
ducedairtendstoremaininthelow-pressurecen-
ter of the pump and is not introduced into the
circulation.
Insertion
The BioMedicus device is mounted on the drive
console. Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) tubing brought
throughthechestwallorsternotomyconnectsthe
inﬂowandoutﬂowcannulastothedevice.Standard
CPBarterialandvenouscannulasareused.Foruse
as an RVAD, the inﬂow cannula is inserted in the
rightatriumandtheoutﬂowcannulaisinsertedinto
themainpulmonaryartery.ForuseasanLVAD,the
inﬂowcannulaisinsertedintheleftatriumandthe
outﬂowcannulaisinsertedintotheascendingaorta.
Insertionisaccomplishedviaamediansternotomy.
Duetothehighincidenceofpostoperativebleeding,
impairmentofvenousdrainageintothedeviceand
pulmonary dysfunction in the postcardiotomy set-
tingthesternaledgesoftenareleftunopposedand
anocclusivedressingisplacedoverthesternotomy.
The chest is then closed after the device has been
removedintheoperatingroom.
Although CPB is not absolutely necessary for
insertion of the device, it is commonly used. In
the postcardiotomy setting, CPB is already in use
as failure to wean from CPB is the indication for
placementofthedevice.
TheTandemHeartdeviceandthesmalldrivecon-
sole can lie on the patient’s leg. The inﬂow and
outﬂow to the device are placed percutaneously.
Thefemoralveiniscannulatedandtheinﬂowcan-
nula is directed across the atrial septum into the
LAunderdirectvisionintheoperatingroom(OR)
or with use of ﬂuoroscopy or TEE in the catheter-
ization laboratory. The femoral artery is used for
device outﬂow. The device provides parallel LVAD
support.
Managementofthecentrifugalpump
The centrifugal pump requires the presence of
a trained individual. Flow is adjusted to meet
metabolic demands. If ﬂow does not increase
with increases in pump revolutions/min, reduced
preloadorelevatedafterloadshouldbetreated.Ele-
vatedMAPshouldbetreatedbyreducingsystemicAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch11” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 400 — #26
400 Chapter11
vascular resistance (SVR) with a vasodilator. Ele-
vatedpulmonaryarterypressure(PAP)mayrequire
treatment with a pulmonary vasodilator. A pul-
monaryarterycatheterwillallowlowassessmentof
bothRVADpreload(centralvenouspressure(CVP))
and LVAD preload (pulmonary artery occlusion
pressure(PAOP)).
Centrifugalpumpsarepronetothrombusforma-
tioninthepumpheadduetoheatproducedinthe
bearing housing during rotation. As a result, some
manufacturers recommend changing the pump
head every 24–48hours. In addition, pump ﬂows
lowerthan2L/minareassociatedwithpumphead
andcannulathrombusformation.
Anticoagulation
AUFHinfusionisusedtomaintainanACTbetween
100 and 200seconds or a PTT between 60 and
80seconds(1.5–2.0timescontrol).Thepumphead
must be monitored for thrombus formation and
mustbechangedifthereisevidenceofthrombus.
Axial pumps
Axial pumps are intracorporeal pumps used in
serieswiththeleftventricle.Thesecompactpumps
employ an impeller mechanism that is the only
moving part. At the proximal end of the pump
stationary airfoil-shaped vanes may be used to
straightenbloodﬂowpriortoentryintoanimpeller.
The impeller then imparts radial velocity (kinetic
energy)tothebloodasitdrawsbloodintothepump.
Atthedistalendofthepumpthereisasetofstation-
ary diffuser (stator) vanes serving to impart axial
velocitybystraighteningﬂow.Thisconvertskinetic
energytostaticpressure(potentialenergy)asblood
leavesthepump.
These pumps are small; about the size of a C
or D cell battery. They have small priming vol-
umes but operate at very high rotational speeds
(8000–10000revolutions/min) allowing them to
generate 6–8L/min of nonpulsatile ﬂow
(Figs 11.31 & 11.32). There are three axial pumps
availableforclinicaluse:
Jarvik2000
Thetwo-bladeimpellerisaneodymium-iron-boron
magnetmountedontwoceramicbearingsmounted
Fig. 11.31 Schematicofanimplanted
electromechanicallydrivenHeartMateIIaxialﬂowleft
ventricularassistsystem(LVAS).Cannulationoftheleft
ventricle(LV)apexandtheend-to-sideanastomosisto
theaortaaredepicted.Thepercutaneousdrivelineis
depictedexitingtheabdominalwall.
Flow straightener
Motor stator
Stator housing
Diffuser
Inducer/impeller
Flow tube
Blood flow
Fig. 11.32 Schematiccross-sectionoftheMicroMed
DeBakeyventricularassistdevice(VAD)axialpump.
Bloodentersthroughtheﬂowstraightenerdrawninby
thecombinationinducer(helicalblades)andimpeller.
Radialﬂowisconvertedtoaxialﬂowbythestationary
bladesofthediffuserpriortobloodexitingthepump.
Theelectricmotorisdepictedaswell.Thepercutaneous
drivelineisdepictedatbottomleft.
inatitaniumhousing.Outﬂowstatorbladesdirect
ﬂow into a 16mm outﬂow graft. A brushless DC
currentmotorwithinthetitaniumhousingcreates
theelectromagneticforcetorotatetheimpeller.The
motorisdrivenviaapercutaneouspowercablecon-
nected to a system controller and 12-volt batteryAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch11” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 401 — #27
MechanicalCirculatorySupport 401
pack system that can be worn by the patient on
a belt. The controller allows manual adjustment
of the impeller revolutions/min. Infant and child
versions of the Jarvik 2000 are currently under
development.
MicroMed(DeBakey)VAD
This pump has a 25mL prime volume including
the titanium inﬂow cannula. Stationary airfoil-
shaped vanes are used to straighten blood ﬂow
prior to entry into the inducer/impeller (a combi-
nation of helixically and axially oriented blades).
Theinducer/impellerhassixbladeswitheightmag-
netssealedineachblade.Outﬂowdiffuser(stator)
bladesdirectﬂowintotheoutﬂowgraft.Abrushless
DCcurrentmotorwithinthetitaniumhousingcre-
ates the electromagnetic force necessary to rotate
the impeller. The motor is driven via a percuta-
neouspowercableconnectedtoasystemcontroller
and 12-volt battery pack system that can be worn
by the patient. An ultrasonic ﬂow probe on the
outﬂow cannula allows continuous measurement
and display of pump output on the laptop driven
Clinical Data Acquisition Unit. Changes in pump
revolutions/min are made using this unit as well.
Thecablefortheﬂowprobeisbundledinwiththe
percutaneous power cable. A pediatric version of
theMicroMedVAD;theDeBakeyVAD®Childnow
has FDA humanitarian device exemption (HDE)
status. This device is intended for patients with a
BSA between 0.7m2 and 1.5m2 and thus suit-
ableforchildrenbetweenapproximately5–16years
ofage.
HeartMateII
Three stationary airfoil-shaped vanes are used to
straighten blood ﬂow prior to entry into a three-
vaneimpellerthatissuspendedinthesinteredtita-
niumpumphousingontwocompositeballandcup
bearings.Outﬂowdiffuser(stator)bladesdirectﬂow
intotheoutﬂowgraft.Amagnetisincorporatedinto
theimpellerrotorandaDCcurrentbrushlesselec-
tric motor is used to generate the electromagnetic
currentnecessarytorotatetheimpeller.Themotor
isdrivenviaapercutaneouspowercableconnected
to a system controller and 12-volt battery pack
systemthatcanbewornbythepatient.
Insertion
These devices are implanted in a preperitoneal
pocket in the left upper quadrant. The inﬂow
and outﬂow conduits are tunneled into the tho-
raciccavity.Insertionrequiresamediansternotomy
(MicroMed and HeartMate II) or left thoracotomy
(Jarvik 2000) and use of CPB. The inﬂow con-
duit of the MicroMed and HeartMate II devices is
inserted into the LV cavity via the LV apex and
the Dacron outﬂow conduit is anastomosed end-
to-side to the ascending aorta. The Jarvik 2000
deviceisimplanteddirectlyintotheLVwithoutan
inﬂow conduit and the Dacron outﬂow conduit is
anastomosedend-to-sidetotheproximaldescend-
ing aorta. The power cable of all three devices is
tunneledthroughtheabdominalwall.
Managementofaxialpumps
Thesedevicesareremarkablysimpletooperatewith
pump output determined by revolutions/min and
/Delta1P(aorticpressure–LVpressure).Increasingpump
revolutions/min will increase pump ﬂow until the
negative inﬂow pressure is low enough to cause
suction and collapse of the LV around the inﬂow
portion of the pump. In addition, for a given rev-
olutions/min pump ﬂow is inversely proportional
to /Delta1P.Inotherwords,thelowerthe /Delta1Pthehigher
the pump ﬂow at a given revolutions/min. As a
result,thesepumpsarehighlyafterloadandpreload
sensitive. /Delta1P is most effectively reduced by low-
ering aortic pressure (afterload reduction) or by
increasing LV pressure (preload augmentation, LV
contraction).Infact,inthepresenceofincreasedLV
contractility semi-pulsatile ﬂow may occur both as
the result of aortic valve opening and as the result
of cyclic increases in pump output with the/Delta1P
reduction that accompanies LV contraction. Most
centers program axial pumps at a revolutions/min
that allows the native aortic valve to open at least
several times per minute as a method of prevent-
ingstasisandpotentialthrombusformationonthe
aorticvalve.
Anticoagulation
AnticoagulationisasdescribedfortheTAH.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch11” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 402 — #28
402 Chapter11
Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation
Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO)
circuits (Fig. 11.33) are a modiﬁcation of the CPB
circuitdescribedindetailinChapter10.Speciﬁcally,
ECMOcircuitsdifferfromthetypicalCPBcircuitin
thefollowingaspects:
• Asiliconemembraneoxygenatorisusedinplace
of a microporous membrane oxygenator. Silicone
membranesremainfunctionalfordaysascompared
tohoursformicroporousmembranes.
• NocardiotomysuctionisusedinanECMOcircuit.
• A closed venous reservoir (bladder) system
is used in conjunction with a servomechanism.
The servomechanism functions to control pump
ﬂowrelativetobladderpressure.
• ECMOcircuitscanbeusedforvenovenous(VV)
or venoarterial (VA) support. VA support is simi-
lar to CPB and is used for mechanical circulatory
support.VVsupportisusedforpatientswithsevere
pulmonary dysfunction in the setting of preserved
myocardialfunction.Venousbloodisdrainedfrom
aproximallocationinthecentralvenouscirculation
O2
Blender
CO2
Membrane
oxygenator
Pre-membrane
pressure
monitor
O2
Fluids
Pump Heparin
Venous
reservoir
Heat
exchanger
Post-membrane
pressure monitor
Arterial
cannula
Fig. 11.33 Schematicofavenoarterial(VA)
extracorporealmembraneoxygenator(ECMO)circuit.
Peripheralcannulationviatherightinternalcarotid
arteryandrightinternaljugularveinisdepicted.
Anonocclusiverollerpumpisdepicted;somecircuits
useacentrifugalpumpinthissamelocation.Unlike
cardiopulmonarybypass(CPB),rapidcoolingand
rewarmingisnotnecessaryandasaresulttheheat
exchangeunitcanbelocateddistaltothesiliconegas
exchangemembrane.Theservomechanismlinkingthe
closedvenousreservoirandthepumpisnotshown.
Drugsandﬂuidsinlimitedquantitiescanbeaddedto
thecircuitinthelocationsdepicted.
(superior vena cava (SVC) or high right atrium).
AftergasandheatexchangetakeplaceintheECMO
circuitthisbloodisreturnedtoamoredistalsitein
thecentralvenouscirculation(midrightatrium)to
bepumpedbythepatient’sheart.
VA ECMO is particularly useful in the pedi-
atric population and is commonly used for post-
cardiotomy support and as a bridge to transplant.
ECMO can be initiated with peripheral vascular
cannulation, provides biventricular support, and
can provide adequate systemic oxygen delivery in
thepresenceofpulmonaryhypertensionandintra-
cardiac right to left shunting. In addition, many
pediatric patients are too small for placement of
currentlyavailableVAD.RapidinitiationofECMO
(rapid response ECMO) is used in both the adult
and pediatric population to facilitate resuscitation
following acute hemodynamic decompensation or
cardiacarrest.Inadultsandolderchildren,aninitial
periodofresuscitationwithECMOmayprovidesuf-
ﬁcientcardiopulmonarystabilizationandreversalof
end-organinjurytopermitVADinsertion.
Insertion
ECMO can be initiated with either peripheral or
centralcannulation.VAECMOinpediatricpatients
is commonly initiated by surgical exposure of the
rightinternalcarotidarteryandrightinternaljugu-
lar vein. In adults and older children peripheral
cannulation of the femoral artery and vein can be
utilized.Inthepostcardiotomysettingcannulation
isgenerallyviatherightatriumandaorta.
ManagementofECMO
VA ECMO is managed much like CPB. When
venousdrainageisadequatetheheartwillbecom-
pletely empty, no ejection will occur, and ventila-
tionwillbeunnecessary.MorecommonlyECMOis
conductedinamannersimilartopartialCPB.There
will be incomplete capture of all venous drainage,
some systemic ventricular ejection will occur, and
some minute ventilation will be necessary. Since
thereisasmall(30mL)closedvenousreservoirthe
amount of blood pumped to the patient can only
exceedtheamountofbloodreturningtothevenous
reservoirforamatterofseconds.Whenthisoccurs
the venous bladder begins to collapse and theAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch11” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 403 — #29
MechanicalCirculatorySupport 403
servomechanismslowsthepumprateappropriately
to equalize drainage and pump output. Generally,
pumps ﬂows of 100–150mL/kg/min are needed
in pediatric patients in the absence of signiﬁcant
ventricularejection.
Anticoagulation
An UFH infusion is used to maintain an ACT of
180–250seconds.
Anesthetic considerations
The cardiac anesthesiologist is likely to encounter
patientswithacirculatoryassistdeviceoraTAHin
thefollowingcircumstances:
• Heart transplantation candidates who require
placementofaVADoraTAHasabridgetotrans-
plantationtopreventdeteriorationintheirmedical
condition.
• Heart transplantation candidates with a VAD or
TAH in place who present for cardiac
transplantation.
• Postcardiotomyshockpatientswhorequireacir-
culatoryassistdeviceoraTAHtoallowseparation
fromCPB.
• Postcardiotomy shock patients who have had
their circulatory assist device weaned and who
requireoperativeexplanationofthedevice.
• Patients with end-stage cardiomyopathies who
undergopermanentimplantationofaVAD.
Device insertion
Inductionandmaintenanceofanesthesiaforinser-
tionofaVADorTAHinapatientwithanend-stage
cardiomyopathyshouldbemanagedasdescribedfor
patientsundergoinghearttransplantation.Implan-
tation of VAD and the TAH requires a median
sternotomy or thoractomy and CPB. In addition,
placementoftheTAHrequiresbicavalvenouscan-
nulationandaorticcross-clamping.Anastomosisof
the outﬂow graft to the side of the ascending or
descending aorta can often be performed off CPB
with application of a partially occluding or side-
biting aortic clamp. Application of this clamp may
increase impedance to LV ejection and cause LV
afterloadmismatchwithsubsequentLVdistention.
If this technique is chosen, careful monitoring of
LV function with TEE is essential. Placement of
the inﬂow conduit into the apex of the LV is gen-
erally performed on CPB although off-CPB tech-
niques have been described. Some surgeons place
the inﬂow conduit during induced ventricular ﬁb-
rillation,whereasothersapplyanaorticcross-clamp
andadministercardioplegia.Centrifugalpumpsare
usedalmostexclusivelyforpostcardiotomysupport.
Asaresult,theyareplacedwhileonCPBaswell.
Many of the patients presenting for placement
of a mechanical assist are anti-coagulated with
coumadinbecauseoftheirdilatedcardiomyopathy.
Thesepatientsusuallyrequirereplacementofcoag-
ulation factors, particularly when there is dilution
of factors on CPB as they already have reduced
factor levels. When the PT is markedly elevated,
adding fresh frozen plasma to the pump prime in
placeofacrystalloidsolutioniswarranted.Anaddi-
tional risk for blood loss is the fact that up to 50%
of bridge-to-transplant patients have had previous
cardiacsurgeries.
Limiting transfusion of homologous blood prod-
ucts helps reduce the risk of postoperative pul-
monary dysfunction, which can seriously impair
RVfunction.Inaddition,avoidanceofhomologous
bloodproductslimitspatientexposuretoantibodies,
whichmaymakesubsequenttypingforhearttrans-
plantationdifﬁcult.Leukocyteﬁltersshouldbeused
when administering homologous blood products.
Cytomegalovirus (CMV) negative blood should be
usedinCMV-negativepatients.
Useofaprotininhasbeenshowntoreduceblood
loss and transfusion requirements for packed cells
and components in patients receiving a LVAD.
Aprotinin is discussed in detail in Chapter 10. The
incidence of both mild and severe allergic reac-
tions on re-exposure in adults and children is
similar and is approximately 2.8%. Nine percent
of the re-exposure reactions are fatal. The likeli-
hood of a reaction on re-exposure is increased if
there-exposureoccurswithin6monthsoftheini-
tialexposurewith95%ofallreportedre-exposure
events occurring within 6 months of initial expo-
sure. When aprotinin is used at the time of device
insertionandagainattransplantation,re-exposure
withinthisintervalisnotuncommon.
Theexistenceofapatentforamenovale(PFO)or
anysiteforintracardiacshuntingmustbeexcludedAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch11” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 404 — #30
404 Chapter11
before placement of any mechanical assist device
that is capable of reducing LA pressure below RA
pressure.DecompressionoftheLVandreductionin
LApressurebelowRApressurewillproduceright-
to-left intracardiac shunting and hypoxemia. This
is particularly likely in the setting in which RA
pressure is elevated, such as when there is con-
comitant RV dysfunction or elevated pulmonary
artery(PAPpressure.Inaddition,itintroducesthe
possibility of producing systemic air emboli from
bubblesintroducedintotheRAbyIVlines.Allofthe
devices described in this chapter except the IABP,
arecapableofproducingsuchshunting.Eithersur-
gicalexaminationorTEEcanbeusedtodetermine
whether a PFO exists. Two-dimensional echocar-
diographic views of the intra-atrial septum in con-
junctionwithcolorﬂowimagingmaybesufﬁcient
to detect a PFO. However, because most patients
receiving mechanical assist devices have elevated
LApressures,thepresenceofaPFObyTEEshould
not be ruled out without the use of provocative
measurestoreduceleftatrialpressure(LAP)below
right atrial pressure (RAP). Release of a Valsalva
maneuver (actually release of sustained positive
inspiratory pressure) will transiently reduce LAP
belowRAP.Whenthisisusedinconjunctionwith
agitatedsalinecontrast,TEEimagingoftheRA,LA,
andintra-atrialseptumdetectionofaPFOisreliable.
TEEshouldbeusedtoassesstheascendingaorta
and thoracic aorta for the presence of atheroma-
tousdiseaseandcalciﬁcationsthatwillinﬂuencethe
site of aortic outﬂow cannula placement. Epiaor-
ticscanningmaybeusefulinguidingplacementof
thedeviceoutﬂowconduitontheascendingaorta.
TEE should be used to assess for the presence of
intracardiacthrombi.
Comprehensive assessment of all four valves by
TEEisnecessarypriortoVADplacement:
• Aorticvalve.PlacementofanLVADiscontraindi-
cated in the presence of a mechanical aortic valve
or signiﬁcant aortic insufﬁciency. Thrombus for-
mation on the mechanical aortic valve can result
from the absent or minimal aortic valve opening
thatoccurswhentheLVADisfunctioningnormally.
Aortic valve insufﬁciency will not permit effective
(decompression of LA and LV) or efﬁcient (high
cardiac output) LVAD functioning because a large
portion of LVAD ejection will be regurgitated into
thenativeLV.TheproblemworsensasLVADoutput
increases. In these circumstances, the aortic valve
caneitherbereplacedwithabioprosthesisormore
uncommonly removed and pericardial patch clo-
sureoftheaorticannulusperformed.Aorticstenosis
isnotacontraindicationtoLVADplacement.
• Pulmonary valve. RVAD placement is contraindi-
cated in the setting of pulmonary valve insufﬁ-
ciencyasitwillnotpermiteffective(decompression
of RA and RV) or efﬁcient (high cardiac output)
RVADfunctioningbecausealargeportionofRVAD
ejectionwillberegurgitatedintothenativeRV.
• Mitral valve. The presence of signiﬁcant mitral
stenosis is a contraindication to placement of an
LVAD in series with the LV. Signiﬁcant mitral
stenosis will impede inﬂow into the LV and sub-
sequently into the inﬂow cannula of the LVAD
and will not allow decompression of the LA.
Mitral valve repair or bioprosthetic replacement
will be necessary. With parallel LVAD placement
(LAandaorticcannulation)mitralstenosisisnota
contraindication.
• Tricuspidvalve. Assessment of the tricuspid valve
priortoLVADplacement.Theetiologyofanypre-
existing tricuspid regurgitation should be carefully
delineated,asregurgitationislikelytobeworsened
byLVADplacementasdescribedbelow.
Following device placement, meticulous deair-
ing of the native cardiac chambers and the assist
device is necessary to prevent systemic air emboli.
The patient usually is kept in steep Trendelenberg
position until deairing is completed. TEE is use-
ful in detecting intracardiac air and in guiding the
de-airingprocess.
Management of patients with
devices in place
Post-device implantation management is tailored
to the patient, the speciﬁc device, and the setting.
Thefollowingissuesmustbeconsidered.
Functionofthenonassistedventricle
Proper functioning of an LVAD requires an RV
that functions well enough to match the com-
bined output of the LV and the LVAD. An RV
that is capable of delivering only 3L/min to theAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch11” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 405 — #31
MechanicalCirculatorySupport 405
pulmonary circulation and LA will severely com-
promise optimal functioning of an LVAD that can
deliver 6L/min. Because many patients requiring
LVADimplantationhaveconcomitantRVdysfunc-
tion,theremaybeaneedforinotropic/vasodilator
ormechanicalsupport(RVAD)oftheRVafterLVAD
implantation.
Approximately 10% of patients implanted with
an LVAD require placement of an RVAD for RV
failure. Preoperative clinical factors that are use-
ful in predicting the need for mechanical support
of the RV after LVAD implantation are younger
patients,lowBSApatients,femalepatients,patients
with a nonischemic cardiomyopathy (more likely
to involve both ventricles than ischemic origin),
and patients receiving mechanical ventilatory sup-
port. In addition, patients with low preoperative
PAP (systolic, mean, diastolic), signiﬁcant tricus-
pid regurgitation (TR), and low right ventricular
strokeworkindex(RVSWI)areatrisk.LowPAPin
thesepatientsisnotanindicationoflowpulmonary
vascular resistance (PVR) but rather of severely
depressedRVfunctionandlowRVoutput.
The indications for RVAD support following
LVADplacementareasfollows:
• Maximalinotropicsupportinthesettingofnitric
oxide(NO)and/orprostaglandin.
• Low mean and diastolic PAP, elevated CVP, and
diminishedRVSWI.
• DecreasedLVADﬂow( <2.4L/min).
• Dilated, hypokinetic RV by echocardiographic
examination.
• Decreasedurineoutputand/orahighfractionof
inspiredoxygen(Fio 2)requirement.
TheeffectsofLVADimplantationonRVfunction
arecomplexandaresummarized:
• Contractility. Complete pressure unloading of the
LV with an LVAD shifts the intraventricular sep-
tum to the left and reduces the LV contribution
to RV contraction. Systolic ventricular interdepen-
dence is such that LV contraction may account for
most RV-developed pressure and volume outﬂow.
In addition, there may be loss of RV contrac-
tion in the areas adjacent to the leftward-shifted
intraventricular septum. As a result, LVAD inser-
tion generally results in impairment of RV systolic
function.
• Afterload. Insertion of an LVAD generally pro-
duces a reduction in RV afterload. Insertion of
an LVAD results in reduction of LA pressures by
reducing LV distention. Reduction in LA pres-
sures results in reduced pulmonary venous con-
gestion and a reduction in PVR and PA pressures
despite the increase in cardiac output and pul-
monarybloodﬂowthataccompaniesimplantation.
Reduction of RV afterload improves RV function
through enhanced shortening of the RV free wall.
Not all patients have immediate normalization of
PVR and PA pressures. Patients with longstand-
ing pulmonary venous congestion may have an
additional component of pulmonary hypertension
that may take days or weeks to resolve. In addi-
tion,althoughPApressuresdecreaseroutinelyafter
LVAD implantation, the transpulmonary gradient
(meanpulmonaryarterialpressure–leftatrialpres-
sure)routinelyincreasesslightlypostimplantation
but falls by 24hours postoperatively. This is most
likely due to the residual pulmonary edema, and
theeffectsofCPBandbloodproductadministration
onthepulmonaryvascularbed.
• Preload. LVAD insertion increases cardiac output
thatinturnproducesanincreaseinRVpreload.In
addition, LVAD insertion improves RV compliance
andRVend-diastolicvolume(EDV)increaseswhile
RVend-diastolicpressure(EDP)decreases.
• Tricuspid valve function. LVAD implantation gen-
erally acutely decreases mitral regurgitation while
worseningtricuspidregurgitationbothacutelyand
chronically. Poor apposition of the tricuspid valve
leaﬂetsafterLVdecompressionwithaLVADoccurs
astheresultofaleftwardshiftoftheintraventricular
septumandtheincreasedRVvolumeload.Thereis
generallydilationofthetricuspidannulusandleft-
warddeviationoftheseptalcomponentsofthetri-
cuspidsubvalvular(chordaeandpapillarymuscles)
apparatus.
• Coronaryperfusion. LVAD insertion may improve
RVfunctionbyincreasingaorticbloodpressureand
improvingRVcoronarybloodﬂow.
Onbalance,LVADinsertionresultsinglobalimpair-
ment of RV systolic function, which is offset by
increasedRVpreloadandreducedRVafterloadsuch
thatRVoutputismaintainedorincreased.Asmen-
tioned, 10% of patients receiving an LVAD willAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch11” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 406 — #32
406 Chapter11
require placement of an RVAD for RV failure that
persistsdespiteaggressivepharmacologictherapyto
improveRVfunction.Thesepatientsusuallyhavea
component of pulmonary vascular resistance that
is not immediately reduced by decompression of
the LV, and underlying RV contractile dysfunction
particularly of the intraventricular septum. Septal
dysfunction causes the intraventricular septum to
move away from the RV free wall during systole.
TheRVfreewallcannotcompensateforthismove-
ment, even in the setting of reduced afterload and
RVstrokevolumefalls.
Treatment of RV dysfunction and TR with
pulmonary vasodilators and inotropes will be nec-
essary for patients who manifest severe RV dys-
function after LVAD implantation. Severe RV
dysfunctionwillproducealowLVADoutputincon-
junctionwithahighCVPandTRwithRVdistention
and hypokinesis seen with TEE. TEE is valuable
in guiding therapy to reduce TR and improve RV
function. In some circumstances a tricuspid annu-
loplasty may be warranted at the time of LVAD
implantation.
Preloadtothedevice
Properfunctioningofallassistdevicesexcludingthe
IABParedependentondeliveryofadequatevolume
tothedevice.TEEisusefulindeterminingtheetiol-
ogyofpoorpreloadtoadevice.Thefollowingcauses
shouldbeconsidered:
• Hypovolemia.
• Poor positioning/obstruction of the inﬂow can-
nula. This is particularly important in RVAD and
LVADoperatinginparallelwiththenativeheartas
cannulas are placed in the RA or LA. TEE is used
to ensure unobstructed inﬂow to the device. Care
mustbetakentoensurethatatrialcannuladonot
crosstheAVvalveorimpingeontheintra-atrialsep-
tum.Fordevicesinserieswiththenativeheart,the
ventricular cannula must not impinge on the ven-
tricularfreewall,septum,orpapillarymuscles.No
substantialpressuregradientshouldexistacrossthe
inﬂowconduit.Inaddition,signiﬁcantmitralsteno-
siswillimpedeinﬂowintotheLVandsubsequently
into the inﬂow cannula of the LVAD and will not
allowdecompressionoftheLA.
• IVC, SVC, or pulmonary venous obstruction in
TAHpatients.InTAHpatients,TEEisusedtoensure
that there is no obstruction of the SVC, IVC, or
pulmonaryveins.
• ImpairedRVfunctionwithdeliveryofinadequate
volumesofbloodacrossthepulmonarycirculation
toaLVAD.
Afterloadpresentedtothedevice
The performance of both pulsatile and nonpul-
satile assist devices is inﬂuenced by afterload. As
addressed previously, centrifugal and axial pumps
have reduced performance as vascular resistance
increases. At very high afterload, pulsatile pumps
will develop increasing residual volumes as they
fail to empty completely. This is analogous to an
increasing end-systolic volume in the native ven-
tricle with the end result being a reduced stroke
volume. By increasing driveline pressure, pneu-
matic pumps can be made to empty completely
at higher afterload. The result will be elevated
MAP or PAP and the potential for more hemol-
ysis. At systolic pressures in excess of 160mmHg,
theNovacordeviceexhibitsincreasedresidualvol-
ume and begins to overheat. As SVR increases
in patients with the pneumatic HeartMate the
ejection time necessary to completely empty the
device increases. This, in turn, reduces maximal
pumprate/minbecauseminimalLVADﬁllingtime
is a ﬁxed proportion of the selected LVAD ejec-
tion duration. With the Abiomed BVS 5000 and
AB 5000 devices increased afterload will increase
the duration of ejection and for a given diastolic
ﬁlling period will reduce the pump rate/min. In
all of these circumstances, afterload reduction is
warranted.
Another source of device malfunction related to
afterload is obstruction to outﬂow. TEE is used to
ensure that there is no signiﬁcant pressure gradi-
entdistaltotheoutﬂowcannulasorconduitsinthe
greatvessels.
Arrhythmias
Atrialandventriculararrhythmiasarenotuncom-
mon in the subset of patients requiring circulatory
assist devices. They often resolve as the patient’s
hemodynamic status improves. The presence of
atrial and ventricular arrhythmias in patients with
an LVAD is often not of signiﬁcant hemodynamic
consequence provided the PVR is not elevated.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch11” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 407 — #33
MechanicalCirculatorySupport 407
In these patients there may be adequate passive
delivery of blood across the pulmonary vascular
bed to the LVAD even during ventricular tachy-
cardia (VT) and ventricular ﬁbrillation (VF) in a
manner similar to Fontan patients (total cavopul-
monaryconnectionwithoutpulsatileRVfunction).
In patients with elevated PVR the inability to con-
trol these arrhythmias will require placement of
anRVAD.
Catecholamineresistantvasodilatory
shock(CRVS)
A subset of patients will exhibit CRVS follow-
ing placement of a mechanical circulatory sup-
port device. This manifests as low SVR and high
unstressed venous volume (high venous capaci-
tance)thatisresistanttohighdosesofpotentcate-
cholaminevasoconstrictorssuchasnorepinephrine.
HypotensioniscommonasSVRislowandpreload
to the assist device is low as well. In circum-
stances where preload to an LVAD or TAH is
maintained, hypotension may persist despite and
output in excess of 6–7L/min. CRVS is due
to a combination of factors including endoge-
nous NO release, arginine vasopressin (AVP) deﬁ-
ciency, intracellular acidosis (opens KATP chan-
nels), and contact phase activation-induced sys-
temic inﬂammatory response. These patients gen-
erally have a favorable response to AVP infusion
(0.01–0.05units/min) in combination with lower
doses of norepinephrine. AVP infusion repletes
AVP deﬁciency, restores α1-receptor responsive-
ness to norepinephrine by closing KATP chan-
nels, and potentiates the vasoconstrictor effects
of norepinephrine by suppressing cyclic guanosine
monophosphate(cGMP)releaseinducedbyNO.In
addition, AVP administration increases release of
corticotropin (ACTH). Patients receiving an LVAD
are often treated with amiodarone, angiotensin-
convertingenzyme(ACE)inhibitors,andmilrinone
in the perioperative period that will exacerbate
hypotension.
Cardiacoutputdetermination
The determination of cardiac output in patients
with mechanical circulatory assist devices is
summarized.
• TAH.CardiacoutputisdisplayedbytheCOMDU
of the CardioWest TAH. A thermodilution pul-
monaryarterycatheterisnotnecessaryand,infact,
mustberemovedbeforedeviceimplantation.
• LVAD. Device output is equal to systemic car-
diac output as long as the aortic valve remains
closed. TEE will readily determine if this is true.
Thissituationislikelyfordevicesinserieswiththe
LV and less likely for devices in parallel with the
LV. If there is ejection from the native LV in con-
junction with device output, then thermodilution
cardiac output can be used as an accurate mea-
sureofthecombinednativeventricularanddevice
output. Patients with LVAD require pulmonary
catheterstoaidinmanagementofconcomitantRV
dysfunction.
• RVAD. Device output is equal to pulmonic out-
put as long as the pulmonic valve remains closed.
TEE will readily determine if this is true. Because
RVAD are generally placed in series with the RV,
thetotalpulmonicoutputismorelikelytobeacom-
binationofnativeRVoutputandRVADoutput.In
thissetting,thermodilutioncardiacoutputswillnot
be accurate because the transit times of blood and
salinethroughthenativeRVandtheRVADwillbe
different.Thiswillinterferewiththethermodilution
technique.
Effectsofventilation
Positive-pressure ventilation may adversely affect
RVfunctionbymechanicallycompressingthepul-
monary vasculature if peak airway pressures are
high.ThiscanreducenativeRVoutputanddelivery
ofbloodtoanLVassistdevice.
TheTAHventriclefunctionsasanextra-thoracic
chamber surrounded by atmospheric pressure in
diastole and connected to an atrium and great
vessels that are surrounded by intrathoracic pres-
sure.Becausethereisnocompliantintraventricular
septum, there is no ventricular interdependence.
Increasesinintrathoracicpressurewillreduceﬁlling
of the native atria from the systemic and pul-
monary veins but will enhance ﬁlling of the pros-
thetic ventricles. Despite this, respiratory variation
ofsystemicbloodpressurewilloccurinthesettingof
hypovolemia or dilation of venous capacitance
vessels.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch11” — 2007/7/16 — 12:40 — page 408 — #34
408 Chapter11
Effectsofinductionand
maintenanceagents
Induction and maintenance of anesthesia in the
patient with an assist device or TAH should take
intoaccountthehemodynamiceffectsofthechosen
anestheticagents.Theeffectofinductionagentson
myocardialcontractilitymustbetakenintoaccount.
Although the effects of agents on myocardial con-
tractility are not important in TAH patients, the
effects of agents on the peripheral vasculature do
inﬂuencehemodynamics.
Deviceweaning
Devicesareweanedbygraduallywithdrawingsup-
portwhileassessingventricularfunctionandhemo-
dynamics.ThisusuallyrequiresthepresenceofaPA
catheter and arterial line. The IABP is weaned by
decreasingthepumpratefrom1:1to1:2to1:3.Cen-
trifugalandaxialpumpsareweanedbydecreasing
thepumpﬂowrate.Theriskofthrombusformation
is enhanced when the pump ﬂow rate is at or less
than 2L/min. Therefore, adequate anticoagulation
shouldbemaintainedandthepumpshouldbewith-
drawn promptly after weaning down to this level.
Weaningofpulsatiledevicesinvolvesadjustmentof
thedevicetooperateatadecreasedﬁxedrate.TEE
has proved to be very valuable in guiding wean-
ing of circulatory assist devices because it allows
on-line assessment of RV and LV function during
theweaningprocess.
Monitoringconsiderations
Arterial line placement may be difﬁcult and pulse
oximetry monitoring inconsistent in patients with
nonpulsatileﬂowfromaxialandcentrifugalpumps.
Allowingthenativeventricletoejectbytemporarily
reducing pump rate may be necessary for arte-
rial line placement. Insertion of central venous
catheters in patients with pulsatile RVAD imposes
an increased risk of entraining air into the central
circulation particularly when vacuum is applied to
cannulas situated in the RA. Vacuum should be
temporarily discontinued when this procedure is
undertaken.Inaddition,caremustbetakenwhen
acentralvenouslineisaccessedforvolumeordrug
infusionwhilevacuumisapplied.
Suggested reading
Cheung AT, Savino JS, Weiss SJ. Beat-to-beat aug-
mentation of left ventricular function by intraaortic
counterpulsation.Anesthesiology1996;84:545–54.
CopelandJG,SmithRG,ArabiaFA etal.Cardiacreplace-
ment with a total artiﬁcial heart as a bridge to
transplantation.NEnglJMed 2004;351:859–67.
Horton SC, Khodaverdian R, Chatelain P et al. Left
ventricular assist device malfunction: an approach
to diagnosis by echocardiography.J Am Coll Cardiol
2005;45:1435–40.
Mancini D, Burkhoff D. Mechanical device-based meth-
ods of managing and treating heart failure.Circulation
2005;112:438–48.
MillerLW,LietzK.Candidateselectionforlong-termleft
ventricular assist device therapy for refractory heart
failure.JHeartLungTransplant 2006;25:756–64.
Ochiai Y, McCarthy PM, Smedira NGet al. Predictors
of severe right ventricular failure after implantable
left ventricular assist device insertion: analysis of
245patients. Circulation2002;106:I198–202.Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch12” — 2007/7/16 — 12:41 — page 409 — #1
CHAPTER 12
Myocardial Preservation during
Cardiopulmonary Bypass
Myocardial preservation techniques are a
fundamental component of contemporary car-
diac surgery. The ability to suspend metabolic
demand and preserve myocardial viability dur-
ing the operative procedure allows the surgeon
opportunity and time to complete complex repairs.
Early efforts in cardiac surgery were hindered
by postoperative myocardial failure after tech-
nically successful operative procedures due to
extensive damage sustained during the opera-
tive procedure. Myocardial necrosis was common
in patients dying after cardiac surgery and this
necrosis occurred during cardiopulmonary bypass
(CPB). Researchers soon found myocardial preser-
vation techniques to reduce myocardial injury
after CPB.
Initially, surgeons attempted to operate on both
normothermic and hypothermic empty, beating,
or ﬁbrillating hearts. These conditions provided
pooroperativeexposureandresultedinmyocardial
necrosis. Eventually, aortic cross-clamping evolved
as the method of choice to exclude the heart from
the circulation thereby enhancing surgical expo-
sure by providing a bloodless ﬁeld. A bloodless
ﬁeld however, came at the cost of myocardial
perfusion. The heart must survive this interval
of ischemia (cross-clamp interval) without injury
(Fig. 12.1). Myocardial preservation techniques
soon evolved and now provide optimal protec-
tion of the heart during aortic cross-clamping and
in the reperfusion period following clamp release.
This chapter reviews myocardial preservation
during aortic cross-clamping and in the immediate
reperfusion interval.
Consequencesofaorticcross-clamping
Myocardialischemiaoccursastheresultofseverely
compromised or absent myocardial perfusion. In
contrast, hypoxia refers to a reduction in substrate
delivery with maintained perfusion. Because aor-
tic cross-clamping isolates the coronary circulation
from perfusion, global myocardial ischemia results
unless they are adjunct protective measures. To
understand the nature of these protective mea-
sures, it is necessary to examine the consequences
of global myocardial ischemia.
Cessationofoxidativephosphorylation
This is the ﬁrst metabolic derangement to occur.
There is disruption of the electron transport chain
andtheKreb’scycleisinhibited.Thisoccurswithin
minutes of cross-clamping and results in termina-
tion of high-energy phosphate production in the
form of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and creatine
phosphate (CP).
DepletionofATPandCPstores
ATPsupplies energy directly to the myocardium;
whereas CPacts as an intermediate energy source
toresupplyATP.Duringischemia,thereisimmedi-
ate depletion of CPstores. Within 15 minutes, ATP
stores are reduced by one-half and CPstores are
essentially depleted.
409Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch12” — 2007/7/16 — 12:41 — page 410 — #2
410 Chapter 12
Cross-clamp
On
Pre-bypass Cardioplegia Reperfusion
Off
(Early) (Late)
Fig.12.1 A schematic diagram representing the
chronology of a cardiac surgical procedure in which
extracorporeal circulation and intermittent cardioplegia
are used. Injury from ischemia can occur (a) before
cardiopulmonary bypass is initiated, as a result of
coronary artery disease or other disease processes,
hypotension, or ventricular ﬁbrillation; (b) during
intermittent cardioplegia between infusions of solution,
or when cardioplegia is poorly distributed because of
coronary lesions present before revascularization or
obstructions in the grafts; (c) during the reperfusion
period, which can be divided into early and late
components. In reality, the potential for reperfusion
injury exists at each of these intervals when (a)
resolution of pre-bypass hypotension or dysrhythmias
restores blood ﬂow; (b) cardioplegia solution is infused at
high delivery pressures (“perfusion” injury) or has an
inappropriate composition; and (c) coronary blood ﬂow
with unmodiﬁed systemic blood is restored after removal
of the cross-clamp, especially if a terminal “reperfusion”
dose of cardioplegia is not given. Systemic hypotension
and physical or embolic obstructions to coronary blood
ﬂow can also induce injury during this period. (From
Vinten-Johansen J, Ronson RS, Thourani VH,
Wchsler AS. Surgical myocardial protection. In:
Gravlee GP, Davis RF, Kurusz M, Utley JR (eds).
Cardiopulmonary Bypass: Principles and Practice, 2nd edn.
Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins,
2000:214–64, with permission.)
Anaerobicmetabolism
Glucose is the only substrate available for anaer-
obic metabolism in the myocardium. To provide
substrate for glycolysis, glycogenolysis must occur.
Large glycogen stores may provide ample substrate
foranaerobicproductionofATP,butunlessthereis
adequatewashoutofthehydrogenionsandlactate
produced from anaerobic glycolysis, further glycol-
ysis is inhibited by sufﬁciently high concentrations
of these metabolites. Generally, anaerobic produc-
tion of ATPends a few minutes after it starts in the
globally ischemic myocardium.
Inhibitionoffreefattyacidoxidation
Normally, free fatty acids are the major energy
source for the myocardium in the post-absorptive
state. Ischemia interferes with free fatty acid oxi-
dation, fatty acid uptake, and transfer into the
myocardium.
Depletionoftheadenine
nucleotidepool
After30–40minutesofglobalischemia,theprogres-
sivedegradationofATPtoadenosine5-diphosphate
(ADP), ADP to adenosine monophosphate (AMP),
and AMPto inosine and hypoxanthine depletes
the myocardium of its adenine sources. Therefore,
reperfusionofenergysourcestoreplenishATPlev-
els will be fruitless at this time unless the adenine
precursors to form ATPare provided as well.
Impairmentofcalciumhomeostasis
The consequences of impaired calcium home-
ostasis are summarized in Fig. 12.2. Homeosta-
sis of intracellular calcium is dependent on two
ATP-dependent processes: sequestration of calcium
into the sarcoplasmic reticulum and extrusion of
calcium across the sarcolemma. At 30minutes of
global ischemia, the myocardium’s ability to reg-
ulate intracellular calcium is impaired by deple-
tion of ATPstores. Loss of calcium homeostasis
resultsinsustainedmyocardialcontracturebecause
sequestration of calcium is necessary to break
the actin–myosin cross-bridges that allow diastolic
relaxation to occur. In addition, high intracellu-
lar calcium levels cause further depletion of ATP
stores through activation of myosin adenosine
triphosphatase (ATPase).
Disruptionofcellulararchitecture
By30minutesofglobalischemia,thereisswellingof
themitochondriaandsacroplasmicreticulumdueto
increased osmolarity generated by the metabolites
of anaerobic metabolism. After 30minutes, there is
progressive accumulation of the products of mem-
brane degradation. Ischemia-induced reduction of
freeradicalscavengersresultsincontinuedlipidper-
oxidation and membrane destruction via oxygen-
free radicals. After 60minutes, there is destruction
of the cell membrane such that cell death occurs.Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch12” — 2007/7/16 — 12:41 — page 411 — #3
Myocardial Preservation 411
Reduced coronary flow
Reduced availability of oxygen
Reduced synthesis of ATP
Failure of Ca2+ homeostasis
Activation of
Ca2+ lipasesActivation of
Ca2+ ATPases
Mitochondrial
Ca2+ overload
Impaired
mitochondrial function
Failure of ATP
production
Increased usage
of ATP
Reduced ATP
Loss of structure and function
Raised cytosolic Ca2+
Fig.12.2 Consequences of impaired calcium
homeostasis secondary to reduced coronary blood ﬂow.
ATP, adenosine triphosphate; ATPases, adenosine
triphosphatases. (From Nayler WG. The role of calcium
in the ischemic myocardium.Am J Pathol
1981;102:262–70, with permission.)
Cardioplegia
Cardioplegia the solution used to arrest and pro-
tect the heart during aortic cross-clamping. Since
the introduction of cardioplegia in 1955, the com-
position and mode of administration has evolved
greatly. Cardioplegia solutions arrest the heart
in diastole resulting in a profound reduction in
metabolic demand. In addition, cardioplegia plays
a restorative role replenishing energy stores in
ischemic hearts. There is great variability in the
administration, timing, composition, and tempera-
ture of the various cardioplegia regimens. Despite
thesevariations,thebasiccomponentsofcardiople-
gia systems are similar (Fig. 12.3), and the goals of
cardioplegia administration remain unchanged.
Aortic cross-clamping drastically reduces oxygen
and substrate supplies to the myocardium.
Cardioplegia solutions, administered immediately
upon cross-clamp application, promptly reduce
myocardial oxygen consumption. In addition, car-
dioplegiaprovidessubstratestomeetthesereduced
energy demands so that pre-ischemic energy stores
arenotdepleted.Cardioplegiasolutionsinduceelec-
tromechanical arrest of the heart in diastole. Arrest
in diastole can be induced by depolarized arrest
(elevated potassium), polarized arrest (adenosine,
potassiumchannelopeners,procaine,lidocaine),or
arrestbyinﬂuencingcalciummechanisms(elevated
magnesium, calcium antagonists).
Because electromechanical work constitutes
95% of total myocardial oxygen consumption, the
arrested heart will have very low energy require-
ments. In the arrested state, only basal energy
requirements (those required to keep cellular
metabolicprocessesintact)mustbemet.Figure12.4
illustrates the very low oxygen consumption asso-
ciated with induced arrest. Aerobic and anaerobic
metabolism can provide enough energy to meet
basal energy requirements as long as there is peri-
odic replenishment of substrates and washout of
metabolites.
There is considerable variability in the compo-
sition of cardioplegia solutions used in different
institutions. Despite this wide variety of composi-
tion, there are certain properties all solutions must
share. Cardioplegia must:
• induce prompt arrest of the heart in diastole to
reduce myocardial oxygen consumption.
• incorporate hypothermia to further reduce
myocardial oxygen consumption.
• providesufﬁcientsubstratestomeetthemetabolic
demands of the arrested heart.
• provide buffering to counteract the acidosis that
accompanies ischemia.
• provide increased osmolarity to prevent the
cellular edema that accompanies ischemia.
• providemembranestabilizationwithadditivesor
avoidance of hypocalcemia.
• have no adverse effects of its own.
• have a composition suitable for delivery to all
areas of the myocardium.
Table 12.1 lists a typical cardioplegia solu-
tion used in contemporary practice. To fulﬁll
these requirements, a typical cardioplegia solutionAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch12” — 2007/7/16 — 12:41 — page 412 — #4
412 Chapter 12
Retrograde cardioplegia
Antegrade cardioplegia
Pressure
monitoring
line
Pressure
relief line
Patient
delivery
line Temperature
probe port
Heat
exchanger
Roller pump
Blood crystalloid
shunt
Oxygenator
HK LK
Crystalloid
cardioplegia
Fig.12.3 Components of a cardioplegia delivery
system. A modern cardioplegia delivery system is
demonstrated. Oxygenated blood may be diverted from
the oxygenator of the cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB)
circuit and mixed with a high potassium (HK)-containing
crystalloid cardioplegia solution for induction of
electromechanical arrest or with a low potassium
(LK)-containing cardioplegia solution. The ratio of blood
to crystalloid may be varied and the solution is pumped
via a roller pump to a heat exchanger for warming or
cooling before administration. The line pressure and
temperature of the cardioplegia solution is monitored.
Perfusion of the myocardium may be antegrade through
the coronary arteries or retrograde through a catheter in
the coronary sinus. The retrograde catheter is usually
placed before CPB through the right atrial wall and not
the coronary sinus. Evidence of successful cannulation of
the coronary sinus includes dark blood (secondary to the
high oxygen extraction of the heart) returning from the
catheter, visualization of the catheter in the coronary
sinus by transesophageal echocardiography (TEE), and
intravascular pressure monitoring. During retrograde
perfusion, a pressure of 30–50mmHg is desirable. (From
Schell RM, Applegate RL, Reves JG. Cardiopulmonary
bypass. In: Miller RD (ed).Atlas of Anesthesia.
Philadelphia: Current Medicine (Churchill Livingstone),
1999:9.1–30, with permission.)
containsthecomponentsdescribedinthefollowing
sections.
Potassium
Increasingextracellularpotassiumconcentrationto
induce depolarized arrest is the primary method
used to induce electromechanical arrest in most
cardioplegia solutions.
Extracellular hyperkalemia results in depolar-
ization of the cell membrane, inactivation of
the voltage-dependent fast sodium channel, and
sustained diastole. This effect is reversed afterAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch12” — 2007/7/16 — 12:41 — page 413 — #5
Myocardial Preservation 413
6.0
4.0
2.0
0
cc/100 g/min
37°C3 2 °C2 8 °C2 2 °C
Beating nonworking
Fibrillating
Arrest
Fig.12.4 Left ventricular oxygen consumption during
three functional states (beating empty, ﬁbrillating, and
arrested) and at four temperatures. Hypothermia reduces
myocardial oxygen consumption for any of the
functional states. Below 37◦C, the beating empty heart
consumes the most oxygen, followed in decreasing order
by the ﬁbrillating and the arrested heart. (From
Buckberg GD. Studies of the effects of hypothermia on
regional myocardial blood ﬂow and metabolism during
cardiopulmonary bypass.J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg
1977;73:87–94, with permission.)
Table12.1 Components of a typical cardioplegia
solution.
Induction cardioplegia solution
THAMsolution 2.11g 71.60mL
Glutamate∗ 32.43g 44.27mL
Aspartate† 27.72g 44.27mL
CPD 17.76mL
KCl 26.6mEq 13.25mL
Lidocaine 49.77mg 2.53mL
D5W 88.125mL
Totalvolume 282.500mL
Subsequent cardioplegia solution
THAMsolution 1.59g 53.3mL
Glutamate 24.39g 33.3mL
Aspartate 20.80g 33.3mL
CPD 13.3mL
KCl 0.00mEq 0.00mL
Lidocaine 49.77mg 2.53mL
D5W 66.8mL
Totalvolume 202.5mL
CPD, citrate phosphate dextrose; KCl, potassium chloride;
THAM,Tris-hydroxylmethylaminomethane.
∗Glutamateconcentrationis7.32%inH 2O.
†Aspartateconcentrationis6.25%inH 2O.
15–20minutesbythenormalmetabolismandionic
currents present in the myocyte. The potassium
concentration necessary to induce prompt arrest
varies from solution to solution. For example,
myocardial hypothermia reduces the extracellular
potassium concentration required to induce arrest.
Crystalloid cardioplegia solutions require lower
extracellular potassium concentrations to induce
arrest than do blood cardioplegia solutions.
Nonetheless, cardioplegia solutions generally
have a potassium concentration ranging from
15–30mEq/L. This concentration produces prompt
electromechanical arrest. Concentrations of potas-
siumhigherthan40mEq/Laredetrimentalbecause
they increase calcium inﬂux by increasing calcium
conductance.Recallthatincreasedintracellularcal-
cium will increase wall tension and myocardial
oxygen consumption. In addition, increasing cal-
cium conductance while ischemia-induced loss of
calcium homeostasis is occurring will exacerbate
ischemic damage.
Hypothermia
Hypothermia is an important component of car-
dioplegia solutions because it reduces myocardial
oxygen consumption even in the arrested heart,
reduces the degree of extracellular hyperkalemia
needed to cause electromechanical arrest and is
additive with potassium-induced arrest in pre-
venting ischemic damage. Cardioplegia is typically
administered in one of three temperatures: cold
5–10◦C, tepid 27–30◦C , and warm 33–38◦C. Gen-
erally, a combination of temperatures is used with
initial cold or tepid administration later followed
by a “hot shot” of warm cardioplegia just before
removal of the aortic cross-clamp. Despite delivery
of these cold solutions into the coronary arteries, it
often is difﬁcult to cool the myocardium to<15◦C.
Incomplete cooling may be due to the presence of
coronary stenoses preventing homogenous deliv-
ery of the cold cardioplegia solution, noncoronary
collaterals perfusing the heart with warm blood or
systemic venous return warming the heart.
Calcium
Loss of calcium homeostasis is associated with
cell dysfunction and death after ischemia. For thisAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch12” — 2007/7/16 — 12:41 — page 414 — #6
414 Chapter 12
reason, one might assume that the addition of cal-
ciumtocardioplegiasolutionsisdetrimental.Infact,
a small amount of calcium (>50mM) is necessary
to prevent the calcium paradox and to allow func-
tional recovery after aortic cross-clamp removal.
Calcium paradox is the massive cellular destruc-
tion that occurs when the myocardium is perfused
withacalcium-containingsolutionafteraperiodof
calcium-free perfusion. Calcium paradox is due to
washoutofcalciumfromthesarcolemmawithsub-
sequentinabilityofthesarcolemmatolimitcalcium
inﬂuxwhenpresentedwithacalciumload.Calcium
paradox is more likely to occur if the cardioplegia
solution is alkalotic.
Despite this risk, most crystalloid cardioplegia
solutions do not have calcium added to them; they
contain <1mM/L of calcium. Blood cardioplegia
requires no additional calcium. Calcium paradox
is prevented by delivery of an adequate con-
centration of calcium via the systemic perfusate
from noncoronary collaterals and by the pres-
ence of hypothermia. Blood cardioplegia solutions
deliver varying concentrations of calcium to the
myocardium. The exact concentration depends on
howextensivelythebloodsolutionisdilutedbefore
it is used as a medium for cardioplegia. In fact,
most cardioplegia solutions contain the anticoag-
ulant citrate-phosphate-dextrose (CPD) to chelate
calcium thereby making calcium unavailable in
the coagulation system. The CPD solution acts
to chelate calcium, buffer the blood, and provide
dextrose as a substrate for glycolysis.
Sodium
Theoptimalsodiumconcentrationisunknown,but
mostcardioplegiasolutionsavoidextremehypo-or
hypernatremiarelativetointracellularsodiumcon-
centration. Perfusion of the heart with a hypona-
tremic solution may predispose accumulation of
intracellular calcium with subsequent increases in
wall tension and myocardial oxygen consumption.
Perfusion of the heart with a hypernatremic solu-
tionresultsinaccumulationofintracellularsodium.
Thismayresultincellularedema.Italsomayresult
in an accumulation of intracellular calcium as the
sodium–calciumexchangepumpmovessodiumout
and calcium into the cell. For these reasons, most
cardioplegia solutions have sodium concentrations
in the range of 100–120mEq/L.
Magnesium
High-dose magnesium can induce cardiac arrest
in the absence of other agents. Magnesium in
lower doses acts to stabilize cell membranes, block
phosphorylationofmyosin(preservinghighenergy
substrates), and acts as a slow channel calcium
blocker.
Buffering
Anaerobic metabolism accompanying ischemia
results in cellular acidosis. Acidosis results in
negative inotropy, reduced glycolysis, and depres-
sion of myocardial contractile proteins. The accu-
mulation of acid results in inhibition of further
anaerobic metabolism. Buffering allows anaerobic
metabolism to continue and reduces ATPdeple-
tion in the ischemic myocardium. As myocardial
temperaturedecreases,theappropriateuncorrected
pH becomes more alkalotic. Therefore, the buffers
chosen must be effective at the alkalotic pH found
in the hypothermic myocardium. Tromethamine
(THAM), bicarbonate, phosphate, and histidine are
all used as buffers in cardioplegia solutions.
Histidineisacommonbufferandissuperiortothe
othersbecausethepKashiftsintothealkalinerange
astemperaturedecreases;thereforeitisaneffective
buffer over a wide variety of temperatures and pH
levels. In addition, there is greater buffering capac-
ity than crystalloid cardioplegia solutions buffered
with standard concentrations of either bicarbon-
ate or THAM. Blood cardioplegia provides better
myocardial buffering than crystalloid cardioplegia
bufferedwithbicarbonateduetothepresenceofthe
histidinebufferingsysteminblood.Histidineadded
to crystalloid cardioplegia can provide a buffering
capacity similar to that of blood cardioplegia.
Osmolarity
Because myocardial edema accompanies ischemia,
cardioplegia solutions are formulated to minimize
further accumulation of intracellular ﬂuid. Cardio-
plegia solutions with osmolarities >400mOsm/L
exacerbate myocardial edema, probably by induc-
ing increases in intracellular sodium. On the other
hand, solutions with a low osmolarity will resultAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch12” — 2007/7/16 — 12:41 — page 415 — #7
Myocardial Preservation 415
in accumulation of intracellular water and fur-
ther edema. The ideal osmolarity remains undeter-
mined,butprobablyisapproximately370mOsm/L.
Mannitol and albumin are the additives commonly
used to manipulate osmolarity in cardioplegia
solutions.
Substrates
Energy production during anaerobic metabolism
requires provision of a substrate. Glucose and
insulin as components of a cardioplegia solution
allow uptake of glucose into the myocardium
for use during anaerobic metabolism. Anaero-
bic metabolism results in the production of lac-
tic acid and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
(NADH). Accumulation of these metabolites leads
to the eventual shutdown of further anaerobic
metabolism. Substrate provision is useful only
if there is periodic washout of the metabolites
that inhibit anaerobic metabolism. In fact, in the
absence of periodic washout of metabolites, sub-
strate enhancement has been demonstrated to be
deleterioustomyocardialrecoveryafteraorticcross-
clamping. In clinical practice, this washout occurs
through noncoronary collateral ﬂow or through
intermittent infusion of cardioplegia.
Theuseofglucoseandinsulinbeforeaorticcross-
clamping may result in improved post-cross-clamp
myocardial function. Infusion of insulin and glu-
cose before aortic cross-clamping results in a shift
from oxidative lipolysis to glycolysis. There is an
increaseinglycogenstores.Thispre-ischemicaccu-
mulation of glycogen stores and the early shift to
anaerobic metabolism may have a protective effect
during ischemia.
Glucose and insulin concentrations in cardio-
plegia solutions vary greatly from institution to
institution. In fact, some institutions do not add
either entity to their solutions. Some glucose is
present in blood cardioplegia and, therefore, little
or no glucose must be added when blood is used as
a cardioplegia vehicle.
Crystalloidversusbloodcardioplegia
solutions
Cardioplegiasolutionsaredeliveredineitheracrys-
talloid or a blood medium. There are important
differences between the two formulations. Crystal-
loidsolutionsgenerallyarepreparedbythehospital
pharmacy in containers that are delivered to the
perfusionist.Bloodsolutionsarepreparedbydraw-
ing off oxygenated blood from the CPB circuit into
a separate reservoir and mixing it with a prepre-
pared crystalloid base solution. The ratio of blood
to crystalloid base varies from institution to institu-
tion (4:1 to 1:4). Potassium and other additives are
thenaddedtothebloodinthesufﬁcientamountsto
obtainthedesiredconcentration.Bothsolutionscan
be temperature regulated and administered cool,
tepid,orwarm.Coldbloodcardioplegiaisdilutedto
ahematocritof10–15%toreducemicrocirculatory
sludging.
Blood cardioplegia is formulated using oxy-
genatedbloodfromtheCPBcircuit.Theamountof
oxygendeliveredtothemyocardiumbyabloodcar-
dioplegiasolutionisonlyafractionofthesolution’s
total oxygen content. The fraction of total oxygen
content available for delivery is dependent on the
solution’s temperature and the hematocrit. The
lower the temperature and the higher the hemat-
ocrit, the less oxygen will be available for delivery
tothemyocardium.Thehypothermia-inducedleft-
wardshiftoftheoxyhemoglobindissociationcurve
increases hemoglobin’s afﬁnity for oxygen and
decreases oxygen availability to the myocardium.
Thedeliveryofoxygencarriedinthedissolvedstate
is unaffected by changes in hemoglobin’s afﬁnity
for oxygen. For this reason, solutions with high
hematocrit,inwhichthequantityofoxygencarried
dissolved in plasma is reduced, will have a reduced
oxygen-delivery capacity at low temperatures.
Crystalloid cardioplegia is not routinely oxy-
genated. Oxygenation of crystalloid solutions is
accomplished easily by bubbling gas into the solu-
tionbeforedelivery.Aerationofabicarbonatecon-
taining crystalloid cardioplegia solution with 100%
oxygen drives off carbon dioxide and results in
severe alkalosis. For this reason, aeration with a
95–98%oxygenand2–5%carbondioxidemixture
is recommended. An increase in the total oxygen
contentofacrystalloidsolutionoccurswithdecreas-
ing temperature due to the enhanced solubility of
oxygen in crystalloid at low temperatures. Crystal-
loid cardioplegia solutions are capable of deliveringAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch12” — 2007/7/16 — 12:41 — page 416 — #8
416 Chapter 12
Table12.2 Advantages of blood cardioplegia.
Improvedcapillaryperfusionduetothepresenceofredcells
Morehomogenousdeliveryofbloodcardioplegiainthe
presenceandabsenceofcoronarystenoses
Improvedbufferingduetothepresenceofthehistidine
bufferingsystempresentinredcells
Reducedmyocardialedemaduetotheoncotictensionof
blood
Reducedriskofcalciumparadoxandimprovedfunctional
recoveryafterischemiaduetothephysiologiccalcium
concentrationprovidedbyblood
Presenceofredcellenzymecatalasetoscavengefreeradicals
producedbyischemia
their entire oxygen content to the myocardium
because all oxygen is carried in the dissolved state.
Therefore,asthetemperatureofacrystalloidcardio-
plegia solution decreases, the quantity of oxygen it
delivers to the myocardium increases.
Blood cardioplegia solutions offer several poten-
tialadvantagesovercrystalloidsolutions(Table12.2).
Whetherthesedifferencesbetweenbloodandcrys-
talloid cardioplegia solutions offer any clear clinical
advantage remains less clear. There is an exten-
sive literature in both animals and humans on
this topic. Meta-analysis of randomized clinical tri-
als for all types of cardiac surgery demonstrates
that blood cardioplegia is associated with fewer
episodes of post-bypass low cardiac output syn-
dromes, but there is no difference in myocardial
infarctionanddeath.Insurgeryforcoronaryartery
bypassgrafting,thereislittletonoevidencetosup-
port the superiority of cold blood versus cold crys-
talloid cardioplegia. Oxygenated blood cardioplegia
solutions provide better preservation of myocardial
high-energyphosphatestores,myocardialarchitec-
ture, and function than nonoxygenated crystalloid
cardioplegia solutions in animals. Likewise, ani-
malworkdemonstratesthatoxygenatedcrystalloid
cardioplegia provides better myocardial preserva-
tion than nonoxygenated crystalloid cardioplegia.
Whendifferencesincalciumconcentrationarecon-
trolled, oxygenated blood cardioplegia and oxy-
genatedcrystalloidcardioplegiaprovidecomparable
degrees of left ventricular functional recovery and
ATPpreservation.
Comparison of blood and crystalloid cardiople-
gia solutions remains challenging. Review of the
literature demonstrates a lack of controlled, ran-
domized trials, marked differences in the compo-
sitions, delivery, and temperatures of the various
solutions,andwidevariationinpatientpopulations
and end-points. Despite these obstacles, there is
general agreement in the surgical community that
for patients with preserved left-ventricular func-
tion undergoing coronary artery bypass surgery,
intermittent delivery of oxygenated blood cardio-
plegia solution is at least equal or superior to
intermittent delivery of nonoxygenated crystalloid
cardioplegiasolution.Inpatientswithcompromised
preoperative left-ventricular function, oxygenated
bloodcardioplegiaprovidessuperiorpreservationof
postoperative left-ventricular function.
Adjuvantagents
There is almost an inﬁnite number of adjuvant
agents added to cardioplegia solutions in clinical
practice. In addition to the essential components
described above, there are a number of adjuvant
agents that can be added to cardioplegia. Many of
theagentshavebeenwelltestedin in vitro andani-
malexperiments,yetlackrigorousclinicalscrutiny.
Theseadjuvantagentsareaddedtocardioplegiafor
different reasons, but usually are employed to pre-
servemyocardialfunctionanddiminishreperfusion
injury. Some of these agents include calcium chan-
nel blockers, allopurinol, free radical scavengers,
and adenine nucleotides.
Loss of calcium homeostasis is a major factor
in causing ischemia-induced myocardial damage.
The addition of calcium channel blockers in car-
dioplegia solutions may prevent calcium inﬂux
and subsequent high-energy phosphate hydroly-
sisduringcardioplegicarrestbypreventingcalcium
inﬂux during reperfusion. Animal studies have
demonstrated improved preservation of myocar-
dial function with the addition of calcium channel
blockers to crystalloid and blood cardioplegia solu-
tions. The evaluation of calcium channel block-
ers in cardioplegia is more difﬁcult. There are
reports of beneﬁt; however, study differences in
the composition of cardioplegia solutions, in the
dosages of calcium channel blockers added toAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch12” — 2007/7/16 — 12:41 — page 417 — #9
Myocardial Preservation 417
the cardioplegia solutions, in the operative proce-
dures, and in the extent of preoperative ventricu-
lar dysfunction make it difﬁcult to draw any ﬁrm
conclusions about the efﬁcacy of calcium chan-
nel blockers added to cardioplegia solutions. The
issue of whether their routine use is justiﬁed is
unresolved, but the data suggest that their addi-
tion will be of greatest value in patients at highest
riskforcalcium-inducedischemicdamage.Theben-
eﬁtsofcalciumchannelblockersincardioplegiaare
balanced against associated negative inotropy and
atrioventricular (AV) nodal dysfunction.
Allopurinolisacompetitiveinhibitorofxanthine
oxidase;whereas,itschiefmetabolite,alloxanthine,
is a noncompetitive inhibitor. Xanthine oxidase
is an important enzyme in the generation of the
freeradicalsimplicatedincausingmyocardialdam-
age upon reperfusion of the ischemic myocardium.
Allopurinoladdedtocoldbloodandcrystalloidcar-
dioplegia improves myocardial protection in the
severely ischemic animal ventricle.
An alternative to inhibition of free radical pro-
duction is supplementation with agents capable
of scavenging free radicals. Animal studies have
demonstrated improved myocardial protection in
the ischemic myocardium after use of crystalloid
cardioplegic supplemented with the free radical
scavengers superoxide dismutase (SOD), catalase,
deferoxamine, and mannitol.
Myocardial ischemia promotes production of
adenosine. Adenosine added to cardioplegia mit-
igates postischemic ventricular function in ani-
mals. Acadesine, a purine nucleoside analog,
raises adenosine levels in ischemic myocardium.
Acadesine selectively augments adenosine produc-
tion in ischemic myocardium without increasing
production in nonischemic myocardium. Although
the mechanism of action is unclear, the action of
acadesine seems to be mediated through adeno-
sine A1- and A2-receptors and may act through
activation of the ATP-sensitive potassium chan-
nel. Acadesine added to cold cardioplegia improves
postischemicventricularfunctioninanimalmodels.
Cardioplegiaandreperfusioninjury
Reperfusion injury is deﬁned as the functional,
metabolic, and structural alterations caused by
reperfusion after a period of temporary ischemia.
Cardioplegia solutions can protect the heart during
the ischemic insult and reduce reperfusion injury.
Reperfusion injury is characterized by intracellu-
lar calcium accumulation, cellular swelling, micro-
circulatory dysfunction, and reduced ventricular
compliance. Reperfusion solutions are infused into
the myocardium after completion of the surgical
procedure and before removal of the aortic cross-
clamp.Theyareformulatedtopreventorminimize
thereperfusioninjurythataccompaniesreperfusion
of the heart with systemic blood.
Restorative cardioplegia to reduce reperfusion
injury improves ventricular function after aortic
cross-clamping. As with cardioplegia, there are
in vitroandanimaldatatosupportitsuse.Controlled
clinical trials are more difﬁcult to conduct. Dif-
ferences in the composition, temperature, delivery
of the solutions used, and in the operative proce-
dures performed, make it difﬁcult to draw any ﬁrm
conclusions regarding the efﬁcacy of reperfusion
solutions in humans.
Despite this, there is support for use of reper-
fusion solutions in patients with preexisting, poor
ventricular function and in those who require long
cross-clamp times.
Resuscitation of ischemic myocardium can be
accomplished through warm induction of cardio-
plegicarrest.Thegoalistoresuscitateischemicareas
while optimizing preservation of the nonischemic
areas. Warm induction of cardioplegic arrest after
aortic cross-clamping combined with rapid ventric-
ular decompression on CPB improves repletion of
myocardial energy stores and improves myocardial
recovery after an acute ischemic event in patients
with ventricular hypertrophy. Table 12.3 lists the
ideal qualities present in restorative cardioplegia to
reduce reperfusion injury.
Many of the same concerns for cardioplegia
solutions are present for reperfusion solutions.
For reperfusion solutions, sufﬁcient potassium to
maintain arrest in diastole is required. This is
accomplished clinically using 8–10mEq/L in a
blood medium. For warm induction solutions,
25mEq/L of potassium in a blood medium is
required. Hypothermia delays the repair of dam-
aged enzyme systems because the repair processAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch12” — 2007/7/16 — 12:41 — page 418 — #10
418 Chapter 12
Table12.3 Restorative cardioplegia to reduce
reperfusion injury.
Maintainarrestoftheheartindiastoletoreduce
myocardialoxygenconsumption
Inducenormothermiatooptimizetherateofmetabolic
recovery
Initiateaerobicmetabolismwithanoxygenatedsolution
Providebufferingtocounteractacidosisandoptimize
enzymaticandmetabolicrecovery
Provideincreasedosmolaritytominimizereperfusion
edema
Providesufﬁcientsubstratetoallowaerobicenergy
production
Temporarilyreducecalciumionavailability
Providesubstratetoscavengefreeradicals
is temperature-dependent. Clinically, use of a nor-
mothermic (37◦C) reperfusion solution improves
functional recovery.
Glutamate and aspartate are amino acids that
serve to replenish Kreb’s cycle intermediates that
are depleted during ischemia and which enhance
aerobic metabolism and reparative processes.
Reperfusion and warm induction with a mono-
sodium L-glutamate (MSG) and monosodium
L-aspartate(MSA)containingsolutionresultsinthe
return of oxidative metabolism, enhanced oxygen
uptake, improved ATPrepletion, and better preser-
vation of systolic function after ischemic insult.
TheadditionofL-argininetocardioplegiaresultsin
reducedbiomarkersofinjuryinpatients.Themech-
anismofactionmaybeduetoincreasednitricoxide
production.
As previously discussed in detail, maintenance
of temperature-appropriate pH is essential to
ongoing cellular metabolic processes. Because aci-
dosis accompanies ischemia, any reperfusion solu-
tion must counteract acidosis and normalize pH.
TRAM is often employed as a buffer in blood
reperfusion solutions. Additional buffering capac-
ity is available in the form of histidine when a
bloodreperfusateisused.Theglutamicacid-sodium
hydroxidebuffersystemhasbeenusedwithclinical
success in crystalloid reperfusate.
Similar to cardioplegia solutions used to pre-
vent ischemia, reperfusion solutions must prevent
progression of the edema that accompanies
ischemia. Maintenance of an osmolarity of
360mOsm/L and avoidance of perfusion pressures
>60mmHg are effective in this regard. Because
loss of calcium homeostasis is the major determi-
nant of reperfusion injury, careful control of cal-
cium concentration in the reperfusate is essential.
The optimal concentration of calcium in reper-
fusateisunknown,butconcentrationsintherange
of 0.15–0.25mmol/L are common. Clinically, the
desiredcalciumconcentrationinabloodreperfusate
is obtained by using CPD to chelate excess calcium
before its administration.
Free radical damage occurs with reperfusion of
ischemic myocardium with an oxygen-containing
solution. Modiﬁcation of the reperfusate with
the free radical scavengers superoxide dismutase,
catalase, and mannitol is common.
There are other reperfusion strategies that may
offer clinical beneﬁt. Graded reoxygenation and
reperfusion is associated with diminished injury in
experimentalmodels.Neutrophildepletionreduces
boththeclinicalandbiochemicalindicesofmyocar-
dial reperfusion injury after elective coronary
revascularization with CPB. Sevoﬂurane reduces
neutrophilactivitywhenincludedinthecardiople-
gia solution. N-acetylcysteine, which can increase
glutathione levels, reduces the rise in troponin-I
when added to cold blood cardioplegia. Esmolol is
effectivewhenaddedtocoldcontinuousretrograde
blood cardioplegia. Fructose-1,6-diphospate, an
endogenous high-energy gylcolytic pathway inter-
mediary, enhances ATPproduction and reduces
the biochemical markers of injury when added to
cardioplegia. Finally, ischemic preconditioning has
been found to be beneﬁcial in myocardial pro-
tection during surgery on the beating heart, but
offers no additional protection when employed in
conjunction with CPB and aortic cross-clamping.
Cardioplegiadelivery
Cardioplegia is delivered under pressure to the
heart via either a pressurized bag or roller pump
system. The roller pump system offers several
advantages including easy incorporation of a con-
tinuous cooling system to maintain cardioplegia
hypothermia, easy incorporation of the mixingAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch12” — 2007/7/16 — 12:41 — page 419 — #11
Myocardial Preservation 419
apparatusnecessaryforbloodcardioplegiasystems,
and second-to-second control of cardioplegia infu-
sion pressure and ﬂow rates. The delivery system
should have a ﬁlter to prevent particular contam-
inants from reaching the coronary circulation and
inducing coronary vasospasm.
It is necessary to have a means of monitoring
infusion pressure because excessive infusion pres-
surescanresultinmyocardialedemaandventricu-
lar dysfunction. Infusion pressure is monitored in
the cardioplegia line itself or directly at the site
of administration. Safe delivery pressure will be
dictated by the site of administration.
During the period of aortic cross-clamping,
cardioplegia should be infused at least every
20minutes. This strategy allows washout of
metabolites and replacement of the cardioplegia
solution components that are either depleted or
washed out by noncoronary collateral ﬂow. If
electrocardiograph (ECG) or visual evidence of
myocardial contraction is present, infusion of car-
dioplegiaisnecessaryimmediately,regardlessofthe
time elapsed since the previous infusion. There is
some evidence to support continuous administra-
tion of cold blood cardioplegia during aortic cross-
clamping. One advantage to this approach includes
steady-state hypothermia. A signiﬁcant disadvan-
tage is the impediment to the surgeon’s opera-
tive ﬁeld visibility during distal coronary artery
anastomoses.
The optimal cardioplegia infusion volume is
unknown. In general, 10–20mL/kg/min of car-
dioplegia are delivered during the initial infu-
sion with the larger volumes being reserved
for hypertrophied ventricles. Subsequent infusion
usually is 10–15mL/kg. With this method, the
infusion site and the safe maximal delivery pres-
sure will limit the rate of infusion. Some centers
are more concerned with the duration of car-
dioplegia delivery than the volume infused and
prefer to deliver cardioplegia by controlling infu-
sion pressure and delivering cardioplegia over a
speciﬁed time interval (i.e. 1.5–3.0minutes for
initial arrest, and 1.0–1.5minutes for subsequent
infusions).
After the initial arrest, the composition of
subsequent infusions is modiﬁed. After diastolic
arrest with hyperkalemic, hypothermic cardio-
plegia, diastolic arrest can be maintained with a
hypothermicsolutioncontainingalowerpotassium
concentration. Patients receiving cold crystalloid
high-potassium (20 or 27mEq/L) cardioplegia in
both the initial and subsequent infusions had a
higher incidence of postoperative high-grade ven-
tricularectopyandAVnodaldissociationdysrhyth-
mias than patients receiving an initial infusion
of cold crystalloid high-potassium cardioplegia fol-
lowed by subsequent infusions of cold crystalloid
low-potassium (5 or 7mEq/L) cardioplegia. No dif-
ferencesinpostoperativeventricularfunctioncould
be detected between the two groups in either of
these studies.
Optimal delivery of cardioplegia must be tailored
to the operative procedure and operative tech-
nique. Several methods are available for cardiople-
giadelivery.Deliverymaybeviathearterialsystem
(antegrade) or via the venous system (retrograde).
Infusionintotheaorticroot
This method is accomplished by placement of a
cannula into the aorta root between the aortic
cross-clampandtheaorticvalveandcoronaryostia.
Placement of a cannula with two lumens, one for
cardioplegia delivery and the other for venting or
pressure monitoring, is popular and allows mea-
surementofaorticrootpressureduringcardioplegia
delivery(Fig.12.5).Forthismethodtobeeffective,
theaorticvalvemustbecompetent.Otherwise,the
cardioplegiasolutionwillﬂowintotheleftventricle
with resultant ventricular distension and inade-
quate delivery of cardioplegia down the coronary
arteries.
Infusionintothegrafts
Inrevascularizationprocedures,cardioplegiacanbe
infused down the free end of each saphenous vein
after completion of the distal anastomosis. This is
usually performed by the surgeon with a syringe
connectedtothefreeendofthecoronarygraft.The
cardioplegia is highly effective but is limited to the
distributionofthechosencoronaryartery.Onocca-
sion, small air emboli may be injected down the
coronary graft. Typically, this is an incidental ﬁnd-
ing on transesophageal echocardiographic (TEE)Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch12” — 2007/7/16 — 12:41 — page 420 — #12
420 Chapter 12
Fig.12.5 Top: Double-lumen catheter used for delivery
of cardioplegia into the aortic root. Lumen connected to
a stopcock can be used for venting via aortic root or for
measurement of aortic root pressure. Catheter is placed
in aortic root with use of purse-string suture and
needle-tipped stylet shown in place here. After catheter
has been placed in the aorta, the stylet is removed and
the central lumen is used for cardioplegia infusion.
Bottom: Hand-held cannula used to directly cannulate
coronary ostia for delivery of cardioplegia solution.
(From DiNardo JA. Myocardial preservation.
In: DiNardo JA (ed).Anesthesia for Cardiac Surgery,
2nd edn. Stamford, CT: Appleton & Lange, 1998:349–64,
with permission.)
examination and is without clinical signiﬁcance
(Fig. 12.6).
Infusiondirectlyintothecoronaryostia
This method is used for procedures in which the
aortic valve is incompetent and cardioplegia can-
not be delivered into the aortic root or for pro-
cedures in which the aortic root must be opened
(aorticvalvereplacement).Forthismethodtowork
effectively, the surgeon must identify the coronary
ostia and cannulate them with specially designed
cathetersthroughwhichcardioplegiaisinfused(see
Fig. 12.5). The catheters come in a variety of sizes
to allow proper placement without damage to the
ostia. Delivery of cardioplegia with this method
can be complicated in several ways. The tip of the
catheter may extend past the bifurcation of the left
main coronary artery such that the catheter may
only perfuse either the left anterior descending or
the circumﬂex artery. This is particularly true in
patients with bicuspid aortic valves because the left
main coronary artery is shorter than normal. In
50% of patients, the conus artery to the right ven-
tricle (RV) arises separately from the aortic sinus
andwillnotbeperfusedbycannulationoftheright
coronary ostium. Finally, damage to the ostia with
late stenosis can occur with direct cannulation.
For all three of these antegrade delivery
sites, the infusion pressure should not exceed
150mmHg.
(a)
(b)
Intramyocardial air
Fig.12.6 Intramyocardial air is observed in the apical
septal wall before separation from cardiopulmonary
bypass (a). This air may have come from inadvertent
injection of air down a coronary graft during
administration of cardioplegia. The area was initially
dyskinetic, however, after a short washout interval, the
air was absorbed and the wall motion abnormality
resolved (b).Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch12” — 2007/7/16 — 12:41 — page 421 — #13
Myocardial Preservation 421
Retrogradecoronarysinusperfusion
Retrograde coronary sinus perfusion (RCSP)
infusions cardioplegia into the coronary sinus ret-
rograde into the great and small cardiac veins. The
large venous network is free of atherosclerotic dis-
ease allowing adequate retrograde perfusion of the
entire myocardium via this route.
Thismethodrequiresplacementofapurse-string
suture in the right atrium (RA) and creation of
a small atriotomy. A specially designed coronary
sinus catheter is placed in the coronary sinus by
the surgeon via the atriotomy. TEE is useful to
conﬁrm proper positioning of the coronary sinus
catheter (Fig. 12.7). A balloon at the tip of the
catheter helps secure the catheter and ensures
that cardioplegia ﬂow does not spill back into the
right atrium. Delivery of cardioplegia commences
after application of the aortic cross-clamp. Most of
the retrograde perfusion drains via the thebesian
veins, but either the aortic root or the left ventricle
(a)
(b)
Coronary sinus
Retrograde coronary
sinus catheter in place
Fig.12.7 The coronary sinus is easily visualized with
transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) (a). The
retrograde coronary sinus catheter is seen in the
coronary sinus (b).
is usually vented during cardioplegia infusion to
allow egress of the solution. The coronary sinus
catheter has an additional central lumen allow-
ing pressure monitoring during cardioplegia infu-
sion. If infusion pressures are too high, there may
be injury to the coronary venous system. Nor-
mal retrograde perfusion occurs at a pressure of
30–50mmHg.
Retrograde cardioplegia is popular for a num-
ber of reasons. The retrograde route of cardioplegia
administration is particularly useful in aortic valve
replacement thereby avoiding in direct cannula-
tion of the coronary ostia. Retrograde perfusion is
superiortoaorticrootperfusionwhenaorticincom-
petence exists. RCSPresults in more homogeneous
distribution of cardioplegia than antegrade deliv-
eryinanimalsandhumanswithcoronarystenoses.
This may be secondary to the large venous net-
work free of atherosclerotic disease. Troponin I
release is reduced immediately after surgery with
retrograde cardioplegia compared to antegrade car-
dioplegia(Fig.12.8).Retrogradeperfusionisuseful
in reoperative procedures in patients with patent
internal mammary artery (IMA) grafts. Retrograde
perfusion during IMA occlusion will provide car-
dioplegia delivery to the myocardium distal to the
patent graft.
8
*
*P < 0.056
cTnl (µg/L)
4
2
0
Preop. 24 48
Time (h)
Group A
Group R
72 Discharge
Fig.12.8 The time course of troponin I (cTnI)
concentration for antegrade and retrograde cardioplegia
groups in a trial of 58 randomized patients undergoing
elective coronary artery bypass grafting. *P < 0.05
betweengroups.(FromFrankeU,WahlersT,CohnertTU
et al. Retrograde versus antegrade crystalloid cardioplegia
in coronary surgery: value of troponin-I measurement.
Ann Thorac Surg 2001;71:249–53.)Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch12” — 2007/7/16 — 12:41 — page 422 — #14
422 Chapter 12
RCSPprovidespoorprotectionoftheRVandpos-
terior septum probably as a result of venovenous
shunting through arteriosinusoidal and thebe-
sian vessels directly into the RV. As a result,
only 30–70% of delivered retrograde cardioplegia
reaches myocardial tissue. Interestingly, antegrade
cardioplegiaisalsoassociatedwithdiminishedright
ventricular protection compared to the left ventri-
cle. The reasons for this are unclear; however, it
may be related to uneven distribution of cardiople-
gia solution with antegrade delivery or a baseline
metabolicdifferencebetweentherightandleftven-
tricle. To maximize myocardial protection, many
institutions utilize both antegrade and retrograde
cardioplegia in a single patient.
Myocardialprotectionagentsin
additiontocardioplegia
Myocardial preservation is inﬂuenced by factors
otherthantheefﬁcientdeliveryofcoldcardioplegic
solution. The most important of these factors are
discussed in the sections that follow.
Topicalhypothermia
Myocardial oxygen demands drop by 90% in nor-
mothermic arrest to 1mL oxygen (O2)/100g/min.
At 22◦C, oxygen requirements drop to 0.3mL/
100g/min in the arrested heart. Further reduction
of oxygen consumption occurs with temperatures
<22◦C; however, the incremental gain is mini-
mal. Despite this, many clinicians target 4–6 ◦C
for optimal myocardial preservation. As discussed
previously, it is difﬁcult to achieve this degree of
hypothermia in clinical practice. It is possible, with
the use of cold cardioplegia solution and topical
saline slush or ice chips, to achieve and maintain
temperatures lower than 15◦C. Unfortunately, the
useofsalineslushandicechipshasbeenassociated
with problems. Myocardial damage due to freezing
hasbeendemonstratedinheartsexposedtoslushor
ice for more than 30minutes. Phrenic nerve pare-
sis due to freezing has been reported in 60–80% of
casesinwhichslushoriceisused.Forthesereasons,
manycentersuseeitherintermittentorcontinuous
infusionsofsalineat4 ◦Cintothepericardialwellto
obtain topical cooling.
Controlofnoncoronaryand
bronchialcollateralbloodﬂow
Excessive bronchial collateral blood ﬂow results in
warming of the heart by distending it with blood at
the temperature of the systemic perfusate. Exces-
sive noncoronary collateral ﬂow results not only
in distension and warming of the heart but in the
washout of cardioplegia solutions as well. Systemic
hypothermiaonCPBiseffectiveinreducingwarm-
ing, but careful control of systemic ﬂow and pres-
sure on CPB is necessary to reduce the magnitude
of collateralized ﬂow.
Decompressionoftheheart
Distension of the heart has two deleterious conse-
quences: it results in poor distribution of cardiople-
giasolutiontothesubendocardiumduetothehigh
intracavitarypressures,anditresultsinwarmingof
the heart due to distension of the heart with blood
at body temperature. For these reasons, venting of
the heart is usually employed.
Preventingwarmingoftheposterior
surfaceoftheheart
Because the posterior surface of the heart lies on
top of the mediastinum, which is at systemic tem-
perature, it is at high risk of warming during aortic
cross-clamping. To prevent this, many surgeons
place a pad soaked in iced saline behind the heart
in the pericardium to shield it from the mediasti-
nal structures. This may help prevent mitral valve
dysfunction secondary to posterior papillary mus-
cle ischemia. The TEE probe emits energy and heat
whenever imaging is in progress. For this reason,
imagingshouldbesuspendedduringthisportionof
the surgical procedure.
Specialconsiderationsinneonates,
infants,andchildren
Despite advances in the surgical correction of con-
genital cardiac lesions, postoperative low cardiac
output leading to long-term ventricular dysfunc-
tion or death continues to be a concern. This
has focused attention on the effectiveness of cur-
rentmyocardialprotectiontechniquesintherepair
of congenital heart disease. Most work to date
on myocardial preservation has involved adultAlice Nelson Dinardo: “ch12” — 2007/7/16 — 12:41 — page 423 — #15
Myocardial Preservation 423
humans or adult animal preparations. Unfortu-
nately,theexistenceofmajorstructural,metabolic,
andfunctionaldifferencesbetweeninfantandadult
hearts makes extrapolation of these studies to
neonatesandinfantsdifﬁcult.Thesedifferencesare
summarized in the following sections.
Calciumhomeostasis
Neonatalheartshaveapoorlydevelopedsarcoplas-
mic reticulum and T-tubule system. In addition,
the sarcoplasmic reticulum has reduced calcium
storagecapacityandareducedactivityofsarcoplas-
mic calcium ATPase, the enzyme responsible for
calcium re-uptake. These differences result in a
greater reliance on extracellular calcium to provide
excitation-contraction coupling and are a factor in
the diminished tension development capabilities of
the neonatal myocardium.
Substratemetabolism
Intheadultheart90%ofATPproductionisderived
from fatty acid oxidation. The main ATPsub-
strate in neonatal hearts is glucose. As compared
to adults, the noninsulin-dependent glucose trans-
porter (GLU1) is much more highly expressed than
the insulin-dependent glucose transporter (GLU4).
ATPaseactivity
Fetallight-chainmyosinhasadiminishedabilityto
hydrolyzeATP,whichcontributestothediminished
tension-development capability of neonatal hearts.
This light-chain myosin remains in patients with
congenital heart disease.
Capacityforanaerobicmetabolism
The neonatal heart has an enhanced capacity for
anaerobic metabolism compared with the adult
heartsecondarytoitslargeglycogenstores.Forthis
reason, the neonatal heart tolerates longer periods
of hypoxia.
Toleranceforischemia
The neonatal heart possesses greater tolerance
for ischemia (severely reduced or absent perfu-
sion) than adult hearts due to enhanced glyco-
gen stores, better maintenance of ischemic cal-
cium exchange, higher levels of ATPsubstrates,
and increased amino acid use. In the absence of
perfusion, the enhanced capacity for anaerobic
metabolism of the immature myocardium leads to
a rapid accumulation of the products of anaerobic
metabolism such as lactate. Therefore, prolonged
ischemia results in severe acidosis and tissue dam-
age and in the rapid inhibition of further produc-
tion of high-energy phosphates in the neonatal
myocardium. Cyanosis further increases the vul-
nerability of the neonatal heart to ischemia. The
myocardium of cyanotic children is more vulnera-
ble to cardiac ischemia/reperfusion injury than the
myocardium of noncyanotic children presumably
duetodepletionofendogenousantioxidantreserve.
Tensiondevelopment
Incomparisontotheadultheart,theneonatalheart
containsareducednumberofpoorlyorganizedcon-
tractileunits.Intheimmaturemyocardium,alarger
proportionofthemyocyteisdevotedtotheprotein
syntheticprocessesneededforcellgrowth.Inaddi-
tion to the factors already addressed, this accounts
forthereducedtensiondevelopmentcapabilitiesof
the neonatal heart. This reduced tension develop-
mentcapabilitymakestheneonateverysusceptible
to any depression of systolic function after cardiac
surgery.
Work done both in animals and in humans sug-
geststhatimprovedmyocardialpreservationcanbe
obtained in neonates, infants, and children by tai-
loringmyocardialpreservationeffortstothespeciﬁc
needs of the immature myocardium:
• Delivery of cardioplegia to neonates, infants,
and small children requires some modiﬁcations;
20–30mL/kg of cardioplegia may be necessary to
induce arrest. The pressure of antegrade delivery
must be modiﬁed such that, in the neonate, infu-
sionpressureisnomorethan40–50mmHgtoavoid
myocardial edema.
• Topical cooling is much more effective in the
neonate than in the adult due to the smaller car-
diac mass and greater surface area: wall thickness
ratio in neonates.
• Improved post-ischemic functional recovery
occurs with use of hypothermic blood potas-
sium cardioplegia with a normal serum calcium
concentration.Alice Nelson Dinardo: “ch12” — 2007/7/16 — 12:41 — page 424 — #16
424 Chapter 12
• Infantsyoungerthan3monthsofageandinfants
with preoperative heart failure have an increased
susceptibility to ultrastructural myocardial injury
despite the use of cold crystalloid cardioplegia and
topical hypothermia.
• Children with ventricular hypertrophy have
increased vulnerability to ischemia/reperfusion
injury. This is due, at least in part, to reduced
microvascular (capillary) density and impaired
glucose uptake.
• There may be difﬁculty in obtaining adequate
myocardial protection in the presence of volumi-
nous bronchial and noncoronary collateral blood
ﬂow. Noncoronary collateral ﬂow will wash out
cardioplegia, and that bronchial return will result
in warming of the heart. This collateral blood
ﬂow can be eliminated through the use of circu-
latory arrest. In fact, improved recovery of right
ventricular function, reduced need for post-CPB
inotropic support, and less evidence of myocar-
dial necrosis, as indicated by myocardial band
enzymes of creatinine phosphokinase-myocardial
band (CPK-MB) levels, have been demonstrated in
patients undergoing tetralogy of Fallot repair with
systemic deep hypothermic arrest in addition to
cardioplegic protection.
Suggestedreading
DoenstT,SchlensakC,BeyersdorfF.Cardioplegiainpedi-
atriccardiacsurgery:dowebelieveinmagic? Ann Thorac
Surg2003;75:S678–84.
Guru V, Omura J, Alghamdi AA, Weisel R, Fremes SE.
Is blood superior to crystalloid cardioplegia? A meta-
analysis of randomized clinical trials. Circulation
2006;114(Suppl I):I-331–8.
Kevin LG, Novalija E, Stowe DF. Reactive oxygen
species as mediators of cardiac injury and protec-
tion: the relevance to anesthesia practice.Anesth Analg
2005;101:1275–87.
Ovrum E, Tangen G, Tollofsrud Set al. Cold blood cardio-
plegiaversuscoldcrystalloidcardioplegia:aprospective
randomized study of 1440 patients undergoing coro-
nary artery bypass grafting. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg
2004;128:860–5.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch13” — 2007/7/16 — 12:41 — page 425 — #1
CHAPTER 13
SpecialConsiderationsduring
CardiacSurgery
Thischapterwilladdresstopicsthatrequirespecial
considerationduringtheconductofcardiacsurgery.
Deephypothermiccirculatory
arrest
Deep hypothermic circulatory arrest (DHCA) is a
techniqueemployedtoimproveexposureofintrac-
ardiac defects and to facilitate aortic arch recon-
struction in infants and children. In adults, DHCA
isusedprimarilyduringaorticarchreconstructions.
DHCA allows cessation of cardiopulmonary bypass
(CPB), venous and arterial cannula removal, and
exsanguinationofthepatientintothevenousreser-
voir of the CPB circuit. There has been substantial
reﬁnementofthetechniqueofDHCAsinceitssuc-
cessful inception in the 1970s. Currently DHCA is
usedselectivelyandforshortintervals.
Determination of the safe period of DHCA
is problematic because it varies depending on
the deﬁned primary acceptable outcome as well
as on independent variables such as patient
population (infant versus adult), co-morbidities
(cerebrovascular, renal, genetic), and DHCA tech-
nique(pHmanagement,hematocritmanagement).
In neonates and infants, DHCA intervals generally
donotexceed60minutesasDHCAintervalslonger
than 40minutes are associated with a nonlinear
increasinglikelihoodofadverseneurodevelopmen-
tal outcomes including seizures. In adults, DHCA
intervalsoflessthan30–40minutesarecommon.
Hypothermia
Hypothermia is arguably the most important com-
ponent of DHCA. Hypothermia-induced reduction
in cerebral metabolic rate for oxygen (CMRO2)
slows the rate of depletion of high-energy
phosphates and the development of intracellu-
lar acidosis. This delays or prevents the neuronal
energy failure that leads to terminal membrane
depolarization and subsequent neuronal injury
or death during an ischemic episode. The Q10
deﬁnes the ratio of organ oxygen consumption at
a deﬁned temperature to the oxygen consump-
tion at a temperature 10◦Clower. The cerebral
Q10 is approximately 3.65 in children and 2.3
in adults. The cerebral metabolic rate is approx-
imately 10–15% of its normothermic baseline at
15◦C. If it is assumed that 3–5minutes of cerebral
ischemiacanbetoleratedat37 ◦CandtheQ 10is3.0,
9–15minutes of ischemia can be tolerated at 27◦C
and27–45minutescanbetoleratedat17 ◦C.
In addition to reducing CMRO2, hypothermia
also serves to ameliorate some of the sequalae of
neuronal ischemia when instituted prior to the
ischemiainsult.Speciﬁcally,hypothermiamarkedly
reducesreleaseoftheexcitatoryneurotransmitters
glutamate, aspartate, and glycine that accompany
cerebral ischemia and subsequent reperfusion. In
energy deprived cells, glutamate is neurotoxic in
part due to the role it plays in inducing massive
calcium inﬂux viaN-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA)
receptors. Hypothermia also blunts the inhibitory
425AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch13” — 2007/7/16 — 12:41 — page 426 — #2
426 Chapter13
effect of hypoxia on nitroxidergic (postganglionic
parasympathetic nerve where nitric oxide (NO)
is the neurotransmitter) induced cerebral vasodi-
latation. In addition, hypothermia may attenuate
neutrophilmigrationintoischemictissue.
pHstatversus α-statmanagement
pH-stat and α-stat are described in detail in
Chapter 10. Experimentally pH-stat management
during DHCA offers several advantages overα-stat
management:
Suppression of CMRO2
ThereisbettersuppressionofCMRO 2 withpH-stat
as compared toα-stat management. pH-stat man-
agement reduces CMRO2 by 40% over that seen
with α-statmanagementat17 ◦C.
Brain cooling
During the cooling phase of deep hypothermia,
pH-stat management provides faster and more
homogenous brain cooling than doesα-stat man-
agement. This is a direct consequence of the
decreasedcerebralvascularresistanceandincreased
cerebralbloodﬂow(CBF)thataccompaniespH-stat
management.
Oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve
Hypothermia induces a leftward shift of the oxy-
hemoglobin dissociation curve such that during
α-stat management at 17 ◦Cthe P 50 of fetal
hemoglobin is 5.0 as compared to 20.0 at 37◦C.
The increased afﬁnity of hemoglobin for oxygen
reducestheabilityofhemoglobintooff-loadoxygen
totissue.Asaresult,asubstantialportion(56–96%)
of the oxygen delivered to brain during CPB at
17◦Cis obtained from dissolved oxygen making a
highCBFtoCMRO 2 rationecessary.pH-statman-
agement is advantageous in this setting because it
results in increased CBF compared toα-stat man-
agement and because the relative acidosis which
accompaniespH-statmanagementinducesaright-
wardshiftoftheoxyhemoglobindissociationcurve
such that the P50 of fetal hemoglobin increases to
6.9 at 17◦Cimproving off-loading of oxgyen from
hemoglobintothebrain.
Aortopulmonary collaterals
The presence of numerous and often large collat-
eralvesselsfromthearchvesselsandthoracicaorta
to the pulmonary arterial system is common in
neonates, infants, and children with atretic pul-
monary arterial systems. The number and size of
these vessels increase in proportion to the dura-
tionofcyanosis.OnCPB,with α-statmanagement
the resulting alkalosis reduces pulmonary vascu-
lar resistance and increases cerebral vascular resis-
tance such that these vessels divert blood from
the cerebral circulation to the pulmonary circula-
tion. As a result, pH-stat management results in
better cerebral protection thanα-stat management
when circulatory arrest is induced in the presence
ofaortopulmonarycollaterals(APCs).
Cerebral oxygenation
pH-stat management increases pre-DHCA corti-
cal oxygen saturation (ScO2) and increases the
half-life of arrest ScO2 as compared to α-stat
management. pH-stat management also provides
better preservation of intracellular pH and better
preservationofcerebralenergystores(high-energy
phosphates) and tissue oxygenation (nicotinamide
adenine dinucleotide (NADH), cytochrome aa3).
A strategy of pH-stat management during cooling
and arrest coupled with pH-stat management dur-
ingrewarmingresultsinbetterrecoveryofcerebral
energystoresandintracellularpHthanastrategyof
pH-statmanagementduringcoolingandarrestcou-
pledwith α-managementduringrewarming.These
effects are largely mediated through reduction of
CMRO2duringarrestandincreasedcerebraloxygen
deliveryduringthecoolingphasepriortoarrestand
during the reperfusion and rewarming phase after
arrest.
Hematocrit
It has long been assumed that hemodilution is an
essential component of DHCA because hemodi-
lution offsets the viscosity and rheologic changes
that can compromise microcirculatory ﬂow dur-
ing low temperature CPB. Recent laboratory stud-
ies demonstrate that a hematocrit of 30% does
not impair cerebral microcirculation during or
after DHCA. Furthermore, a hematocrit of 10%AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch13” — 2007/7/16 — 12:41 — page 427 — #3
SpecialConsiderations 427
severely compromises cerebral oxygen delivery
duringcoolingpriortoDHCA.Inaddition,ahigher
hematocrit (30% compared to 20% or 10%) dur-
ing cooling and at the onset of DHCA extends the
interval of DHCA that can be tolerated without
neurologicinjury.
Arterialoxygenpartialpressure(Pao 2)
managementduringCPBforDHCA
Normoxic reperfusion is superior to hyperoxic
reperfusioninmitigatingfreeradical-inducedneu-
ronal injury following neuronal ischemia. Hyper-
oxic CPB and DHCA results in more free radical
damage than normoxic CPB and DHCA. However,
this damage is offset by the more severe hypoxic
neuronaldamagethataccompaniesnormoxicCPB
and DHCA. This is likely due to the fact that the
majorityofthebrain’soxygenrequirementsduring
DHCAaremetbydissolvedoxygen.HyperoxicCPB
clearly increases the amount of dissolved oxygen
availabletothebrain.
ConductofDHCA
Cooling for DHCA involves both surface and core
cooling. Surface cooling in neonates and infants
surface is very effective and is initiated once sur-
gical preparation begins. In adults, surface cooling
isgenerallylesseffectivegiventheirsmallersurface
areatoweightratio.Surfacecoolingisaccomplished
usingunwarmedintravenousﬂuids,unhumidiﬁed
gases,reducingtheroomtemperatureto10–12 ◦C,
setting the heating/cooling blanket to 4–5◦C, and
packingthepatient’sheadinice.Thesetechniques
allow the patient to be cooled to 30–32◦Cbefore
beginning CPB and core cooling. Surface cooling
requirescloseobservationoftheprogressionofthe
operativeprocedureasprematurecoolingcanpre-
dispose to dysrhythmias (bradycardia, ventricular
irritability)andhypotension.
ThemosteffectivemethodofcoolingforDHCAis
corecoolingonCPB.Avasodilatorsuchassodium
nitroprussideorphentolamine(0.2mg/kg)maybe
administered into the CPB circuit as core cool-
ing commences to promote vasodilation and more
homogenous cooling. A vasodilator may also be
used before core rewarming. Methylprednisolone
(30mg/kg in infants and neonates, 1g in adults),
magnesium sulfate, lidocaine, and mannitol are
often added to the CPB prime. The minimum
hematocrit during cooling, arrest, and rewarming
is unknown, however many believe it should be
>25%. Based on clinical trial data, many centers
aim for a hematocrit of 30% during these inter-
vals in neomates and infanta. Anesthetic agents
(syntheticopioidandbenzodiazepine)andamuscle
relaxant are administered prior to DHCA to min-
imize oxygen consumption during cooling and
arrest.
Ideally,DHCAshouldcommencewhentheelec-
troencephalogram(EEG)isisoelectricandCMRO 2
is minimal. In adults, it is necessary to obtain a
nasopharyngealtemperatureof12–18 ◦Cortohave
cooledthepatientonCPBformorethan50minutes
to obtain this goal. In neonates and infants this is
generallyaccomplishedwith15–20minutesofcool-
ingandatympanicmembranetemperature <15◦C.
At this point the rectal temperature is invariably
<18◦C. Longer intervals of core cooling should
be used for children with extensive systemic to
pulmonaryarterycollaterals.
pH-statmanagementisgenerallyusedinpediatric
patients while α-stat management is more com-
monlyusedinadults.pH-statmanagementisused
once patient tympanic membrane temperature is
below 30◦Cduring both cooling and rewarming.
Four different mixtures of oxygen/carbon dioxide
foruseasthesweepgasinthemembraneoxygena-
tor are available: 97% oxygen/3% carbon dioxide,
96%oxygen/4%carbondioxide,95%oxygen/5%
carbondioxide,and94%oxygen/6%carbondiox-
ide. The use of carbon dioxide in the membrane
oxygenatorsweepgasissummarizedinTable13.1.
Insmallerinfantsandinpatientswithextensive
APCs the next higher mixture of oxygen/carbon
dioxide than normally indicated is utilized. When
Table13.1 Theuseofcarbondioxide(C O2)inthe
membraneoxygenatorsweepgas.
Patienttemperature( ◦C) %O 2/CO2
30–28 97/3
28–22 96/4
22–15 95/5AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch13” — 2007/7/16 — 12:41 — page 428 — #4
428 Chapter13
CPB commences the perfusate is at 30◦Chaving
been previously recirculated with the chosen
oxygen/carbondioxidemixture.
Target brain temperature at the end of rewarm-
ing on CPB is 35–36◦C. Slow core rewarming will
allowthistargettemperaturetobereachedwithout
inducing cerebral hyperthermia as it is detrimen-
tal to neurological outcome following DHCA. At
no point in the rewarming process should rectal,
esophageal, or tympanic membrane temperatures
exceed target brain temperature if cerebral hyper-
thermiaistobeavoided.Slowcorerewarmingalso
amelioratestemperatureafterdropfollowingtermi-
nation of CPB by promoting more homogenous
somaticrewarming.
AlternativestoDHCA
In an effort to prevent the potentially deleterious
effectsofDHCAoncerebralperfusionandoxygena-
tion, efforts have been directed toward technical
innovations to avoid the use of DHCA. Currently
bothantegradecerebralperfusion(ACP)andretro-
grade cerebral perfusion (RCP) are used clinically.
Whether these techniques can reliably extend the
periodofsafeDHCAremainstobedetermined.
Antegrade cerebral perfusion
ArterialCPBcircuitﬂowcanbedeliveredselectively
to the cerebral circulation antegrade via the circle
of Willis following cannulation of the innominate
artery or right carotid artery. With this technique,
the arch vessels are snared and the descending
aorta is cross-clamped to provide a bloodless oper-
ativeﬁeld(Fig.13.1).Inneonatesandinfants,ACP
is commonly called regional low ﬂow perfusion
(RLFP). The technique is similar to that used in
adults except that a graft may be placed on the
innominate artery to provide access for the can-
nula. This graft can then be used as a modiﬁed
Blalock–Taussig shunt (innominate artery to right
pulmonaryartery).
The optimal ﬂow rates, delivery pressure,
temperature, and acid-base balance (pH-stat or
α-stat) of the selective cerebral perfusate have
yet to be determined. Cerebral overperfusion is
a potential risk with this technique. In adults,
ﬂow rates of 200–250mL/min at a temperature
Arterial cannula
Atrial blood
scavenger
Fig.13.1 Schematicoftheoperativeﬁeldduringthe
ascendingaortaandaorticarchreconstructionportionof
hypoplasticleftheartsyndromerepairutilizingantegrade
cerebralperfusion(regionallowﬂowperfusion).Cerebral
bloodﬂowissuppliedbyanarterialcannulafromthe
cardiopulmonarybypass(CPB)circuitplacedinthedistal
portionofagraftanastomosedtotheinnominateartery.
Theproximalportionsoftheinnominateartery,left
carotidartery,andleftsubclavianarteryaresnaredand
thedescendingaortaiscross-clampedtoprovidea
bloodlessoperativeﬁeld.Thegraftwilllaterbeusedto
createamodiﬁedBlalock–Taussigshunt(innominate
arterytorightpulmonaryartery).(FromPigulaFA.Arch
reconstructionwithoutcirculatoryarrest:Scientiﬁcbasis
forcontinueduseandapplicationtopatientswitharch
anomalies.SeminThoracCardiovascSurgPediatrCardSurg
Annu2002;5:105,withpermission.)
of 8–12◦Cwith α-stat management are generally
utilized. In neonates and infants, ﬂow rates of
40–80mL/kg/minatatemperatureof15–22 ◦Cwith
pH-statmanagementaregenerallyutilized.
Retrograde cerebral perfusion
ArterialCPBcircuitﬂowcanbedeliveredselectively
to the cerebral circulation retrograde via the cere-
bralvenoussystem.Thesuperiorvenacava(SVC)is
cannulatedwithproximalsnaringoftheSVCbelow
theazygousveinandabovetherightatrium.Arte-
rial output from the CPB circuit is directed to this
cannulatoprovideretrogradecerebralperfusionviaAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch13” — 2007/7/16 — 12:41 — page 429 — #5
SpecialConsiderations 429
theSVCandazygousvenoussystem.Thedescend-
ingaortaiscross-clampedbutthearchvesselsmust
beleftopentoatmospheretoprovidelow-pressure
arterial drainage. RCP provides some cerebral per-
fusion,helpstomaintaincerebralhypothermia,and
washesdebrisoutofthearterialsystem.Inorderto
prevent run-off of blood from the cerebral venous
circulation into the lower body venous circulation
during RCP it is necessary to maintain lower body
venous pressure. This is accomplished with partial
ratherthancompleteexsanguinationofthepatient
via the venous cannula following DHCA and prior
toRCP.
Theoptimalﬂowrates,deliverypressure,temper-
ature, and acid-base balance (pH-stat orα-stat) of
theselectivecerebralperfusatehaveyettobedeter-
mined.Cerebraledemaisapotentialriskwiththis
technique.Inadults,ﬂowratesof200–300mL/min
atatemperatureof8–12 ◦Cwith α-statmanagement
atapressureof25mmHgaregenerallyutilized.
AdjunctstoDHCA
In an effort to mitigate the neuronal damage that
accompaniestheuseofDHCAanumberofadjunct
therapieshavebeeninvestigated.
Thiopental
Barbituratesoffernoprotectionfromglobalanoxia,
which is the primary insult induced by DHCA.
BarbituratesadministeredinassociationwithDHCA
(approximately 1.0g in adults) do offer enhanced
cerebral metabolic suppression in the setting of
incompletebraincoolingandameliorationofinjury
induced by cerebral air emboli during rewarming
(focal ischemic event). Barbiturates administered
during cooling for DHCA are potentially deleteri-
ousbecausetheyreducecerebralblood(theprimary
mechanism of brain cooling) and prevent cooling-
induced accumulation of high-energy phosphate
storesandincreasedintracellularpH.Duetoalack
ofgoodclinicaldata,noclearconsensusexistsasto
theutilityofbarbituratesinamelioratingneuronal
injuryassociatedwithDHCA.
Steroids
Theroleofsteroidsinmitigatingneuronaldamage
followingDHCAisunclear.Studiestodatehavenot
demonstrated clear beneﬁt. However, it has been
suggested that administration several hours prior
to initiation of DHCA is of more beneﬁtial than
administrationintheCPBpumpprime.
Investigational agents
Several agents including inhalational anesthetics
(particularly desﬂurane), inhibitors of oxygen free
radical generation such as allopurinol and leuko-
depleted blood are currently being investigated as
agentstomitigateneurologicinjuryassociatedwith
DHCA.
HematocritonCPBand
transfusionofbloodproducts
The issues surrounding transfusion of red cell and
blood component therapy in adult cardiac surgi-
cal patients is complex and has received a great
dealofattentioninthelastseveralyears.Bothlow
hematocritonCPBandperioperativetransfusionto
treat low hematocrit have been implicated in the
full range of adverse outcomes following cardiac
surgery. Analysis of this relationship is hampered
by the fact that most of the data are drawn from
observational studies rather than from controlled
randomizedtrialsandbytherelativeheterogeneity
of the study groups compared. Neither the mini-
mal allowable hematocrit on CPB nor the relative
risk/beneﬁtofperioperativetransfusiontotreatlow
hematocritareclearlydeﬁned.
Therisksassociatedwithareducedhematocriton
CPBcanbesummarizedasfollows:
• Renaldysfunction. CPB hemodilution to a thresh-
old hematocrit ranging from<21% to <26% is
associated with increased likelihood of postopera-
tive renal dysfunction including acute renal fail-
ure and the requirement for renal replacement
therapy (dialysis). This decrease in renal func-
tion is also associated with increased operative
mortality and hospital stay. An oxygen delivery
<272mL/min/m2inconjunctionwithCPBhemod-
ilution is associated with postoperative acute renal
failure.
• Neurologic dysfunction.Nadir hematocrit on CPB
isanindependentpredictorofperioperativestroke
with each 1% decrease in hematocrit below 29%AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch13” — 2007/7/16 — 12:41 — page 430 — #6
430 Chapter13
associated with a 10% increase in the odds of
sufferingaperioperativestroke.
• Poor overall outcome.Lowest hematocrit on CPB
is associated with increased mortality, intra-aortic
balloonpumpplacement,intensivecareunit(ICU)
andhospitalstay,returntoCPBandworse0–6year
survival.
The risks associated with perioperative transfu-
sion of packed red blood cells (PRBC) and other
bloodproductsaresummarizedasfollows:
• Infectious complications.Perioperative transfusion
of PRBCin patients undergoing cardiac surgery
is associated with an increased risk of septicemia
andbacteremia,superﬁcialanddeepwoundinfec-
tions, and nosocomial pneumonia. Transfusion of
otherbloodproductssuchasplatelets,freshfrozen
plasma, and cryoprecipitate may also increase the
riskofinfectiouscomplications.
• Pooroveralloutcome. Perioperative transfusion of
PRBCin patients undergoing cardiac surgery is
associated with an increased risk of postoperative
morbidity from all causes (cardiac, renal, neuro-
logic, respiratory, and infectious). Each unit of
PRBCtransfused incrementally increases the risk
of an adverse outcome. In addition, periopera-
tive transfusion of PRBCis associated with reduc-
tions in short-term survival, long-term survival
(5–10years), and quality of life. There is conﬂict-
ingevidenceastowhetherplatelettransfusionsare
associatedwithadverseclinicaloutcomes.
It is unclear whether use of leukoreduced or
leukodepleted blood products mitigates the risk of
perioperative blood transfusion. Likewise, there is
conﬂictingevidenceastowhethertheageofbanked
transfused PRBCcontributes to the risk of trans-
fusion. The most prudent course is to avoid a low
hematocritonCPBandtolimitperioperativetrans-
fusion of blood products whenever possible. This
requiresamulti-modalapproachusingsomeorall
ofthetechniquesoutlinedinTable13.2.
Neurologicoutcomefollowing
cardiacsurgery
Neurologic complications following adult cardiac
surgery include stroke, encephalopathy, and cog-
nitivedysfunction.Strokeoccursinapproximately
Table13.2 Interventionstolimitbloodproduct
transfusionincardiacsurgery.
Preventandtreatpreoperativeanemia
• Limitpreoperativeblooddrawingfortesting
• Appropriateintervalbetweenpreoperativeautologous
blooddonationandelectivesurgery
• Recombinanthumanerythropoietin(EPO)and
supplementalironadministrationmorethan1weekprior
tosurgery
Pharmacologicalinterventionstolimitperioperative
bloodloss
• Antiﬁbrinolyticagents:
a Aprotinin
b Lysineanalogues(tranexamicacid, ε-aminocaproicacid)
• Desmopressin(DDAVP,1-deamino-8- D-arginine
vasopressin)
• RecombinantfactorVIIa(rFVIIa)
Intraoperativesalvageofblood
• Useofcellsaverduringre-operativeprocedures
• SalvageandtransfusionofCPBcircuitvolumefollowing
terminationofCPB
HemoconcentrationonCPB
• Continuousultraﬁltration(CUF)
• Modiﬁedultraﬁltration(MUF)
ReduceCPBcircuitprimevolume
• Useofsmallestpossibletubinglength/diameter
• Useofsmallestpossiblevenousreservoir/oxygenator
system
• Retrogradeautologouspriming(RAP)
Pointofcaretesting(POCT)toidentifycoagulation
defects
• ACT
• Protaminetitration
• Thromboelastography(TEG)
• Plateletcount,ﬁbrinogenlevel,PT,aPTT
ACT, activated clotting time; aPTT, activated partial
thromboplastin time; CPB, cardiopulmonary bypass;
PT,prothrombintime.
1–3%ofpatientswhilepostoperativecognitivedys-
function is far more common affecting upwards
of 30–65% of patients at 1month and 20–40% of
patients at 6months. The etiology of these neu-
rologic complications is complex and involves theAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch13” — 2007/7/16 — 12:41 — page 431 — #7
SpecialConsiderations 431
interplay of several variables including cerebral
emboli, global cerebral hypoperfusion, systemic
inﬂammatoryresponse,andgeneticpredisposition.
The fact that the incidence of cognitive dysfunc-
tionandstrokefollowingoff-pumpcoronaryartery
bypassgraftsurgery(CABG)andon-pumpCABGis
notsigniﬁcantlydifferentemphasizesthecomplex,
multi-factorialnatureofthisproblem.
Cerebralemboli
Both micro- and macroemboli are delivered to
the brain during CPB despite the use of arte-
rial and venous ﬁlters. There is concern that
the increased CBF associated with pH-stat man-
agement can contribute to neurologic morbid-
ity by increasing the embolic load to the brain
and by inducing intra-cerebral steal of blood
ﬂow. This contention is unproven; nonetheless,
α-stat management remains the standard during
adultCPB.
Particulate macroemboli are generally com-
posed of atheromatous or calciﬁc debris from the
aorta, cardiac valves, or great vessels. Microemboli
can be gaseous or particulate. Particulate micro-
emboliariseprimarilyfromfat,marrow,bonewax,
and other material in the pericardial well that are
aspirated into the CPB circuit via cardiotomy suc-
tion. Gaseous microemboli arise from air that is
introduceddirectlyintotheheartduringopencar-
diac chamber procedures or from air introduced
into the CPB circuit. Perfusionist interventions,
speciﬁcally injection of drugs (and air) into the
venous reservoir, and entrainment of air around
the venous cannula introduce air into the venous
reservoir that can transit the oxygenator and arte-
rial line ﬁlter to reach the arterial circulation as
microemboli.
Cerebralemboliareassociatedwithneurocogni-
tive deﬁcits and stroke following cardiac surgery.
Thenumberofcerebralmicroemboli(microembolic
load)deliveredduringCPBisrelatedtothedevelop-
ment of cognitive dysfunction occurring following
CABG surgery. However, similar degrees of cogni-
tivedysfunctionoccurfollowingCABGandcardiac
valve surgery despite the fact that the cerebral
gaseous microembolic load is higher during valve
surgery. This suggests that the type of cerebral
microemboli may be a more important factor than
thenumberofmicroemboliinthedevelopmentof
cognitive dysfunction. Lipid microemboli, such as
those generated with use of cardiotomy suction,
areparticularlydamagingtothecerebralmicrovas-
cular endothelium and probably play a signiﬁ-
cant role in the genesis of microembolic cognitive
dysfunction. Cerebral macroembolic load, as mea-
sured by the extent of aortic atheromatous disease
(atheromatous burden), is associated with stroke
followingcardiacsurgery.Theroleofmacroemboli
inthegenesisofcognitivedysfunctionislessclear.
Methods to reduce microemboli
AnumberofmodiﬁcationstotheCPBcircuitryand
surgicaltechniquehavebeenutilizedtoreducepar-
ticulateandgaseousmicroemboli.Theyaresumma-
rizedbelow.Althoughnoneofthesemodiﬁcations
has been conclusively shown to be of beneﬁt in
reducing neurocognitive deﬁcits, each reduces the
numberofembolidetectedbyechocardiographyor
transcranialDoppler.
• Reduce perfusionist interventions and surgical
ﬁeldvenouslinemanipulationstoaminimum.The
perfusionist should carefully remove air from all
syringespriortodrugorﬂushadministration.Hard
shell venous reservoirs allow air to rise to the top
possiblyreducingthenumberofvenousairemboli
that reach the arterial circulation as compared to
softshellvenousreservoirs.
• Diversion of cardiotomy suction to cell-saver or
discarding cardiotomy suction to avoid contam-
ination of the venous reservoir with particulate
microemboli.
• Use of a gas diffuser to insufﬂate carbon dioxide
into the surgical wound to displace air with more
soluble and more easily absorbed carbon dioxide
duringopenchamberprocedures.
Methods to reduce macroemboli
Effortstoreducemacroemboliemploystrategiesto
reducedislodgementofatheroscleroticdebrisfrom
the ascending aorta. These strategies as applied to
CABGaresummarized:
• Use of epiaortic ultrasonic scanning to identify
aorticcannulationandaorticmanipulationsitesfree
ofatheromata.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch13” — 2007/7/16 — 12:41 — page 432 — #8
432 Chapter13
• Use of “no-touch technique” where the proxi-
mal ends of saphenous vein or radial artery grafts
are“Y-ed”offaninternalmammaryarterygraftto
avoidapartialoccluding(site-biting)clamponthe
aorta.
• Use of “single cross-clamp technique” where
proximal aortic graft anastomoses are constructed
after the aortic cross-clamp is placed without use
of partial occluding (site-biting) clamp on the
aorta.
• Cannulation of the axillary artery, innominate
arteryorthedistalaorticarchwhenatheromatous
disease of the ascending aorta is severe and dif-
fuse. Alternatively, DHCA can be used to replace
theascendingaorta.
• Useofanaorticcannulawithadeployableintra-
aortic 120-µ ﬁlter to capture particulate emboli
“sandblasted” or dislodged from the aorta by
turbulentﬂowfromtheaorticcannula.
• Use of a longer aortic cannula to reduce turbu-
lenceintheaortaandpotentiallyreducecreationof
microemboli.
• Use of off-CPB technique in combination with
a“no-touchtechnique”.
Use of these strategies show promise in reduc-
ing stroke and cognitive dysfunction. It remains
to be determined whether off-pump CABG per se
results in better neurologic outcome as compared
to on-pump CABG when appropriate measures to
deal with an atheromatous aorta are utilized with
eachapproach.
Cerebralhypoperfusion
Given what is known about cerebral autoregula-
tion in adults, a mean arterial pressure (MAP)≥
50mmHg on CPB is commonly targeted. Clear
evidence supporting this target MAP during CPB
is lacking however. There is no consistent link
between a MAP< 50mmHg on CPB per se and
subsequent neurologic dysfunction. The combina-
tionofreducedMAP( <50–60mmHg)onCPBand
a large burden of aortic atheromata may increase
the risk of CPB related stroke. Cerebral injury
inducedbymacroemboliispresumablyexacerbated
by the reduced collateral perfusion accompanying
hypotension.Theneurologicsequalaeofareduced
MAP during CPB in patients with cerebrovascular
disease or with impaired cerebral autoregulation
(elderly patients, hypertensive patients, diabetics,
patients with prior strokes) has not been system-
atically investigated. Given the currently available
data, maintenance of MAP≥ 50mmHg on CPB is
reasonableandahighertargetMAP(70–90mmHg)
is indicated for patients at high risk for neurologic
dysfunction.
Pharmacologicinterventionsto
improveneurologicoutcome
A wide range of pharmacologic agents has under-
gone investigation as neuroprotective agents in
adults undergoing cardiac surgery. To date, lido-
caine, remaceamide (an NMDA antagonist), and
aprotinin have shown the most promise. In retro-
spectiveanalyses,high-doseaprotininusehasbeen
associated with a reduced incidence of neurocog-
nitivedeﬁcitsandstrokefollowingcardiacsurgery.
These conclusions require veriﬁcation in placebo-
controlled, randomized trials. The mechanism of
aprotinin’s neuroprotective effect is unknown. It
may be due to its anti-inﬂammatory properties or
to an associated reduction in cerebral microem-
boli as the result of the reduced use of cardiotomy
suction and platelet transfusions. Lidocaine blocks
voltage-dependent fast sodium channels, reduces
cerebral metabolic rate, and reduces release of the
excitatory neurotransmitters. Remaceamide blocks
theeffectsofischemiainducedglutamatereleaseon
NMDA channels and thereby prevents the inﬂux
of calcium that exacerbates neuronal injury and
death.
Renalfunction
Acute renal failure in adults following cardiac
surgeryisamajorsourceofmorbidityandmortality.
The incidence and outcome in children is remark-
ablysimilartoadults.Approximately13%ofadults
with a normal serum creatinine (<1.0 µmol/dL)
have occult renal insufﬁciency deﬁned as a crea-
tinine clearance<60mL/min. These patients have
a risk (odds ratio of 2.8) for postoperative dial-
ysis. This is similar to patients with mild renal
insufﬁciencydeﬁnedasaserumcreatininebetween
1.0and1.33 µmol/dL.CreatinineclearancecanbeAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch13” — 2007/7/16 — 12:41 — page 433 — #9
SpecialConsiderations 433
calculatedusingtheCockcroft–Gaultequation:
CCR(mL/min)
=[(140–age) ×weight]/(PCR ×72)formen;
CCR(mL/min)
=[(140–age) ×weight]/(PCR ×85)forwomen.
Where CCR = creatinine clearance, PCR = serum
creatinine in milligrams/deciliters (mg/dL), age in
years,weightinkilograms(kg).
The etiology of renal failure following car-
diac surgery and CPB is multi-factorial with both
ischemic and direct nephrotoxic etiologies. Low
ﬂow, nonpulsatile CPB may produce renal perfu-
sion pressures below the limit of renal autoreg-
ulation resulting in ischemia-reperfusion injury.
This insult is exacerbated by CPB hemodilution.
AlthoughitisclearthatCPBplaysaroleinthegen-
esisofrenaldysfunctionfollowingcardiacsurgery,
itisonlyoneofmultiplefactorsasevidencedbythe
factthatoff-CPBcardiacsurgicalproceduresdonot
have a lower incidence of renal dysfunction than
on-CPB procedures. Atheromatous aortic emboli
havebeenimplicatedinthegenesisofrenalfailure
as well. Mediators released as part of the systemic
inﬂammatoryresponse,particularlytumornecrosis
factor-α(TNF-α)andinterleukin-6(IL-6),produce
renalmicrovascularchangesthatcanresultintubu-
lar damage. Finally, many cardiac surgical patients
will be exposed to nephrotoxic angiographic con-
trastagentspreoperatively.Itisimportanttopoint
out that patients with pre-existing renal dysfunc-
tion are at no greater risk than patients with
normal renal function for renal injury. However,
patients with pre-existing renal dysfunction are at
greaterriskforacuterenalfailureandtherequire-
ment for renal replacement therapy following a
given renal insult than patients with normal renal
function.
Anumberofinterventionscommonlyemployed
to prevent renal dysfunction following cardiac
surgery and CPB particularly in high-risk patients
aresummarized:
• Prophylactic infusion of sodium bicarbonate
(154mmol/L at 3mL/kg/h prior to angiographic
contrast administration and at 1mL/kg/h for
6hours after administration) is probably superior
∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗
40
30
20Predicted %∆Cr
10
0
10 15 20
Lowest Hct during bypass (%)
25 30 35
Fig.13.2 Theinﬂuenceofintraoperativeblood
transfusionontherelationshipbetweenfractional
changeincreatinine(% /Delta1Cr)andlowesthematocrit
(Hct)oncardiopulmonarybypass.Parallellinesrepresent
thenumberonunitsofpackedredbloodcellstransfused
intraoperatively: ∗= 9units; /Delta1=6units; ◦ =3units;
□ =0units.Bothlowhematocritoncardiopulmonary
bypassandtransfusiontotreatthelowhematocrit
contributetothedevelopmentofrenaldysfunction.
(FromSwaminathanM, etal.Theassociationoflowest
hematocritduringcardiopulmonarybypasswithacute
renalinjuryaftercoronaryarterybypasssurgery.
AnnThoracSurg 2003;76:789,withpermission.)
to prehydration in preventing contrast medium-
inducednephropathy.
• Preload and cardiac output should be optimized
inboththepre-andpost-CPBperiods.
• A hematocrit<25% on CPB should be avoided,
keeping in mind that PRBCtransfusion to treat
a low hematocrit increases the risk of developing
renal dysfunction (Fig. 13.2). Strategies to avoid
CPBhemodilutionandtransfusionaresummarized
inTable13.2.
• MaintenanceofCPBﬂowrates ≥2L/min/m2and
mean arterial pressure≥50–70mmHg are proba-
blyprudentinhigh-riskpatients.Amoreimportant
determinant than pump ﬂow may be the product
of pump ﬂow and arterial oxygen content with a
criticalvalveof272mL/min/m 2.
• Nomeaningfulcorrelationbetweenurineoutput
on CPB and postoperative renal function has been
demonstrated.
• Prophylactic administration of “low-dose” or
“renal dose” dopamine (1–3µg/kg/min) increases
urine output but has not been demonstrated to
improveorpreventperioperativerenaldysfunction.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch13” — 2007/7/16 — 12:41 — page 434 — #10
434 Chapter13
There is concern that prophylactic dopamine
administration may not be benign given the fact
that it is associated with release of markers such
as β2-microglobulin that are indicative of sub-
clinical renal tubular injury. In addition, prophy-
lactic dopamine administration may compromise
splanchnic mucosal perfusion and predispose to
developmentofpostoperativeatrialﬁbrillation.
• Prophylactic administration of low doses of
the selective dopamine-1 receptor (D1) agonist
fenoldopam mesylate (0.01–0.03µg/kg/min) may
be renoprotective particularly in patients with
pre-existing renal dysfunction. At higher dosages
fenoldopam has a vasodilator proﬁle similar to
sodiumnitroprusside.
• Diuretic administration (furosemide, mannitol)
inconjunctionwithCPBincreasesurineoutputbut
isnotrenoprotectiveandmayinfactbeassociated
withanincreasedriskofserumcreatinineelevation
and acute renal failure due to part to the neuro-
hormonal effects (renin–angiotensin–aldosterone)
ofpreloadreductionandhypovolemia.
Inﬂammatorysequalaeof
cardiacsurgeryandCPB
Cardiac surgery and CPB are known to be a
potentstimulusforinitiationofbothpro-andanti-
inﬂammatoryresponses.Thebalanceoftheelicited
pro- and anti-inﬂammatory mediators deter-
mines the clinical manifestations of this response.
A preponderance of anti-inﬂammatory mediators
produces the compensatory anti-inﬂammatory
response syndrome (CARS) while a preponder-
ance of pro-inﬂammatory mediators produces the
systemic inﬂammatory response syndrome (SIRS).
SIRS is characterized by tissue and endothelial
injury leading to enhanced capillary permeability
(capillary leak syndrome) and transmigration of
leukocytes into interstitial ﬂuid with subsequent
activationofsequesteredleukocytesandampliﬁca-
tion of the inﬂammatory process. The spectrum of
SIRS induced responses range from tissue edema
to end-organ dysfunction and failure. Immediate
postoperative fever and leukocytosis is a common
relativelybenignmanifestationofSIRS.Postopera-
tivesepsisandSIRSismorelikelyincardiacsurgery
patientswhohavereducedmonocytehumanlym-
phocyte antigen DR (HLA-DR) expression. This
reduced expression is felt to be a manifestation
oftherelativepredominanceofanti-inﬂammatory
stimuli over pro-inﬂammatory stimuli resulting in
astateofimmunoparesis.
The systemic inﬂammatory response associated
withcardiacsurgeryandCPBisinitiatedbyavariety
of stimuli. Contact activation, heparin-protamine
complexes,endothelialischemia/reperfusioninjury,
and gut translocation of endotoxins have been
implicated. Mechanical sheer stress, hemodilution,
hypothermia,autotransfusionofunprocessedshed
blood, and use of cardiotomy suction play a role.
Genetic polymorphisms inﬂuence the response to
initiating stimuli. The magnitude of the inﬂamma-
toryresponseisenhancedinneonates,infantsand
small children due, in part, to the high circuit sur-
face area to blood volume ratio as compared to
adults.
Initiating stimuli induce the release of inﬂam-
matory mediators via a number of pathways as
summarized in Fig. 13.3. The complement cascade
is activated via both the classic and alternative
pathway. Exposure of blood to the CPB circuit
results in conversion of factor XII to factor XIIa
with initiation of thrombin formation. In addi-
tion,factorXIIaleadstoconversionofprekallikrein
to kallikrein with production of bradykinin and
alternative pathway activation (C3) of the com-
plement cascade. This process is exacerbated by
the fact that the CPB circuit lacks the endothe-
lial cell surface inhibitors that normally limit C3
activation. Endotoxin and ischemia/reperfusion
mediators also initiate complement activation via
thealternativepathway.Activationofthecomple-
mentpathwayviatheclassicalpathway(C1andC4)
occurs due to the presence of heparin-protamine
complexes.
There is production and release of both pro-
and anti-inﬂammatory cytokines from activated
monocytes, macrophages, lymphocytes, and vas-
cular endothelium. Cytokines are inﬂammatory
mediators that can act on the cells that pro-
duced them (autocrine), on cells in the vicinity
(paracrine)orsystemically(endocrine).Theinten-
sity of the inﬂammatory response as measured byAliceNelson Dinardo: “ch13” — 2007/7/16 — 12:41 — page 435 — #11
SpecialConsiderations 435
Initiating stimuli
•  Contact activation (CPB circuit)
•  Mechanical shear stress
•  Cardiotomy suction
•  Endotoxin release
•  Ischemia/reperfusion injury
•  Heparin-protamine complexes
Complement activation
•  Classical pathway (C1, C4)
•  Alternative pathway (C3)
   Factor XII activation
•  Thrombin production
•  Plasmin production
•  Kallikrein production
Endothelial cell adhesion molecule
expression
Cytokine release
Pro-inflammatory
•  IL-1β
•  IL-6
•  IL-8
•  TNF-α
Leukocyte adhesion molecule
expression
Leukocyte transmigration and
degranulation
SIRS
NF-/afii9837B activation
Cytokine release
Anti-inflammatory
•  IL-1ra
•  IL-10
•  TNFsr-1 and 2iNOS up-regulation Bradykinin release
Fig.13.3 Schematicoftheinﬂammatorycascade
associatedwithcardiacsurgeryandcardiopulmonary
bypassleadingtosystemicinﬂammatoryresponse
syndrome(SIRS).Inﬂammatorymediatorsareinbold
boxes.Solidarrowandlineisstimulatory.Dashedarrow
andlineisinhibitory.CPB,cardiopulmonarybypass;IL,
interleukin;iNOS,induciblenitricoxidesynthase;
NF-κB,nuclearfactor- κB;ra,receptorantagonist;TNF,
tumornecrosisfactor;TNFsr,tumornecrosisfactor
solublereceptor.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch13” — 2007/7/16 — 12:41 — page 436 — #12
436 Chapter13
Platelet-
leukocyte
aggregation
Rolling
leukocytes
Firm
adherence
Transendothelial
migration and
release of
granules
Endothelium
P selectin
E selectin
L selectin
Interstial space
Activated
integrin
ICAM/
VCAM
Fluid
leakage
Fig.13.4 Schematicof
leukocyte–platelet–endothelialcell
interactionleadingtoleukocyte
margination,rolling,andadhesion.
Transmigrationofaleukocyteacrossthe
endothelialcelllayerfollowedbyleukocyte
degranulationisillustrated.ICAM,
intercellularadhesionmolecule;VCAM,
vascularcelladhesionmolecule.(From
PaparellaD, etal.Cardiopulmonarybypass
inducedinﬂammation:pathophysiology
andtreatment.Anupdate. EurJ
CardiothoracSurg 2002;21:232–244,with
permission.)
pro-inﬂammatory cytokine levels such as TNF-α,
IL-1β, IL-6, and IL-8 has been linked to the devel-
opment of end organ dysfunction (myocardial,
pulmonary, renal, hepatic) and sepsis in the peri-
operativeperiod.Endothelialinduciblenitricoxide
synthase (iNOS) is up-regulated by the inﬂamma-
toryprocessresultinginhigherlevelsofNO.These
higher levels result in increased vascular perme-
abilityandvasodilatation.Bradykininreleaseresults
invasodilationandenhancedvascularpermeability
aswell.
Productionoftheseinﬂammatorymediatorsleads
to induction of nuclear factor κB (NF-κB), the
transcription factor responsible for expression of
bothendothelialandleukocyteadhesionmolecules
(selectinsandintegrins).Thesemoleculespromote
themargination,rolling,adhesion,andtransmigra-
tion of leukocytes through the endothelium into
the extravascular space (Fig. 13.4). Degranulation
ofleukocytesreleaseselastaseandmyeloperoxidase
thatleadtotissuedamage.Releaseofcytokinesby
these leukocytes further escalates the inﬂamma-
tory response. In addition, once NF-κB is induced
itup-regulatescytokineproduction.
Anumberofdifferentapproachesaimedateffec-
tive attenuation of SIRS following cardiac surgery
havebeeninvestigated(Table13.3)butnonehave
proven uniformly effective. This is not surpris-
ing considering the multi-mediator nature of the
systemic inﬂammatory response. A multi-modal
approach will likely be needed. Nonetheless, the
two most commonly employed drug therapies are
aprotininandglucocorticoids.
Table13.3 Therapiestomodulatethesystemic
inﬂammatoryresponsetocardiacsurgeryand
cardiopulmonarybypass(CPB).
AvoidanceofCPB
•Off-pumpcoronaryarterybypassgrafting(OPCAB)
ModiﬁcationoftheCPBcircuit
•UseofbiocompatibleCPBcircuits:
aCovalentheparinbindingcoating
bPhosphorylcholinecoating
cPoly2-methoxyethylacrylatecoating
dSiloxane/caprolactoneoligomercoating
•NormoxicratherthanhyperoxicCPB
•Avoidanceofcardiotomysuction
•Avoidanceofunwashedautotransfusion
Selectivedigestivedecontamination
•Nonabsorbableoralantibiotics(polymyxinE,tobramycin,
amphotericinB)
HemoﬁltrationonCPB
•Continuousultraﬁltration(CUF)
•Modiﬁedultraﬁltration(MUF)
•Dilutionalultraﬁltration(DUF)
•Zero-balanceultraﬁltration(ZBUF)
Leukocytedepletion
•Useofleukodepletedbloodorleukocyteﬁlters
Complementinhibition
•C5monoclonalantibody(pexelizumab)
•C1-esteraseinhibitor
•C4ArichplasmaadministrationtoC4A-deﬁcientpatients
Freeradicalscavengers–antioxidants
•Allopurinol
•Mannitol
•Ascorbicacid(vitaminC)
• α-Tocopherol(vitaminE)
Serineproteaseinhibitors
•Aprotinin
Glucocorticoids
•Methylprednisolone
•Dexamethasone
CPB,cardiopulmonarybypass.AliceNelson Dinardo: “ch13” — 2007/7/16 — 12:41 — page 437 — #13
SpecialConsiderations 437
High-dose aprotinin regimens producing
plasma levels ≥30 µg/mL (215KIU/mL) inhibit
CPB-induced kallikrein production. Kallikrein is
responsible for production of bradykinin and for
activation of the complement system both of
which play a prominent role in the genesis of
SIRS. Kallikrein is also responsible for produc-
tion of plasmin, an additional source of com-
plement activation. Aprotinin at lower plasma
levels is also capable of directly inhibiting plas-
min. Aprotinin also plays an important role in
attenuation of SIRS through inhibition of up-
regulationofpro-inﬂammatoryadhesionmolecules
suchastheintegrinCD11b.Multi-levelinhibitionof
the leukocyte-endothelial cell adhesion cascade by
aprotinininhibitsleukocytetransmigrationthrough
vascular endothelium. Aprotinin is also capable of
inhibitingcytokine-inducedproductionofiNOS.
Glucocorticoidsreduceinﬂammationviaanum-
ber of mechanisms. They inhibit NF- κB, the
main transcription factor of genes for inﬂam-
matory proteins and also increase the transcrip-
tion of many anti-inﬂammatory proteins such
as IL-10-and IL-1-receptor antagonist. In addi-
tion, glucocorticoids decrease endotoxin release
andleukocyteadhesionmolecule(CD11b)expres-
sion. The optimal timing, dosage, and formula-
tion of glucocorticoid administration remain to be
determined.
Suggestedreading
Appoo JJ, Augoustides JG, Pochettino Aet al. Periop-
erative outcome in adults undergoing elective deep
hypothermic circulatory arrest with retrograde cere-
bral perfusion in proximal aortic arch repair: evalua-
tion of protocol-based care.J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth
2006;20:3–7.
Habib RH, Zacharias A, Schwann TA et al. Role of
hemodilutional anemia and transfusion during car-
diopulmonary bypass in renal injury after coronary
revascularization: implications on operative outcome.
CritCareMed 2005;33:1749–56.
Hogue CW, Jr, Palin CA, Arrowsmith JE. Cardiopul-
monarybypassmanagementandneurologicoutcomes:
anevidence-basedappraisalofcurrentpractices. Anesth
Analg2006;103:21–37.
KarkoutiK,BeattieWS,WijeysunderaDN etal.Hemodilu-
tionduringcardiopulmonarybypassisanindependent
riskfactorforacuterenalfailureinadultcardiacsurgery.
JThoracCardiovascSurg 2005;129:391–400.
Koch CG, Li L, Duncan AIetal. Morbidity and mortality
riskassociatedwithredbloodcellandblood-component
transfusioninisolatedcoronaryarterybypassgrafting.
CritCareMed 2006;34:1608–16.
LaffeyJG,BoylanJF,ChengDC.Thesystemicinﬂamma-
tory response to cardiac surgery: implications for the
anesthesiologist.Anesthesiology2002;97:215–52.
Wijeysundera DN, Karkouti K, Beattie WS, Rao V,
Ivanov J. Improving the identiﬁcation of patients at
riskofpostoperativerenalfailureaftercardiacsurgery.
Anesthesiology2006;104:65–72.
Zhang S, Wang S, Li Qet al. Capillary leak syndrome
in children with C4A-deﬁciency undergoing cardiac
surgery with cardiopulmonary bypass: a double-blind,
randomisedcontrolledstudy. Lancet2005;366:556–62.Alice Nelson Dinardo: “index” — 2007/7/16 — 12:41 — page 439 — #1
Index
Page numbers initalics refer to ﬁgures and those inbold to tables
abciximab 363
Abiocor device 377
Abiomed AB5000 376, 378,
392, 406
Abiomed BVS 5000 376, 395–8,
397, 398, 406
ABO blood typing, heart
transplantation 258
ABO incompatible heart
transplantation 258, 258
acadesine 417
acceleration time (A1) 65
ACE inhibitorssee angiotensin
converting enzyme
inhibitors
acetylcholinesterase inhibitors,
heart transplant recipients
272, 273
acetylsalicylic acidsee aspirin
acid-base management
alpha-stat vs.pH-stat 347,
347–8, 426
CPB 347–8, 355
DHCA 426, 427
acoustic quantiﬁcation (AQ) 73
activated clotting time (ACT)
87–8
aprotinin use 368
for CPB 339–41, 352
protamine dose determination
359, 362
activated partial thromboplastin
time see partial
thromboplastin time,
activated
acute renal failure (ARF) 432–4
after thoracic aorta surgery
315–16, 317
preoperativeassessmentofrisk
13, 13
preventive interventions 13,
433, 433–4
adenine nucleotides, depletion
410
adenosine
cardioplegia solutions 417
congenital heart disease 186
heart transplant recipients
272
stress testing 5–6
afterload
aortic regurgitation 146, 147
aortic stenosis 139–40
dilated cardiomyopathy 257
ejection fraction 30
mechanical circulatory support
405, 406
mismatch 25–6
after mitral valve surgery
161
aortic stenosis 136, 138,
140
aortic surgery 321–2
dilated cardiomyopathy
254, 256
heart transplant recipients
265, 266–7
neonates 171
mitral regurgitation 159, 161
mitral stenosis 151–2, 153
myocardial oxygen demand
94
pressure–volume loops 24,
24–6, 25, 26
air, intracardiac
during CPB 335
removal 353–4
role of TEE 82–3, 353
transplant recipients 265,
286
air embolism 431
during CPB 345
prevention 353–4
air locks, CPB venous drainage
lines 325
airway
complications, lung
transplantation 286
compression, aortic lesions
311, 311, 312
management, congenital heart
disease 191–2
aldosterone inhibiting drugs,
dilated cardiomyopathy
255
Alﬁeri stitch 166
aliasing 62, 63
Allen’s test 44–5
allergic reactions
aprotinin 367
protamine 360–1, 362
allopurinol 417
α1-antitrypsin deﬁciency 273,
274
α-adrenergic agonists 105
see also phenylephrine
439Alice Nelson Dinardo: “index” — 2007/7/16 — 12:41 — page 440 — #2
440 Index
α-stat acid-base management
CPB 347, 347–8
DHCA 426, 427
American College of
Cardiology/American
Heart Association
(ACC/AHA)
classiﬁcationofheartfailure 3
indications for aortic valve
replacement 164
indications for CABG surgery
90, 91–2
indications for mitral valve
surgery 165
intraoperative TEE monitoring
130, 131
American Society of
Anesthesiologists (ASA),
monitoring standards
42–3
American Society of
Echocardiography (ASE)
intraoperative TEE monitoring
130, 131
mitral valve classiﬁcation
148–9
recommended TEE views 67
aminophylline 6
amiodarone 186
anaerobic metabolism 410, 415,
423
anaphylactic/anaphylactoid
reactions, protamine
360–1, 362
anemia, myocardial oxygen
delivery 99–100
anesthetic preconditioning
(APC) 99, 115–16, 116
angina pectoris 100
aortic stenosis 137
classiﬁcation 4
exercise ECG testing 6
exertional 98, 98
indications for CABG 91
pathogenesis 96, 97–8
rest 98, 98
unstable 1, 3
indications for CABG 91–2
pathogenesis 96–7
variant (Prinzmetal’s) 99
see also myocardial ischemia
angiotensin converting enzyme
inhibitors (ACE-I)
aprotinin interaction 368–9
CABG 110
congenital heart disease
187–8
dilated cardiomyopathy 255
valvular heart disease 131
angiotensin-receptor blockers
(ARB), dilated
cardiomyopathy 255
antegrade cerebral perfusion
(ACP) 428, 428
antiarrhythmic agents,
congenital heart disease
186
anticoagulation
CPB 339–41, 352, 373–4
ECMO 403
heart transplant recipients
259
IABPrecipients 385
mechanical assist device
insertion 403
total artiﬁcial heart 390
VADs 394, 398, 400
valvular heart disease 131–2
see also heparin
anti-factor Xa assay 359
antiﬁbrinolytic agents 365–9
dosage and administration
366–7
efﬁcacy 367–8
antihypertensive agents, aortic
surgery 318–19
antiplatelet agents
post-CPB bleeding problems
363
preoperative discontinuation
16–17, 110, 131
see also aspirin; clopidogrel
antithrombin-III (AT-III) 339
deﬁciency 341
recombinant 341
aorta
ascending, surgery 313, 318,
320–1
atheromatous disease 83–4,
84
coarctation see coarctation of
aorta
descending thoracic, surgery
313, 316–18, 321–2
epiaortic ultrasound scanning
83, 84
orientation and identity, TEE
85
TEE evaluation 83–4, 84
TEE views 69, 70, 71–2, 72
aortic aneurysms, thoracic
306–8
airway compression 312
diagnosis 308–11, 309, 310
false 308
fusiform 308, 308
saccular 308, 308
aortic arch
distal, surgery 313, 316–18,
321–2
interrupted see interrupted
aortic arch
reconstruction, single ventricle
lesions 225, 227–8
surgery 313, 318, 320–1
TEE views 72, 72
aortic cannulas for CPB 326,
341–2
assessment of inﬂow 343–4
macroembolus reduction 432
removal 369
TEE visualization 84, 344
aortic cross-clamping 349
anesthetic management 321,
321–2
aortic surgery 312–16, 313
coarctation repair 206
myocardial consequences
409–10, 410, 411
reducing embolus formation
432
removal 354
spinal cord ischemic time
314, 315
aortic diastolic pressure,
congenital heart disease
182
aortic dissection 305, 305–6
aortic regurgitation with 143,
147
classiﬁcation 305–6, 306
at CPB cannulation site 343
diagnosis 308–11, 309, 310,
310
mortality rates 306, 307
paraplegia complicating 314
surgical approach and
management 311
aortic lesions, thoracic
airwaycompression 311,311,
312
classiﬁcation 304–8
diagnosis 308–11
aorticperfusionpressure,CPB see
perfusion pressure, CPB
aortic regurgitation (AR) 143–8
anesthetic technique 146–8
cardiac catheterization 37, 38
mitral regurgitation with 144,
145, 163
mitral stenosis with 163
pathophysiology and
adaptation 143–6, 144
TEE 80–1, 81
aortic root
abnormalities 80, 143Alice Nelson Dinardo: “index” — 2007/7/16 — 12:41 — page 441 — #3
Index 441
cardioplegia infusion 410,
419
aortic stenosis (AS) 135–43
anesthetic technique 140–3
cardiac catheterization
35–7, 36
congenital supravalvular
(SVAS) 224
congenital valvular 224
critical 140
discovered during CABG 165
grading of severity 79–80
indications for valve
replacement 164
mitral regurgitation with
163–4
mitral stenosis with 163
pathophysiology and
adaptation 135–40
post-bypass management
132, 132–3, 142–3
preoperative evaluation
129–30, 130
severeneonatal 172, 175,224
TEE 79–80
aortic surgery 304–22
anesthetic management
318–22, 321
aortic cross-clamping 312–16,
313
arterial pressure monitoring
45
surgical approach 311–18,
313
ventilation 311–12
aortic transection, traumatic
306, 307
diagnosis 308–11, 309
aortic valve 134–48
anatomy 134, 134–5, 135
area 35, 37, 79, 80
indicating surgery 135
assessment, VAD insertion
404
bicuspid 143, 224
dimensionless index (DI) 80
indications for replacement
164
pulmonary autograft for
replacement 133, 164
TEE evaluation 79–81
TEE views 68, 69, 71
aortography 20–1, 308–9, 310
aortopulmonary collateral
arteries, multiplesee
multiple aortopulmonary
collateral arteries
aortopulmonary shunts, surgical
single ventricle lesions 225,
226
TEE evaluation 86
tetralogy of Fallot 209–10,
210
vs.bidirectional Glenn
procedure 232, 234
aprotinin 365–6, 437
allergic reactions 367
dosage and administration
366–7
efﬁcacy 367–8
mechanical assist device
insertion 403
neuroprotective effects 432
argatroban 374
L-arginine 418
arginine vasopressinsee
vasopressin
arrhythmias see dysrhythmias
arterial blood pressure
mean see mean arterial blood
pressure
monitoring 44–6
coarctation of aorta 45, 206
congenital heart disease
188
see also blood pressure
arterial cannulation
for CPB 326–7, 341–2, 369
for monitoring 44–6
arterial inﬂow, for CPB 326–7
assessment 343–4
arterial switch operation (ASO)
216–18, 217
post-CPB management
219–20
ASD see atrial septal defects
aspirin
mechanical circulatory support
390, 394
preoperative use 16–17, 18,
363
assisted venous drainage, CPB
326
asthma, preoperative assessment
12–13
atherosclerotic disease 96–8, 97
coronary angiography
33–4, 34
ATP, depletion 409, 410
ATPase 423
atria, TEE evaluation 85
atrial arrhythmias, heart
transplant recipients 271
atrial ﬁbrillation
aortic stenosis with 136
heart transplant recipients
271
mitral regurgitation 157, 159,
161
mitral stenosis 149–50, 151
preoperative evaluation 2
atrial function, transplanted
heart 270
atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP)
130, 254–5
atrial septal defects (ASD)
196–9
anatomy 196–7, 197
anesthetic management 195,
198
physiology 197–8
post-CPB management 196,
198–9
repaired, TEE evaluation 86
surgical therapy 198
total anomalous pulmonary
venous return 221
atrial septectomy
hypoplastic left heart
syndrome 242
single ventricle lesions 225,
227
atrial septostomy, balloon
215–16, 227
atrial septum 196
movement, pressure estimates
83
TEE views 69, 70
atrioventricular (AV) block 4
atrioventricular canal (AVC)
defects 199–201
anatomy 199, 199–200
anesthetic management 195,
200
post-CPB management 196,
200–1
atrioventricular (AV) node
dysfunction, heart
transplant recipients 265
atropine 112
aortic valve surgery 141, 147
heart transplantation 261,
272
automated border detection
(ABD) 73
autonomic innervation
at birth 171
transplanted heart 268–9
AVC defectssee atrioventricular
canal defects
awareness during anesthesia
132, 353
A waves 51, 51, 52
cannon 51, 52Alice Nelson Dinardo: “index” — 2007/7/16 — 12:41 — page 442 — #4
442 Index
axial pumps, circulatory support
400, 400–1
axis, cardiac 2
azathioprine 268
bacterial pericarditis 298–9
balanced circulation concept,
singleventriclephysiology
228, 228–9
balloon atrial septostomy (BAS)
215–16, 227
Barlow syndrome 155
baroreceptor response, heart
transplant recipients
268–9
basiliximab 268
Beck’s triad 290–1
beclomethasone, inhaled 12
benzodiazepines
aortic valve surgery 142
congenital heart disease 193
coronary revascularization
109, 112–13
heart transplantation 260,
261
lung transplantation 283
see also diazepam; lorazepam;
midazolam
Berlin Heart 376, 392
Bernouilli equation 64, 79–80
β2-agonists, asthma control
12, 13
β-adrenergic agonists
dilated cardiomyopathy 254
heart transplant recipients
272
see also dobutamine;
dopamine; epinephrine;
isoproterenol;
norepinephrine
β-adrenergic receptors, dilated
cardiomyopathy 254
beta-blockers (β-adrenergic
antagonists)
aortic surgery 318–19
aortic valve surgery 141
CABG 110
dilated cardiomyopathy 255
heart transplant recipients
272
tachycardia management
104–5
see also individual agents
bicarbonate therapy 433
aortic surgery 322
“Tet spells” 209
bicitra 260, 279
bidirectional Glenn procedure
(BDG) see superior
cavopulmonary shunt
BioMedicus device 376, 398,
399
bioprosthetic heart valves
133–4
bivalirudin 374
biventricular assist devices
(BiVAD) 376, 379, 398
bladder temperature monitoring
342–3
Blalock–Taussig shunts 210,
210
arterial pressure monitoring
45
modiﬁed (mBTS) 210, 210
hypoplastic left heart
syndrome 242–3
single ventricle lesions 225,
226
tricuspid atresia 241
bleeding/hemorrhage
abnormal, preoperative
evaluation 16–19
complicating pericardiectomy
301
post-CPB 362–9, 370
surgical 362
bleeding time 18, 88
blood ﬂow
effective 172, 173
rates, CPB 345–6, 346
blood gases, arterial 11
blood pressure (BP)
age-related variation 183,
183
control, aortic surgery
318–19, 321, 322
on CPB 346
diastolic (DBP), myocardial
oxygen delivery 95
during exercise testing 7
intraoperative monitoring
44–6, 188
myocardial oxygen balance
95, 104
during off-pump CABG 115
perioperative myocardial
ischemia 101
see also arterial blood pressure;
hypertension;
hypotension
blood transfusionsee transfusion
of blood products
blood volume, estimated (EBV)
338, 338
BODE index 273
bradycardia 2
aortic regurgitation 145–6,
147
aortic stenosis 138–9, 139,
141
coronary revascularization
112
heart transplantation 261
mitral regurgitation 158–9
myocardial oxygen delivery
95
bradykinin 436, 437
brain
cooling 426
temperature 342, 352, 428
brain death, myocardial effects
264
brain natriuretic peptide (BNP)
254–5
bronchiolitis obliterans (BO)
287
bronchiolitis obliterans
syndrome (BOS) 287
bronchodilators 12–13
Bruce treadmill protocol 6
bubble oxygenators 328, 328–9
buffering, cardioplegia solutions
414
bupivacaine, hyperbaric 117
CABG see coronary artery bypass
graft
calcium
administration
congenital heart disease
186
during CPB 341
CPB termination 124, 355,
357–8
cardioplegia solutions 413–14
homeostasis
myocardial ischemia 410,
411
neonatal myocardium 423
reperfusion solutions 418
serum, ECG effects 4
calcium channel blockers 106
aortic surgery 318–19
CABG patients 110
cardioplegia solutions 416–17
heart transplant recipients
272
calcium paradox 414
caloric requirements, pediatric
patients 187
Canadian Cardiovascular Society
ClassiﬁcationofAngina 4
cannon A waves 51, 52Alice Nelson Dinardo: “index” — 2007/7/16 — 12:41 — page 443 — #5
Index 443
carbon dioxide
end-tidal (ETco2), monitoring
189
membrane oxygenator sweep
gas 427
partial pressure in arterial
blood (Paco2)
CPB circuits 329
hypothermic CPB 347, 348
pulmonary vascular
resistance 180
reference ﬂow 332
ventilatory response, lung
transplant recipients 287
carboxyhemoglobin 12
cardiac allograft vasculopathy
(CAV) 270–1
cardiac catheterization 10
interpretation of data 20–41
left heart 20–1
pericardial disease 291, 292,
297, 297
right heart 20
valvular lesions 23, 35–8
cardiac output (CO)
aortic regurgitation 145–6
aortic stenosis 138, 139, 139
continuous (CCO), monitoring
55–6, 57
determination 21–2, 55–7
circulatory assist device
recipients 407
Doppler method 64
factors affecting accuracy
57
Fick method 22
thermodilution (TD)
method 22, 55–7
Fontan physiology 239
mixed venous oxygen
saturation 58
neonates 170–1
resistance calculations 22–3
cardiac output monitor and
diagnostic unit (COMDU)
389, 389, 390
cardiac surgery
chronology 410
prior see prior cardiac surgery
cardiac tamponadesee pericardial
tamponade
cardiogenic shock, mechanical
circulatory support
375–7, 403
cardioplegia 411–22
delivery 410, 418–22
delivery system 412, 418–19
infusion volume 419
neonates, infants and children
423–4
reperfusion injury 417–18,
418
solutions 411–17, 419
adjuvant agents 416–17
buffering 414
components 411–15, 413
crystalloid vs.blood
415–16, 416
osmolarity 414–15
cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB)
323–74
aortic surgery 318, 320–1
circuit 323–39, 324
coating 339
prime 337–9
cold-reactive proteins 370–2
commencing 343–5
conduct 345–51
decannulation 369
ﬂow rates 345–6, 346, 433
glucose and insulin
homeostasis 14–15
heart-lung transplantation
(HLT) 277, 278
hematocrit for 338, 350,
429–30
heparin-induced
thrombocytopenia
372–4, 373
hypothermic see hypothermic
CPB
inﬂammatory sequelae 434–7
lung transplantation 277,
278, 285–6
myocardial preservation
during 409–24
normothermic 345
partial 325–6
aortic surgery 317–18, 322
pediatric 323
bleeding problems after
364, 366–7
cerebral blood ﬂow
regulation 347, 348–9
circuit prime 337
circuits 324, 326
termination 353, 356
pericardial and chest closure
369
pericardiectomy 302
preparation for 339–43
recommendations for conduct
351–2
sickle cell disease 372
termination 357–8
coronary revascularization
119–24
factors causing difﬁculty
354
heart transplantation
265–7
management aftersee
post-CPB management
preparation for 352–6
valve surgery 132–3, 354
total (complete, full) 324–5
cardiopulmonary resuscitation
(CPR), emergency CABG
119
cardiotomy suction 333
cardio-to-thoracic ratio 5
cardiovascular evaluation 1–10
history and physical
examination 1–2
investigations 2–10
cardiovascular physiology,
pediatric 167–71
CardioWest total artiﬁcial heart
377, 385–90, 388, 389
insertion 388–9
management 389, 389–90,
390
catecholamine resistant
vasodilatory shock
(CRVS) 407
catecholamines 121–2, 123
catheters, TEE visualization
86–7
cavopulmonary anastomosis,
double 232, 235
cavopulmonary connection, total
see Fontan procedure
cavopulmonary shunt, superior
see superior
cavopulmonary shunt
cell death, myocardial ischemia
410
central shunt, tetralogy of Fallot
210, 210
central venous access 46–8
heart transplantation 260
pediatric patients 46, 48, 189
right ventricular assist device
recipients 408
central venous catheters 46
central venous measurements
51–9
central venous pressure (CVP)
constrictive pericarditis
296–7, 297
on CPB 346
monitoring, pediatric patients
189, 189
pericardial tamponade 290–1,
291, 294Alice Nelson Dinardo: “index” — 2007/7/16 — 12:41 — page 444 — #6
444 Index
central venous pressure (CVP)
(Cont’d)
resistance calculations 22–3
see also right atrial pressure
centrifugal pumps
CPB 327, 327–8
mechanical circulatory support
398–400, 399
cerebral blood ﬂow
autoregulation 346–7
on CPB 346–9, 432
transcranial Doppler 190–1
cerebral emboli 431–2
transcranial Doppler 191
cerebral metabolic rate for
oxygen (CMRO2)
acid-base management 426
during hypothermia 425
cerebral oxygenation
monitoring 190
pH-stat vs. α-stat management
426
cerebral oxygen consumption,
hypothermic CPB 345
cerebral oxygen extraction,
during rewarming 352
cerebral perfusion
antegrade 428, 428
continuous retrograde 313,
318, 428–9
on CPB 432
cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF)
drainage, aortic surgery
312–14, 315
cerebrovascular disease 351,
432
chamber dilatation, diastolic
pressure–volume curve
27
chamber stiffness, increased
26–7, 27
CHARGE association 185
chemistry, serum 16
chemotherapeutic agents 300
chest closure, after cardiac
surgery 369
chest radiograph (CXR)
preoperative 5, 11
thoracic aortic lesions 308,
310, 310
children see pediatric patients
chordae tendinae, rupture 156
cisatracurium
aortic surgery 319
aortic valve surgery 141
congenital heart disease
192–3
coronary revascularization
112, 113
heart transplantation 261
lung transplantation 283
renal failure 298
citrate-phosphate-dextrose
(CPD) solution 414
clonidine, intrathecal 116–17
clopidogrel
post-CPB bleeding problems
363
preoperative use 16, 18, 110,
131
clotting factors, dilution by CPB
364–5
coagulation
monitoring 87–9
preoperative studies 16
tests after CPB 88
coagulopathy
congenital heart disease 19,
185
CPB-associated 364–5
renal failure 18–19, 298
systemic lupus erythematosus
299
Coanda effect 78
coarctation of aorta 202–6
anatomy 202
anesthetic management
205–6
arterial pressure monitoring
45, 206
physiology 202–3, 203
surgical therapy 204, 204–5,
205
coating, CPB circuit 339
cocaine abuse 305
cognitive dysfunction,
postoperative 430–1
cold agglutinins (CA) 371–2
cold-reactive proteins 370–2
collaterals
bronchopulmonary, TGA 214
coarctation of aorta 203
coronary artery 34, 93,
94, 96
multiple aortopulmonarysee
multiple aortopulmonary
collateral arteries
myocardial protection 422,
424
color-ﬂow (CF) Doppler 63, 63
compensatory anti-inﬂammatory
response syndrome
(CARS) 434
complement activation 434,
435
compliance (distensibility),
ventricular
causes of poor diastolic 26–7
decreased 27–8, 28–30
neonates 171
computerized tomography (CT)
10
aortic lesions 309, 310
conduction defects, preoperative
evaluation 4
congenital heart disease (CHD)
167–251
anesthesia induction and
maintenance 192–3
cardiac catheterization 23,
40–1
coagulopathies 19, 185
heart transplantation 252,
260, 263–4
myocardial protection
techniques 422–4
pathophysiology 171–82
preoperative evaluation
182–6
preoperative preparation 186,
186–92
pulmonary artery catheters
50–1
pulmonary assessment 11–12
surgically repaired, TEE
evaluation 86
TEE 84–6, 191
connective tissue disorders,
pericardial disease
299–300
conotruncal anomalies 185
constrictive pericarditis 289,
296–303
anesthetic technique 302–3,
303
diagnosis 54, 296–7, 297
etiology 296, 297–301
hemodynamics 297, 297, 298
surgery for 301–2
continuity equation 64–5, 78,
80
continuouscardiacoutput(CCO)
monitoring 55–6, 57
continuous-wave (CW) Doppler
62–3, 63
contractility
after LVAD implantation 405
myocardial oxygen demand
94
neonates 171
pressure–volume loops 25, 25
cooling methods, for DHCA 427
Coombs’ test, direct 371
coronary air embolism 354–5
coronary angiography 32–5
CABG patients 107–9
heart transplant donors 258Alice Nelson Dinardo: “index” — 2007/7/16 — 12:41 — page 445 — #7
Index 445
interpretation of data 34–5
technique 21, 21, 22
coronary angioplasty, failed,
emergency CABG
117–19
coronary arteries
anatomy 32, 32–3, 33
pre-CABG evaluation
107–9
anomalous RV connections
246
cardiac allograft vasculopathy
270–1
cardioplegia infusion 420
collaterals 34, 93, 94, 96
congenital abnormalities 182
tetralogy of Fallot 211
transposition of great
arteries 213, 214
obstruction to ﬂowsee
coronary stenosis
reimplantation, TGA 217,
219–20
TEE views 69, 70
thrombus formation 34
coronary artery bypass graft
(CABG) surgery 90–128
anesthesia induction and
maintenance 111–14
fast-track technique 113,
113–14
high-dose narcotic
technique 111–13
anesthetic management
106–24
aprotinin and graft patency
369
cardiac allograft vasculopathy
271
cardioplegia infusion 419–20,
420, 421
constrictive pericarditis after
302, 303
coronary blood ﬂow dynamics
90–3
emergency 117–19, 120
glucose management 117,
119
heart transplantation after
previous 259–60
hypothyroid patients 16
indications 91–2
intrathecal and epidural
analgesia 116–17, 118
ischemic and anesthetic
preconditioning 115–16
long-term outcome 124–8,
125–6, 127
myocardial ischemia 100–6
myocardial oxygenation
93–100
off-pump 114, 114–15
post-CPB management
119–24
preinduction management
110–11
premedication 109–10
preoperative assessment 12,
106–9
repeat, preoperative
evaluation 106, 108, 109
strategies to reduce cerebral
emboli 431–2
valve disease discovered
during 165–6
coronary artery disease (CAD)
chest radiography 5
coronary angiography 33, 34
coronary steal 99
hematocrit levels 100
hypothyroidism 16
pacing-induced ischemia 27
pathogenesis 96–8, 97, 98
pre-CABG evaluation 107–9
preoperative ECG 4
pulmonary assessment 12
stress testing 6–7
see also atherosclerotic disease
coronary artery spasm 34, 99
postoperative 120
coronary blood ﬂow 90–3
autoregulation 90–3, 93
collateral 93, 94
congenital aortic stenosis 224
during CPB 334, 334
coronary circulation, right
ventricle-dependent
(RVDCC) 246, 247
coronary ostia, cardioplegia
infusion 420, 420
coronary perfusion
after LVAD implantation
405–6
reduced time available for 95
coronary perfusion pressure
(CPP) 90, 93
congenital heart disease
181–2
reduced 95
coronary revascularization
see coronary artery
bypass graft (CABG)
surgery
coronary sinus (CS)
blood ﬂow during CPB 334
cannula, TEE evaluation 87
defects 197, 198
retrograde perfusion (RCSP)
421, 421–2
TEE views 69, 70
coronary steal 99, 99
coronary stenosis (ﬂow
obstruction)
atherosclerotic 96–8, 97, 98
angiography 33–4, 34
conduct of CPB 351
dynamic 98, 98, 105–6
myocardial oxygen delivery
95–6, 349
pre-CABG evaluation 107–9
coronary stents
temporary, off-pump CABG
114, 115
vs.CABG 124–8, 127
coronary vasomotor tone
atheromatous disease 98, 98
variations 98–9
coronary vasospasmsee coronary
artery spasm
corticosteroids (glucocorticoids)
for DHCA 429
heart allograft rejection 272
heart transplant donors 259
inhaled (ICS) 12
see also methylprednisolone
cor triatriatum 223
cough reﬂex, lung transplant
recipients 286–7
coumadin 390, 394
CPB see cardiopulmonary
bypass
creatine phosphate (CP),
depletion 409
creatinine clearance 432–3
cryoglobulins 371
cryoprecipitate 17, 19, 88
post-CPB period 364–5
C wave 51, 52
cyanosis
coagulopathy 19
induction of anesthesia 192
myocardial vulnerability to
ischemia 423
pathophysiologic relevance
179
preoperative evaluation 183,
185
tetralogy of Fallot 179, 207
cyclosporine 260, 268, 279
cystic ﬁbrosis 274, 275–6
cytokines 434–6, 435
daclizumab 268
Damus–Kaye–Stansel (DKS)
procedure 225, 226,
227–8, 242Alice Nelson Dinardo: “index” — 2007/7/16 — 12:41 — page 446 — #8
446 Index
DDAVP see desmopressin
d-dimers, ﬁbrin 88
l-deamino-8-d-arginine
vasopressin see
desmopressin
DeBakey classiﬁcation, aortic
dissection 305–6, 306
deceleration time (D1) 65, 65
deep hypothermic circulatory
arrest (DHCA) 346,
425–9
acid-base management 348,
426
adjuncts to 429
alternatives to 428–9
aortic surgery 313, 318,
320–1
aprotinin use 369
conduct 427–8
hematocrit 426–7
hypothermia 425–6
Pao2 management 426–7
temperature monitoring 343
venous cannulation 325
deﬁbrillation 354–5
deﬁbrillators 49–50
depth of anesthesia, myocardial
ischemia 104, 105
desﬂurane 115, 192
desmopressin (DDAVP)
post-CPB bleeding problems
363
uremic patients 13, 19, 298
dexmedetomidine 114
dextran 390
DHCA see deep hypothermic
circulatory arrest
diabetes mellitus (DM)
CPB 346
heart transplantation 253
insulin infusion 15, 15
myocardial ischemia 101
preoperative evaluation
14–15
dialysis, preoperative 13
diastole, length, aortic stenosis
138, 138
diastolic blood pressure (DBP),
myocardial oxygen
delivery 95
diastolic (dys)function
cardiac catheterization 26–30
constrictive pericarditis 296,
303
coronary angiography 34–5
dilated cardiomyopathy 255
heart transplant recipients
265, 270
pre-CABG evaluation 106,
107, 108
TEE assessment 74–6
diastolic pressure time
index:systolic pressure
index (DPTI:SPTI) ratio
103–4
diastolic pressure–volume curves
27, 27, 28–30
diazepam 109, 113
DiGeorge syndrome 185
digitalis toxicity 4
digoxin 255, 272
dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM)
252, 253–7
anesthetic management
261–2
etiologies 253
medical therapy 255
pathophysiology and
adaptation 253–7, 254
diltiazem 110, 186
dimensionless index (DI), aortic
valve 80
dip and plateau sign, constrictive
pericarditis 297, 297
dipyridamole
mechanical circulatory devices
390, 394
stress testing 5–6
direct thrombin inhibitors 18,
373–4
distensibility see compliance
diuretics 255, 434
DNase, recombinant human
(rhDNase) 276
dobutamine
after CABG 121, 124
aortic valve surgery 142, 147,
148
congenital heart disease 186
heart transplantation 262,
266
interrupted aortic arch 250
maximal inotropic support
375
mitral valve surgery 153,
155, 160
stress testing 5–6, 10
tetralogy of Fallot 212
total anomalous pulmonary
venous return 223
transposition of great arteries
219
truncus arteriosus 249
dopamine
after CABG 121, 124
aortic valve surgery 142, 147
congenital heart disease 186
heart transplantation 262,
266
interrupted aortic arch 250
lung transplantation 284
maximal inotropic support
375
mitral valve surgery 155
renal protection 315–16,
433–4
single ventricle lesions 231,
239
tetralogy of Fallot 212
total anomalous pulmonary
venous return 223
transposition of great arteries
219, 220
truncus arteriosus 249
Doppler principle 60
Doppler ultrasound
color-ﬂow (CF) 63, 63
continuous-wave (CW) 62–3,
63
pressure gradients 63, 64
principles 60–1
pulsed-wave (PW) 62, 62
spectra measurements 64,
64–5
transcranial (TCD) 190–1
velocity–time integral 64–5,
65
double cavopulmonary
anastomosis 232, 235
double-headed roller pump
327, 327
double inlet left ventricle (DILV)
175
Down syndromesee trisomy 21
ductal dependent circulation
172
ductus arteriosus (DA) 168,
168, 169
closure 168–70
coarctation of aorta 202, 203,
203
delayed closure 170
patent see patent ductus
arteriosus
ductus venosus 167–8, 168, 169
closure 170
dysrhythmias
advanced ECG monitoring 43
after Mustard and Senning
procedures 216
circulatory assist device
recipients 406–7
exercise ECG testing 6–7
heart transplant recipients
271Alice Nelson Dinardo: “index” — 2007/7/16 — 12:41 — page 447 — #9
Index 447
off-pump CABG 115
preoperative evaluation 2
Ebstein’s anomaly 162
ecarin clotting time (ECT) 374
ECG see electrocardiogram
echocardiography 10
contrast 10, 86
M-mode 61, 61
pericardial effusion 291
stress 7, 10
transesophageal see
transesophageal
echocardiography
transthoracic (TTE) 10
two-dimensional (2-D) 61,
61–2
ECMO see extracorporeal
membrane oxygenation
Eisenmenger syndrome 273,
274, 275
ejection fraction (EF) 30–1
aortic stenosis 135, 136, 137,
137
CPB 346
determination 21, 30
interpretation 34
mitral regurgitation 157, 158
pre-CABG evaluation 106,
107, 109
TEE assessment 72–3
elastance (stiffness) 26
effective arterial (Ea) 24,
24–5, 30
increased chamber 26–7, 27
increased muscle 27
ventricular (Ees) 24, 24–5, 30
elderly patientssee older patients
electrocardiogram (ECG)
advanced monitoring 43,
43–4
congenital heart disease
surgery 188
coronary revascularization
110
exercise stress test 6–7
IABPcontrol 383
lung transplant surgery 279,
280
myocardial ischemia diagnosis
102
preoperative 2–5
serum potassium
abnormalities 4, 14
electroencephalogram (EEG)
monitoring 130
electrolyte disturbances 4,
13–14
Elhers–Danlos syndrome 143
emphysema, lung
transplantation 273, 274
end-diastolic area (EDA) 72–3,
76
endobronchial intubation
280–1
endocarditis, infective
aortic regurgitation 143
prophylaxis, heart transplant
recipients 271
valve repair surgery 134
endocrine disorders,
preoperative evaluation
14–16
endomyocardial biopsies 271
endotracheal intubationsee
tracheal intubation
endotracheal tubes (ETT)
double-lumen (DLT) 282–3,
320
pediatric 192
single lumen, one-lung
ventilation 281
thoracic aortic surgery 320
end-systolic area (ESA) 72–3,
76
end-tidal carbon dioxide (ETco2)
monitoring 189
ephedrine 112
heart transplant recipients
272
heart transplant surgery 261
valve surgery 141
epidural analgesia/anesthesia
aortic surgery 319
coronary revascularization
117, 118
lung transplantation 280
valve surgery 132
epinephrine
after CABG 120, 122, 124
aortic valve surgery 142, 148
congenital heart disease 186
ductus arteriosus closure 168
heart transplantation 266
lung transplantation 284
maximal inotropic support
375
mitral valve surgery 153,
155, 161
post-CPB management 361
transposition of great arteries
220
epoprostenol see prostacyclin
ϵ-aminocaproic acid (EACA)
365, 367
dosage and administration
366
efﬁcacy 368
eptiﬁbatide 363
erythrophoresis 19
esmolol 104–5
aortic surgery 319
aortic valve surgery 141
cardioplegia solutions 418
congenital heart disease 186
“Tet spells” 209
esophageal temperature
monitoring 342–3
etomidate
aortic regurgitation 147
aortic surgery 320
congenital heart disease 193
emergency CABG 118
heart transplant surgery 261
lung transplant surgery 283
mitral valve surgery 160
pericardial disease 295–6
everolimus 268
exercise
heart transplant recipients
269
stress testing 6–7, 9–10
external jugular cannulation 48
extracorporeal membrane
oxygenation (ECMO)
376, 402–3
insertion 402
lung transplant recipients 286
management 402–3
oxygenators 330, 402
“Tet spells” 209
transposition of great arteries
216
venoarterial (VA) 402, 402–3
venovenous (VV) 402
factor VIII 17, 364–5
factor IX 17
factor XI deﬁciency 17
fast-track anesthetic technique,
coronary
revascularization 113–14
fatty acid oxidation 410, 423
femoral artery cannulation
45–6
cardiac catheterization 20
CPB 326–7
IABPinsertion 382
femoral vein cannulation 20,
325
fenoldopam 186, 434
fentanyl
aortic surgery 319, 320
aortic valve surgery 140, 141,
142, 147
congenital heart disease 193Alice Nelson Dinardo: “index” — 2007/7/16 — 12:41 — page 448 — #10
448 Index
fentanyl (Cont’d)
coronary revascularization
111, 112, 113
emergency CABG 118
heart transplantation 261,
262
lung transplantation 283
mitral valve surgery 154, 160
pericardial disease 295–6, 303
fetalcirculation 167–8,168,169
persistence (PFC) 168
FEV1 see forced expiratory
volume in 1 second
FEV1/FVC 12
ﬁbrin degradation 88
ﬁbrinogen 88, 364–5
ﬁbrinolysis, post-CPB 365
Fick determination, cardiac
output 21–2
ﬁlters, micropore 335
ﬁsh allergies 360
FK506 268
ﬂuid management
congenital heart disease 187
CPB termination 121, 357
renal dysfunction 13
tetralogy of Fallot 209,
211–12
Fontan procedure 236–9, 237
anesthetic management 238
fenestrated 238
post-CPB management
238–9, 240
pulmonary atresia with intact
interventricular septum
247
staged approach to 225,
225–36, 237–8
foramen ovale (FO) 168
closure 170
patent see patent foramen
ovale
forced expiratory volume in 1
second (FEV1) 11, 12, 13
lung transplantation 274
forced mid-expiratory ﬂow
(FEF 25–75%) 11
forced vital capacity (FVC) 11
fractional area change (FAC)
72, 73, 76
Frank–Starling mechanism 24
free fatty acid oxidation 410,
423
free radical scavengers 417, 418
fresh frozen plasma (FFP) 17,
341, 364
fructose-1,6-diphosphate 418
furosemide 352, 434
Glenn procedure 232
bidirectional (BDG)see
superior cavopulmonary
shunt
glucocorticoids see corticosteroids
glucose
cardioplegia solutions 415
homeostasis, during CPB
14–15
perioperative management
15
glycemic control 15
CABG 117, 119, 120–1
congenital heart disease 187
glycopyrrolate 112
congenital heart disease 187,
188, 193
heart transplant recipients
272
Gorlin equation 35, 135
Gott shunt 313, 316
H2-receptor blockers 260, 279
halothane 192, 212
heart failure
ACA/AHA classiﬁcation 3
congenital heart disease 183,
185
constrictive pericarditis 296
dilated cardiomyopathy 255
mechanical circulatory support
375
preoperative evaluation 1
see also right ventricular failure
heart-lung transplantation (HLT)
273
anesthetic management
278–80, 283–4
contraindications 253, 274
indications 273, 276
noncardiac surgery after
286–8
operative procedure 277, 278
post-CPB management 286
HeartMate II device 377, 378,
400, 401
HeartMate IPdevice 377, 378,
392–4, 393, 406
HeartMate XVE device 377,
378, 392–4, 393
heart rate (HR)
abnormalities 2
age-related variation 183,
183
aortic regurgitation 145–6
aortic stenosis 138, 138–9,
139
congenital heart disease 182
dilated cardiomyopathy 257
heart transplant recipients
265, 269
mitral regurgitation 159
mitral stenosis 150–1, 152,
153
myocardial ischemia 101
myocardial oxygen balance
94–5, 95, 104
see also bradycardia;
tachycardia
heart transplantation 252–73
anesthetic management
259–62
bridge to 259, 377–8,378,
403
contraindications 252–3, 253
donors 257–9
noncardiac surgery after
267–73
anesthetic principles 272–3
physiology of transplanted
heart 268–70
unique management issues
270–2
operative procedure 262–4,
263, 264
post-CPB management 264–7
preoperative evaluation
259–60
heat exchangers 331, 332,
332–3
hematocrit (Hct) 16, 429–30
congenital heart disease 185
coronary artery disease
99–100
CPB 338, 350, 429–30
CPB termination 356
DHCA 426–7
postoperative renal
dysfunction 433, 433
hematologic evaluation,
preoperative 16–19
hematoma, spinal, after
intrathecal/epidural
analgesia 117
hemi-Fontan procedure 232,
238
Hemochron® 340, 359, 362
hemodilution, myocardial
oxygen delivery 349–50
hemodynamic parameters,
derived 58, 59
hemoglobin 16
hemoglobinopathies 372
hemoglobinuria, paroxysmal
cold 371
hemophilia 17Alice Nelson Dinardo: “index” — 2007/7/16 — 12:41 — page 449 — #11
Index 449
hemorrhage see
bleeding/hemorrhage
hemostasis, post-CPB 362–9
Hemotec® 340, 359, 362
heparin
concentration testing 88, 359
monitoring effects 87–8,
339–41, 352
rebound 361, 362
resistance 340–1
unfractionated (UFH)
for CPB 338, 339–41, 352
HIT patients 18, 374
IABPrecipients 385
protamine neutralization
358–65
total artiﬁcial heart
recipients 390
VADs 398
heparinase ACT test 362
heparin dose–response test
(HDR) 88, 340
heparin-induced
thrombocytopenia (HIT)
372–4, 373
heparin-induced
thrombocytopenia and
thrombosis (HITT) 18,
372
heparin/protamine titration test
(HPT) 359
heparinresponsetest(HRT) 340
hepatic veins
blood ﬂow velocity 83
fetal circulation 167–8
heterotaxy syndrome 173, 324
hibernating myocardium 8
high-dose narcotic technique
aortic stenosis 140–2
congenital heart disease
192–3, 219
coronary revascularization
111–13
heart transplantation 261
high dose thrombin time (HiTT)
88
hirudin 373–4
histidine 414, 418
histoplasmosis 299
HIT see heparin-induced
thrombocytopenia
HLA-DR 434
Hodgkin lymphoma 300,
300–1, 302
hormone replacement therapy
(HRT), transplant donors
258–9
hyperacute rejection, heart grafts
264–5
hypercalcemia 4
hypercarbia, single ventricle
physiology 230–1
hyperglycemia, CPB-associated
15
hyperkalemia 4, 13–14, 355
hypertension
aortic valve surgery 142
coronary revascularization
112
heart transplant recipients
271
heart transplant surgery 262
management 105
myocardial ischemia risk 104
preoperative evaluation 2
hyperventilation 180
hypocalcemia, in congenital
heart disease 185
hypokalemia 4, 14, 355
hypomagnesemia 354
hypoplastic left heart syndrome
(HLHS) 241–3
anatomy 241, 242
anesthetic management 243
heart transplantation 252
myocardial ischemia 182
physiology 172, 175, 242
post-CPB management 243
staged approach to Fontan
procedure 225, 225–36,
242–3
hypotension
aortic valve surgery 141–2
circulatory assist device
recipients 407
coronary revascularization
112
heart transplant recipients
268–9
management 105
myocardial oxygen balance
95, 104
pericardial tamponade 290–1
protamine-induced 360, 361
hypothermia
cardioplegia solutions 413
classiﬁcation 345
DHCA 425–6
topical 422, 423, 427
see also deep hypothermic
circulatory arrest
hypothermic CPB 345
cerebral blood ﬂow 346–9
cold-reactive proteins 370–2
myocardial oxygen balance
349, 350, 350
pediatric patients 423–4
pump ﬂow rates 348–9
rewarming prior to
termination 352–3
sickle cell disease 372
systemic blood ﬂow 345–6
systemic blood pressure 346
hypothyroidism, preoperative
evaluation 15–16
hypoxemia
total anomalous pulmonary
venous return 222
transposition of great arteries
215
hypoxia, ventilatory response,
lung transplant recipients
287
IABP see intra-aortic balloon
pump
immunosuppressive drugs 268
complications 267, 267
preoperative doses 260, 279
indomethacin 170
induction of anesthesia
aortic surgery 319–20
aortic valve surgery 140–2,
147
circulatory assist device
recipients 408
congenital heart disease
192–3
constrictive pericarditis 303
coronary revascularization
111–12
heart transplantation 261–2
lung transplantation 283–4
mitral valve surgery 153–4,
160
pericardial effusion 295–6
rapid sequence
aortic surgery 319–20
emergency CABG 118
heart transplantation 261
lung transplantation 283
single ventricle lesions 231,
234, 238
valve surgery 132
infants see neonates; pediatric
patients
infectious complications,
transfusion of blood
products 430
infectious pericarditis 298–9
inferior vena cava (IVC)
cannulation for CPB 324, 325
fetal circulation 167–8, 169
inﬂammatory mediators 434,
435
inﬂammatory sequelae 434–7,
435Alice Nelson Dinardo: “index” — 2007/7/16 — 12:41 — page 450 — #12
450 Index
inhalational anesthetic agentssee
volatile anesthetic agents
inotropic support
aortic valve surgery 142, 147,
148
CABG post-bypass 121–4
CPB termination 357
dilated cardiomyopathy 254,
255
heart transplantation 262,
265, 266
interrupted aortic arch 250
lung transplantation 285
maximal 375
mechanisms of action 123
mitral valve surgery 153,
154, 155, 160, 161
neonates 171
pericardial effusion 294–5
single ventricle lesions 231,
235, 239
tetralogy of Fallot 212
total anomalous pulmonary
venous return 223
transposition of great arteries
219, 220
truncus arteriosus 249
insulin
administration 15, 15
CABG 117, 119, 121
heart transplant donors
259
cardioplegia solutions 415
homeostasis, during CPB
14–15
NPH, protamine allergy 360
resistance 14
integrelin 16, 18
intercirculatory mixing 174,
176
intercostal arteries, ligation 312,
314
internal jugular vein
cannulation 46–8, 47
pulmonary artery catheter
placement 49
internal mammary artery (IMA)
dissection 110
graft ﬂow, vasoactive agents
affecting 120
retrograde cardioplegia
infusion 421
interrupted aortic arch (IAA)
249–51
anatomy 249, 249–50
physiology 172, 175, 250
intra-aorticballoonpump(IABP)
376, 381, 381–5, 382
anticoagulation 385
complications 383
indications and
contraindications 382
insertion 382–3
management 383–5, 384,
385, 386, 387, 388
mitral regurgitation 160
TEE evaluation 87
weaning 408
intra-atrial septumsee atrial
septum
intrathecal analgesia, coronary
revascularization
116–17, 118
intravascular ultrasound (IVUS),
cardiac allograft
vasculopathy 270
intraventricular dependence, in
neonates 171
ischemia, myocardialsee
myocardial ischemia
ischemia-reperfusion injurysee
reperfusion injury
ischemic preconditioning
115–16, 418
isoﬂurane
aortic surgery 321
aortic valve surgery 142
congenital heart disease 192,
193
coronary revascularization
113–14
coronary steal 99
heart transplantation 261
lung transplantation 283
myocardialprotection 115–16
isoproterenol
congenital heart disease 186
heart transplant recipients
265–6
mitral valve surgery 155
isovolumic contraction 23, 23
isovolumic relaxation time
(IVRT) 74, 74
Jarvik 2000 device 377, 378,
400–1
Jatene proceduresee arterial
switch operation
Judkin’s technique 21, 22
junctional ectopic tachycardia
(JET), after tetralogy of
Fallot repair 213
kallikrein 365, 434, 437
kallikrein inhibition units (KIU)
366
ketamine
induction 193, 212, 296
premedication 187, 188, 260
Kussmaul’s sign 296–7
L-arginine 418
laryngoscopy 112, 141
LeCompte maneuver 217, 217,
220
left anterior descending (LAD)
artery 33
left atrial appendage (LAA)
68–9, 70, 85
left atrial enlargement (LAE) 3,
5
mitral regurgitation 157, 158
mitral stenosis 149
left atrial hypertrophy 149, 157
left atrial pressure (LAP) 51,
51–4
aortic stenosis 136
A wave 51, 52
C wave 51, 52
elevated 40, 41
interpretation 28, 30
mitral regurgitation 156, 157,
158
mitral stenosis 37, 149–50
V wave 51, 52–3
X and Y descent 51, 53–4
see also pulmonary capillary
wedge pressure
left atrium (LA)
blood ﬂow during CPB 334
identiﬁcation using TEE 85
left circumﬂex artery 32, 33
left heart bypass, aortic surgery
313, 317, 322
left heart catheterization 20–1
“left main equivalent” lesions
107–9
left-to-right shunts 172, 173
cardiac output determination
57
pulmonary arterial
hypertension 40–1, 41
quantitation 39–40
left ventricle (LV)
blood ﬂow during CPB 334
TEE evaluation 85
venting during CPB 334–5
left ventricular assist devices
(LVAD) 376, 377, 379,
391–401
anesthetic management after
insertion 404–8
indications 378, 378–9
insertion 404
see also speciﬁc devicesAlice Nelson Dinardo: “index” — 2007/7/16 — 12:41 — page 451 — #13
Index 451
left ventricular diastolic
(dys)function
aortic stenosis 135–6
aortic surgery 322
pre-CABG evaluation 106,
107, 108
TEE assessment 74, 74–6, 77
see also diastolic (dys)function
left ventricular end-diastolic
pressure (LVEDP)
aortic regurgitation 144, 147
aortic stenosis 136
coronary blood ﬂow 90, 93
diastolic pressure–volume
curves 28–30
measurement 51, 52, 54
mitral regurgitation 159, 160
mitral stenosis 153
myocardial ischemia 102
myocardial oxygen delivery
95
pressure–volume loops 23
left ventricular end-diastolic
volume (LVEDV) 23, 30
aortic regurgitation 143–4,
145, 146
aortic stenosis 136, 142–3
interpretation 28–30
measurement 21
mitral regurgitation 156,
157–8, 160
mitral stenosis 150, 150, 151,
152, 153
pressure–volume loops 25
left ventricular end-diastolic
volume index (LVEDVI)
28, 30
left ventricular end-systolic
pressure (LVESP) 23
left ventricular end-systolic
volume (LVESV) 30
measurement 21
pressure–volume loops 23, 25
left ventricular end-systolic
volume index (LVESVI)
28, 30
left ventricular (LV) ﬁlling,
congenital causes of
obstruction to 223
left ventricular hypertrophy
(LVH) 4, 5
aortic regurgitation 143–4,
144
aortic stenosis 135
mitral regurgitation 156, 157,
157–8
left ventricular outﬂow tract
(LVOT), TEE 71, 84
left ventricular outﬂow tract
obstruction (LVOTO)
congenital 224
transposition of great arteries
214, 218
left ventricular stroke work
(LVSW) 31
left ventricular stroke work
index (LVSWI) 59
left ventricular systolic
(dys)function
after CABG 120
aortic stenosis 136, 137–8
CPB 346
dilated cardiomyopathy 256
mitral regurgitation 157, 158
TEE assessment 72–3
transplanted heart 269
left ventriculography 21, 21,
31–2, 32
lepirudin 374
leukocyte-endothelial cell
adhesion cascade 436,
436
leukotriene receptor antagonists
(LTRAs) 12
levosimendan
after CABG 122–4
dilated cardiomyopathy 255
mechanism of action 122,
123
levothyroxine 16
lidocaine
congenital heart disease 186
hyperbaric 117
neuroprotective effects 432
premature ventricular
contractions 59
termination of CPB 354
ligamentum arteriosum 168
local anesthesia, vascular access
44, 47
lorazepam
aortic valve surgery 142
CABG 109, 113
CPB management 353
valvular heart disease 130
lungs, thallium uptake 8
lung transplantation 273–88
anesthetic management
278–86
bilateral sequential single
(BSSLT) 273–4, 277–8,
278
anesthetic management
284–6
contraindications 253, 274
donors 276–7
double (DLT) 273–4
en bloc 277, 278
operative procedure 277–8
indications 274–6
living donor lobar (LDLLT)
274
noncardiac surgery after
286–8
operative procedure 277–8
patient positioning 277
post-CPB management 286
postoperative care 286
single (SLT) 273
anesthetic management
284–6
operative procedure 277–8,
278
postoperative care 286
lung volumes
pulmonary vascular resistance
180
transplanted lungs 287
lupus anticoagulant 299
LVADs see left ventricular assist
devices
lymphoma, Hodgkin 300,
300–1, 302
lysine analogs 365, 366, 368
magnesium
cardioplegia solutions 414
congenital heart disease 186
termination of CPB 354
magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) 10, 11
aortic lesions 309, 310
maintenance of anesthesia
aortic valve surgery 140–2,
147
circulatory assist device
recipients 408
congenital heart disease 193
constrictive pericarditis 303
coronary revascularization
113
heart transplantation 261–2
lung transplantation 283–4
mitral valve surgery 153–4,
160
pericardial effusion 295–6
single ventricle lesions 231,
234, 238
valve surgery 132
malignant pericardial disease
294, 300, 300–1
mannitol 316, 352, 434
MAP see mean arterial blood
pressureAlice Nelson Dinardo: “index” — 2007/7/16 — 12:41 — page 452 — #14
452 Index
MAPCAs see multiple
aortopulmonary collateral
arteries
Marfan syndrome 143
mask induction of anesthesia
192
maximum voluntary ventilation
(MVV) 12
MBTS see Blalock–Taussig
shunts, modiﬁed
mean arterial blood pressure
(MAP)
during CPB 346, 351–2, 432,
433
CPB termination 356, 357,
358
myocardial blood ﬂow 349
resistance calculations 22–3
mean arterial blood
pressure–heart rate
(BP–HR) quotient 104
mechanical circulatory support
375–408
anesthetic considerations
403–8
bridge to heart transplantation
259, 377–8,378, 403
bridge to recovery 375–7
classiﬁcation of devices
379–81
complications 379
destination therapy 378–9
device insertion 403–4
device selection 375–9
extracorporeal devices 376,
380
indications 375
intracorporeal devices 377,
380
post-device implantation
management 404–8
triggering modes/percentage
of systole 380–1
weaning 408
see also speciﬁc devices
mediastinal masses, malignant
300
Medos VAD 376, 392
membrane oxygenators
329–32, 332
ECMO 330, 402
microporous 329–30, 330,
331
solid 330–2
meperidine 188
metabolic disorders, ECG effects
4–5
metabolic equivalents (METs) 6
metabolism, myocardial
during global ischemia
409–10
neonates 171, 423
substrates in cardioplegia
solutions 415
methylprednisolone 268
DHCA management 427
transplant recipients 265, 284
metoclopramide 118, 260, 279
metoprolol 104
MicroMed (DeBakey) VAD 377,
378, 400, 401
micropore ﬁlters 335
midazolam
aortic valve surgery 141, 142
congenital heart disease 187,
188, 193, 219
coronary revascularization
109, 113
CPB management 353
emergency coronary
revascularization 119
heart transplantation 260,
261
lung transplantation 279, 283
pericardial effusion 295
middle cerebral artery (MCA),
transcranial Doppler
190–1
milrinone
after CABG 122, 124
congenital heart disease 186,
196, 212
heart transplantation 266
interrupted aortic arch 250
lung transplantation 285
maximal inotropic support
375
mitral valve surgery 153,
155, 161
off-pump CABG 115
single ventricle lesions 235,
239
total anomalous pulmonary
venous return 223
transposition of great arteries
219, 220
truncus arteriosus 249
mitral annulus 148
mitral inﬂow
Doppler assessment 74, 74
parameters, normal values 74
mitral regurgitation (MR)
155–61, 156
after mitral valve surgery 82
anesthetic technique 159–61
aortic regurgitation with 144,
145, 163
aortic stenosis with 163–4
cardiac catheterization 37,
37–8
diastolic pressure–volume
curves 28, 156–8, 157
dilated cardiomyopathy 256
discovered during CABG
165–6
ejection fraction 30–1
grading of severity 79
indications for surgery 165
ischemic 156, 165–6
pathophysiology and
adaptation 156–9, 157
percutaneous endovascular
repair 166, 166
post-bypass management
133, 160–1
TEE 78–9
V waves 37–8, 52, 53
mitral stenosis (MS) 149,
149–55
anesthetic technique 153–4
aortic regurgitation with 163
aortic stenosis with 163
cardiac catheterization 35–7,
36
congenital supravalvular 223
congenital valvular 223
critical 153
parachute 223
pathophysiology and
adaptation 149–52, 150,
151, 152
post-CPB management 154–5
severity estimation 78, 78
TEE 76–8
mitral valve 148–61
Alﬁeri stitch 166
anatomy 148–9
assessment, VAD insertion
404
indications for surgery 165
TEE evaluation 76–9
TEE views 70, 71
mitral valve area (MVA) 76,
149
cardiac catheterization 35,
36–7
Doppler measurement 65, 65,
78, 78
M-mode echocardiography 61,
61
monitoring 42–89
advanced ECG 43–4
arterial pressure 44–6
ASA standards 42–3
central circulation pressure
48–59Alice Nelson Dinardo: “index” — 2007/7/16 — 12:41 — page 453 — #15
Index 453
central venous access 46–8
circulatory assist device
recipients 408
coagulation 87–9
congenital heart disease
188–91
coronary revascularization
110–11
pulmonary artery catheter
48–59
transesophageal
echocardiography 58–87
valve surgery 130
monosodium L-aspartate (MSA)
418
monosodium L-glutamate
(MSG) 418
morphine
premedication 109, 130
“Tet spells” 209
motor evoked potentials (MEPs)
314–15, 316
multiple aortopulmonary
collateral arteries
(MAPCAs)
pH statvs. α-stat management
426
tetralogy of Fallot with
pulmonary atresia 244,
244, 245
tricuspid atresia 227, 241
muscarinic antagonists, heart
transplant recipients 272
muscle relaxants
aortic surgery 319
aortic valve surgery 141, 147
congenital heart disease
192–3
coronary revascularization
111–12, 113, 113
CPB management 344–5, 353
heart transplantation 261
see also individual agents
muscle stiffness, increased 27
Mustard operation 216, 216
mycophenolate mofentil 268
myocardial blood ﬂow, on CPB
349–50
myocardial contusion, donor
hearts 258, 265
myocardial infarction (MI)
dilated cardiomyopathy after
253
emergency coronary
revascularization 119,
120
indications for CABG 91–2
newly transplanted heart 265
pathogenesis 97
pericarditis complicating 299
postoperative (PMI) 101–2
preoperative ECG 4
myocardial ischemia 100–6
aortic surgery 322
congenital heart disease
181–2
consequences of global
409–10
coronary revascularization
111
diagnosis 102–3
ECG monitoring 43, 43–4
emergency CABG 117–19
exercise testing 6, 7
incidence of perioperative
101
mitral regurgitation 156,
165–6
off-pump CABG 114
outcome after 101–2
pacing-induced 27
postoperative 101, 120
preconditioning 115–16
prediction 103–4
preoperative ECG 4
pulmonary atresia with intact
ventricular septum
247–8
symptomatic vs.asymptomatic
101
TEE monitoring 73–4, 102–3
thallium imaging 8
tolerance in neonates 423
transposition of great arteries
219–20
treatment 104–6
see also angina pectoris
myocardial oxygen balance
93–100
aortic stenosis 137, 137
dilated cardiomyopathy
255–6
myocardial oxygen consumption
(MVo2)
aortic regurgitation 145, 145
assessment 103
causes of increased 93–5
during CPB 350, 350
effectofcardioplegia 411,413
mitral regurgitation 158
myocardial oxygen delivery
aortic regurgitation 145
causes of reduced 95–100
during CPB 349–50
mitral regurgitation 158
myocardial perfusion
scintigraphy 7–9
myocardial physiology 20–41
myocardial preservation
409–24, 410
additional factors 422
cardioplegia 411–22
neonates, infants and children
422–4
myocardial regional wall motion
abnormalities see regional
wall motion abnormalities
myocardial supply–demand ratio
(DPTI:SPTI) 103–4
myocardial wall segmentssee
wall segments
myocardial wall tensionsee wall
tension, myocardial
N-acetylcysteine 418
narcotic agentssee opioids
nasopharyngeal temperature
monitoring 342
near infra-red spectroscopy
(NIRS) 190
neonates
central venous access 189
circulatory changes 167–70,
169
myocardial performance
170–1
myocardial preservation
techniques 422–4
platelet dysfunction 19
pulmonary vascular changes
170
see also pediatric patients
neostigmine, heart transplant
recipients 272
nesiritide 255
neurological outcome 430–2
hematocrit 429–30
interventions to improve
431–2
neuromuscular blockade,
at CPB commencement
344–5
neuromuscular blocking agents
see muscle relaxants
nicotine 12
nifedipine 106, 110
nitric oxide (NO) 180–1, 436
inhaled 181, 267, 361
nitric oxide synthase, inducible
(iNOS) 436
nitroglycerin (NTG) 105–6
aortic surgery 319
aortic valve surgery 142
congenital heart disease 186
CPB management 351
heart transplantation 262,
266–7Alice Nelson Dinardo: “index” — 2007/7/16 — 12:41 — page 454 — #16
454 Index
nitroglycerin (NTG)(Cont’d)
lung transplantation 285
mitral valve surgery 155,
160, 161
post-CPB management 361
nitroprusside, sodium (SNP)
105
after CABG 124
aortic surgery 319
aortic valve surgery 142, 147
congenital heart disease 186,
196
CPB management 351, 353
DHCA management 427
heart transplantation 257,
262, 266–7
mitral valve surgery 154,
155, 160, 161
transposition of great arteries
220
nitrous oxide (N2O)
aortic valve surgery 142
coronary revascularization
113
heart transplantation 261
nodule of Arantius 134
non-steroidal anti-inﬂammatory
drugs (NSAIDs) 18, 299,
363
norepinephrine (NE)
after CABG 120, 122, 124
congenital heart disease 186
ductus arteriosus closure 168
heart transplantation 266
lung transplantation 285
mitral valve surgery 155
secretion, dilated
cardiomyopathy 254
Norwood stage 1 procedure 242
modiﬁed 242
Novacor device 377, 394,
394–5, 395, 396
afterload to 406
indications 378
NPH insulin 360
N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic
peptide (NTproBNP) 16
nuclear factorκB (NF-κB) 436,
437
nutritional support, congenital
heart disease 187
Nyquist limit 62
obstructive lung disease
anesthetic management
283–4
lung transplantation 273, 274
off-pump coronary artery bypass
(OPCAB) graft surgery
114, 114–15
OKT3 268
older patients
CPB 346, 352
premedication 109–10
one-and-a-half ventricle repair
247
one-and-a-quarter ventricle
repair 247
one-lung ventilation (OLV)
lung transplantation 277
anesthetic management
284–5
indications 278
techniques 280–3
thoracic aortic surgery
311–12, 320
opioids
congenital heart disease 193
high-dose techniquesee
high-dose narcotic
technique
intrathecal 116–17
see also fentanyl; morphine;
sufentanil
oral hypoglycemic agents 15
osmolarity, cardioplegia
solutions 414–15
oxidative phosphorylation,
cessation 409
oxygenators 328, 328–32, 331,
332
assessing function 344
ECMO 330, 402
oxygen consumption (Vo2) 6,
57–8
determination 22
during hypothermia 345
myocardial (MVo2) see
myocardial oxygen
consumption
oxygen content
arterial (Cao2) 57
mixed venous (Cvo2) 57
oxygen delivery (Do2) 57
myocardial see myocardial
oxygen delivery
single ventricle physiology
228, 228–30, 230
useful, to body 230
oxygen excess factor (/Omega1) 230
oxygen fraction, inspired (Fio2),
singleventriclephysiology
230, 231
oxygen partial pressure, arterial
(Pao2)
CPB 329
DHCA 427
ductus arteriosus closure 168
pulmonary vascular resistance
180
transposition of great arteries
215
oxygen reference ﬂow 332
oxygen saturation
cerebral (Sco2) 190, 426
mixed venous (Svo2) 39
continuous monitoring 49,
57–8
single ventricle physiology
229, 229
pulmonary arterial (PAo2) 39
pulmonary venous (Spvo2)
39
single ventricle physiology
175–6, 229
shunt characterization 23, 38,
39, 185
superior vena cava (Ssvco2)
39, 229
systemic arterial (Sao2) 39
after bidirectional Glenn
234, 235–6
intercirculatory mixing
174, 176
monitoring 188
single ventricle physiology
173–6, 228–9
systemic venous 174
oxyhemoglobin dissociation
curve, during
hypothermia 426
pacer spikes, IABPcontrol 383
pacing
CPB termination 355–6, 369
electrodes, pulmonary artery
catheters 49
heart transplant recipients
265, 266
-induced ischemia 27
Paco2 see carbon dioxide, partial
pressure in arterial blood
pancuronium
aortic valve surgery 141, 147
congenital heart disease 192
coronary revascularization
111–12, 113
CPB 344–5
heart transplantation 261
lung transplant surgery 283
panel reactive antibody (PRA)
screen 258
Pao2 see oxygen partial pressure,
arterialAlice Nelson Dinardo: “index” — 2007/7/16 — 12:41 — page 455 — #17
Index 455
paraplegia
complicatingcoarctationrepair
205
complicating thoracic aortic
surgery 314–15, 315
paroxysmal cold hemoglobinuria
371
partially anomalous pulmonary
venous return (PAPVR)
197
partial thromboplastin time,
activated (aPTT) 17, 88,
368
patent ductus arteriosus (PDA)
201, 201–2
anesthetic management 195,
201–2
coarctation of aorta 203, 204,
205
hypoplastic left heart
syndrome 242
interrupted aortic arch 250
TEE 68
tetralogy of Fallot with
pulmonary atresia 243,
244, 244
transposition of great arteries
214, 215, 218
patent foramen ovale (PFO)
detection of patency 86
mechanical assist device
insertion 403–4
total anomalous pulmonary
venous return 221
transposition of great arteries
214, 215
PCWP see pulmonary capillary
wedge pressure
PDA see patent ductus arteriosus
peak pressure gradients,
estimation 83
pediatric patients
arterial cannulation 44, 45–6
blood volumes 337, 338
cardiac catheterization 20
cardiovascular physiology
167–71
central venous access 46, 48,
189
CPB see under
cardiopulmonary bypass
DHCA 346, 425, 427–8
heart transplantation 252,
258, 260
lung transplantation 273,
274, 280
mechanical circulatory support
392, 401, 402
myocardial preservation
techniques 422–4
psychological considerations
182–3
pulmonary artery catheters
49, 50
TEE 65, 87, 191
see also congenital heart
disease; neonates
PEEP see positive end expiratory
pressure
pentobarbital 188
performance factor, heat
exchangers 333
perfusion pressure, CPB 323,
349
deﬁbrillation 354–5
renal function 352
pericardial disease 289–303
diastolic pressure–volume
curves 27, 27–8
etiology 297–301
pericardial effusions 289, 290–6
anesthetic technique 294–6,
295
diagnosis 291, 291–2, 292
malignant 294, 300–1
percutaneous
pericardiocentesis 293–4
surgical treatment 294
uremic 294, 298
pericardial knock 296
pericardial tamponade 289
anesthetic technique 294–6,
295
diagnosis 53, 291, 291–2
hemodynamic effects 290–3,
293
percutaneous
pericardiocentesis 293–4
surgical treatment 294
pericardial window 294
pericardiectomy
constrictive pericarditis 301–2
pericardial tamponade 294
pericardiocentesis 293–4, 295
pericardioscopy 294
pericarditis
constrictive see constrictive
pericarditis
idiopathic 299
infectious 298–9
post-myocardial infarction
299
pericardium
aspirated blood from 333
closure after cardiac surgery
301, 369
compliance curve 290, 290
normal physiology 289–90,
290
peripheral intravenous (IV)
access, coronary
revascularization 110
peripheral vascular disease 346,
382
peripheral vascular resistancesee
systemic vascular
resistance
PFO see patent foramen ovale
PGI2 see prostacyclin
pH
pulmonary vascular resistance
180
regulation during CPB 347–8
see also acid-base management
phentolamine 427
phenylephrine 105, 106
aortic valve surgery 141–2
congenital heart disease 186
coronary revascularization
110, 112, 120
CPB management 351
heart transplantation 262
mitral valve surgery 153–4
tetralogy of Fallot 209, 212
phosphodiesterase III (PDE III)
inhibitors 122, 123
pH-stat acid-base management
CPB 347, 347–8
DHCA 426, 427
Pierce–Donachy VADsee
Thoratec VAD system
Plasmalyte 337–8
plasmapheresis, cold agglutinins
372
plasmin 365, 437
plasminogen 365
platelet aggregometry 89
platelet counts 18, 88
post-CPB period 364
platelet dysfunction 18–19
after CPB 362–3
assessment 18
congenital heart disease 19
medication-induced 18
qualitative 18–19
uremia-associated 13, 18–19,
298
plateletfactor 4(PF4) 341,372
antibodies 372, 373
plateletglycoprotein(GP)IIb/IIIa
inhibitors 16, 18, 363
plateletglycoprotein(GP)IIb/IIIa
receptors 363
platelet transfusions 364
pleural pressure 54Alice Nelson Dinardo: “index” — 2007/7/16 — 12:41 — page 456 — #18
456 Index
point of care testing (POCT),
post-CPB bleeding 369,
370
positive end expiratory pressure
(PEEP) 54
congenital heart disease 180
lung transplantation 284, 285
post-CPB management 358–69
antiﬁbrinolytic agents 365–9
aortic regurgitation 147–8
aortic stenosis 132, 132–3,
142–3
ASD, VSD and AVC defects
196, 196, 198–9
coagulation tests 88
coronary revascularization
119–24
decannulation 369
Fontan procedure 238–9, 240
heart transplantation 264–7
hemostatic problems 362–9
interrupted aortic arch 250–1
lung transplantation 286
mitral valve surgery 154–5,
160–1
protamine administration
358–62
pulmonary atresia with intact
ventricular septum
247–8
single ventricle lesions 231–2,
234–6
tetralogy of Fallot 212–13
total anomalous pulmonary
venous return 222–3
transposition of great arteries
219–20
truncus arteriosus 249
posterior descending artery 32,
33
postoperative analgesia, CABG
116–17, 118
postoperative period, myocardial
ischemia 120
potassium
balance, termination of CPB
354, 355
cardioplegia solutions
412–13, 419
reperfusion solutions 417–18
replacement 14
serum, disturbances 4, 13–14
Potts shunt 209–10
prednisone 268
pregnancy test 16
preinduction phase
aortic surgery 319
aortic valve surgery 140,
146–7
congenital heart disease
186–92
constrictive pericarditis 302–3
coronary revascularization
110–11
heart transplantation 260–1
lung transplantation 279–80
mitral valve surgery 153,
159–60
pericardial effusion 295
preload
after LVAD implantation 405
assessment 55, 72–3
ejection fraction 30
to mechanical circulatory
assist devices 406
myocardial oxygen demand
94
optimization
coronary revascularization
111, 121
CPB termination 357
pressure–volume loops 24, 24
reserve 25, 26
after CABG 121
aortic regurgitation 145,
148
aortic stenosis 136, 136–7
dilated cardiomyopathy
256
mitral regurgitation 158
mitral stenosis 150, 151–2,
154
neonates 171
preload recruitable stroke work
(PRSW) 25, 31, 357
premature ventricular
contractions (PVCs) 2, 59
premedication
CABG 109–10
congenital heart disease
187–8, 188
constrictive pericarditis 302
heart transplantation 260
lung transplantation 278–9
mitral regurgitation 159
pericardial effusion 295
thoracic aortic surgery
318–19
valvular heart disease 130–2
preoperative evaluation 1–19
CABG patients 106–9
cardiovascular 1–10
congenital heart disease
182–6
endocrine 14–16
hematologic 16–19
renal function 13–14
respiratory 11–13
valvular heart disease 129–30
pressure gradients
cardiac catheterization
35–6, 36
Doppler measurement 63, 64
peak, estimation 83
pressure half-time (PHT) 65, 65
aortic regurgitation 81
mitral stenosis 78, 78
pressure rate quotient (PRQ)
104
pressure–volume loops,
ventricular 23, 23–6, 24,
25, 26
aortic regurgitation 143–5,
144
aortic stenosis 135–6, 136
mitral regurgitation 28,
156–8, 157
mitral stenosis 149, 150
prime, CPB circuit 337–9
prior cardiac surgery
heart transplantation after
259–60
pericardial disease 301, 302,
303
procainamide, congenital heart
disease 186
propofol
aortic surgery 320
aortic valve surgery 140
congenital heart disease 193
coronary revascularization
113, 114
propranolol 104
"Tet spells" 209
prostacyclin(PGI2, epoprostenol)
aerosolized 181, 267
for CPB 18, 374
heart transplant recipients
266–7
idiopathic pulmonary arterial
hypertension 275
lung transplantation 285
prostaglandin E1 (PGE1)
aerosolized 181
congenital heart disease 186
ductus arteriosus maintenance
168, 170
coarctation of aorta 203,
205
single ventricle lesions 226,
230
tetralogy of Fallot with
pulmonary atresia 244
transposition of great
arteries 215, 218
heart transplantation 257,
266–7Alice Nelson Dinardo: “index” — 2007/7/16 — 12:41 — page 457 — #19
Index 457
lung transplantation 285
mitral valve surgery 155
post-CPB management 361
prostaglandin E2 (PGE2)374
prosthetic heart valves
mitral position 154, 154
patient mismatch (VP-PM)
134
special considerations 133–4
TEE evaluation 82, 82
protamine 358–65
adverse reactions 359–61
allergic reactions 360–1, 362
causes of impaired hemostasis
after 362–5
dose determination methods
88, 359
recommended use 361–2
protamine dose assay (PDAO)
362
protamine response test (PRT)
359
prothrombin time (PT) 17, 88
proximal isovolemic surface area
(PISA) method 78
pseudoaneurysms, aortic 308
pseudonormalization, LV
diastolic function 75, 75
pseudoxanthoma elasticum 143
psychological considerations,
congenital heart disease
182–3
pulmonary alveolar pressure
(Palv) 51
pulmonary arterial hypertension
(PAH)
aortic regurgitation 145
aortic stenosis 138
assessment 40–1, 41
congenital heart disease
179–80
management 180–1
idiopathic (IPAH) 273, 274–5
mitral regurgitation 158
mitral stenosis 150, 151, 153,
154–5
total anomalous pulmonary
venous return 223
pulmonary artery
clamping, lung transplantation
285
orientation and identity,
TEE 85
rupture 59
pulmonary artery (PA)
banding
single ventricle lesions 226
transposition of great arteries
218
pulmonary artery catheters
(PACs) 48–59
aortic valve surgery 140
components 48–9
coronary revascularization
110–11
efﬁcacy and complications
58–9
emergency CABG 118, 119
heart transplantation 260
hemodynamic proﬁles 58, 59
lung transplantation 279
measurements 51–8
mitral valve surgery 153
placement 49–51
TEE evaluation 87
pulmonary artery diastolic
pressure (PADP) 49, 50
pulmonary artery occlusion
pressure (PAOP) 22–3,
28
pulmonary artery pressure (PAP)
40
mean (mPAP)
determination 54
Doppler estimation 83
resistancecalculations 22–3
measurement 54
vs.PCWP 53
pulmonary artery systolic
pressure (PASP) 49, 50,
83
pulmonary artery wedge
angiogram 40
pulmonary atresia
with intact ventricular septum
(PA/IVS) 225, 245–8
anatomy 245, 246
anesthetic management
247
physiology 172, 175, 245–6
post-CPB management
247–8
surgical therapy 246–7
tetralogy of Fallot with
(TOF/PA) 175, 243–5,
244
with tricuspid atresia 175,
227, 228
pulmonary blood ﬂow (QP ) 39,
172
effective (QPeff ) 39, 172, 173
single ventricle physiology
172, 225–6
transposition of great arteries
174, 176
tricuspid atresia 228, 241
pulmonary blood ﬂow:systemic
blood ﬂow ratio (QP:QS)
39, 174, 176
after bidirectional Glenn 234,
236
pulmonary arterial
hypertension 40–1
single ventricle physiology
228, 228–9, 229, 230, 231
total anomalous pulmonary
venous return 221, 222
tricuspid atresia 241
pulmonary capillary wedge
pressure (PCWP) 51
aortic regurgitation 146, 147
aortic surgery 321, 321–2
aortic valve surgery 140
atrial septum movement
predicting 83
A wave 52
coronary blood ﬂow 90, 93
coronary revascularization
111
mean 54
measurement 49, 50
mitral regurgitation 159–60
mitral stenosis 153
myocardial ischemia diagnosis
102
vs.PAP 53
see also left atrial pressure
pulmonary dysfunction 12
pulmonary edema
afterlungtransplantation 285
after pericardial effusion
drainage 296
protamine-induced 361
reperfusion, lung
transplantation 286
total anomalous pulmonary
venous return 222
pulmonary ﬁbrosis, idiopathic
273, 274
pulmonary function,
preoperative assessment
11–13
pulmonary function tests (PFTs)
11, 12
pulmonary hypertension
primary see pulmonary arterial
hypertension (PAH),
idiopathic
protamine-induced 360, 361
pulmonary infarction 59
pulmonary regurgitation (PR)
162–3, 163
peak pressure gradient
estimation 83
TEE 82Alice Nelson Dinardo: “index” — 2007/7/16 — 12:41 — page 458 — #20
458 Index
pulmonary stenosis (TS) 82,
162
with restrictive VSD 226
tetralogy of Fallot 207, 208
transposition of great arteries
214, 215
tricuspid atresia with 175,
227, 228
pulmonary valve 162–3
aortic valve replacementsee
Ross procedure
assessment, VAD insertion
404
TEE evaluation 81–2
tetralogy of Fallot 207
pulmonary vascular occlusive
disease (PVOD) 40, 41,
275
atrioventricular canal (AVC)
defects 200, 201
congenital heart lesions
179–80
dilated cardiomyopathy 256
mitral stenosis 150, 151
post-CPB management 196
total anomalous pulmonary
venous return 222, 223
transposition of great arteries
215
truncus arteriosus 248
ventricular septal defects 195
pulmonary vascular resistance
(PVR) 22–3
changes at birth 170
congenital heart disease
179–80
control 180–1
CPB termination 356
dilated cardiomyopathy
256–7
mitral stenosis 150, 151,
154–5
pre-heart transplant
assessment 257
pulmonary vascular
resistance:systemic
vascular resistance
(PVR:SVR) ratio 177–9,
178, 179
tetralogy of Fallot 211
total anomalous pulmonary
venous return 222
transposition of great arteries
218–19
pulmonary vasculature
assessment of anatomy 23
cardiac catheterization
evaluation 40–1
changes at birth 170
congenital heart lesions
179–80
pulmonary vasodilator therapy
congenital heart disease
180–1
heart transplant recipients
266–7
mitral valve surgery 155
single ventricle lesions 231–2,
235, 239
pulmonary veins
obstruction
congenital heart disease
180
pulmonary arterial
hypertension 40, 41
total anomalous pulmonary
venous return 221–3
TEE views 68, 69
total anomalous returnsee
total anomalous
pulmonary venous return
pulmonary vein wedge
angiogram 40
pulmonary venous congestion,
ventricular septal defects
195
pulmonary venous ﬂow
Doppler assessment 74, 74–5
optimizing, single ventricle
lesions 226–7
velocity 83
pulmonary venous pressure
(Pv) 51
pulmonary venous return
(PVR) 59
pulmonic valvesee pulmonary
valve
pulsed-wave (PW) Doppler 62,
62
pulse oximetry 42
pulse repetition frequency (PRF)
62, 63
pulsus paradoxus 292–3, 293
pumps, CPB 327, 327–8
pupils, assessment 343
Q10 345, 425
QP see pulmonary blood ﬂow
QP:QS see pulmonary blood
ﬂow:systemic blood ﬂow
ratio
QS see systemic blood ﬂow
rabbit antithymocyteγ-globulin
(RATG) 268
radial artery cannulation 44–5,
45
coronary revascularization
110
radiation-induced pericardial
disease 300–1
radicular artery of Adamkiewicz
312, 314
radionuclide angiography 9–10
combined with perfusion
scintigraphy 9
equilibrium (ERNA) 9–10
ﬁrst pass (FPRNA) 9–10
radionuclideventriculography 9
ranitidine 260, 279
Rashkind–Miller balloon atrial
septostomy 227
Rastelli procedure 218, 218
rate-pressureproduct(RPP) 103
rectal temperature monitoring
342–3
red cell mass (RCM)
blood products 338
CPB (RCMCPB) 338
patient (RCMP ) 338
red cells,
technetium-99m-labeled
9
regional analgesia/anesthesia
coronary revascularization
116–17, 118
valve surgery 132
regional low ﬂow perfusion
(RLFP) 428
regional wall motion
abnormalities (RWMA)
102–3
left ventriculography 21–2
pre-CABG evaluation 106–7,
109
stress-induced 10
TEE 71, 73–4
regurgitant fraction 37
rejection
heart transplants 271–2
lung transplants 287
relaxation, ventricular 28
pressure–volume curves 27,
28
TEE 74, 75, 75
remaceamide 432
renal failure
acute postoperativesee acute
renal failure
platelet dysfunction 13,
18–19
uremic pericardial effusions
294, 298Alice Nelson Dinardo: “index” — 2007/7/16 — 12:41 — page 459 — #21
Index 459
renal function 432–4
during CPB 350–1, 352, 429
effects of aprotinin 368–9
preoperative assessment
13–14
renal transplant recipients 13
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone
system, dilated
cardiomyopathy 254,
255
repeat cardiac surgerysee prior
cardiac surgery
reperfusion injury
cardioplegia and 417–18, 418
pediatric patients 424
transplanted heart 264
resistances 22–3
respiratory distress, aortic lesions
309, 311
respiratory evaluation 11–13
restrictive ﬁlling pattern, TEE
74, 75, 75–6
retrograde autologous priming
(RAP) 338–9
retrograde cerebral perfusion
(RCP) 313, 318, 428–9
retrograde coronary sinus
perfusion (RCSP) 421,
421–2
reverse redistribution 8
Revised Cardiac Risk Index 1,2
rewarming 352–3, 428
rheumatic heart disease
aortic valve 135, 143
mitral stenosis 76–7, 149, 149
tricuspid stenosis 81–2
rheumatoid arthritis 299–300,
302
right atrial appendage (RAA) 85
right atrial enlargement (RAE)
4
right atrial pressure (RAP) 28,
51–4
atrial septum movement
predicting 83
A wave 51
C wave 52
mean 54
measurement 50, 51
V wave 52–3
X descentsee X descent
Y descentsee Y descent
right atrium (RA)
blood ﬂow during CPB 334
cannulation, for CPB
324–5
identiﬁcation using TEE 85
right coronary artery 32, 33
right heart catheterization 20
right-to-left shunts 172, 173
quantitation 39–40
right ventricle (RV), TEE
evaluation 85
right ventricle-dependent
coronary circulation
(RVDCC) 246, 247
right ventricular assist devices
(RVAD) 376, 379
after LVAD implantation 405,
406
cardiac output determination
407
central venous line insertion
408
insertion 404
Thoratec system 391–2
right ventricular ejection fraction
(RVEF) 56
right ventricular end-diastolic
pressure (RVEDP) 28, 54
right ventricular end-diastolic
volume (RVEDV) 56
right ventricular end-systolic
volume (RVESV) 56
right ventricular failure
after LVAD implantation 405,
406
dilated cardiomyopathy 256
heart transplant recipients
265, 266
mitral regurgitation 158, 160
mitral stenosis 150, 151, 153,
154–5
tricuspid valvular disease 162
right ventricular function
aortic regurgitation 145
aortic stenosis 138
dilated cardiomyopathy
256–7
heart transplant recipients
265
idiopathic pulmonary arterial
hypertension 275
lung transplantation 284, 286
LVAD implantation and
404–6
mitral regurgitation 158
mitral stenosis 150, 151
pre-CABG evaluation 107
TEE assessment 76
transplanted heart 269–70
right ventricular hypertrophy
(RVH) 4
right ventricular outﬂow tract
(RVOT)
obstruction, tetralogy of Fallot
206–7, 212
TEE 71, 84
right ventricular stroke work
index (RVSWI) 59
right ventricular systolic pressure
83
Ringer’s lactate solution 337–8
rocuronium
aortic surgery 319
congenital heart disease 193
coronary revascularization
113
heart transplantation 261
lung transplantation 283
Rosenthal syndrome 17
Ross procedure 133, 164
saline-contrast echocardiography
86
Sano procedure 242, 243
saphenous vein grafts
agents affecting ﬂow through
120
cardioplegia infusion 419–20
saturation see oxygen saturation
saturation threshold (SatThresh)
229–30
Scimitar syndrome 197
scopolamine 109, 119, 272
Senning procedure 216
14C-serotonin release assay
(SRA) 373
Sestamibi imaging 7, 8–9
sevoﬂurane
cardioplegia solutions 418
congenital heart disease 192,
193
heart transplantation 261
lung transplantation 283
myocardial protection 115,
116
shock
cardiogenic see cardiogenic
shock
catecholamine resistant
vasodilatory (CRVS) 407
shunts 171–2, 173
cardiac catheterization 38–40
classiﬁcation 177–9
complex 177–9, 178, 179
dependent 177
Gott 313, 316
localization 38
mechanical assist device
insertion 403–4
palliative, tetralogy of Fallot
209–10, 210
quantiﬁcation 39–40
restrictive and nonrestrictive
177, 177Alice Nelson Dinardo: “index” — 2007/7/16 — 12:41 — page 460 — #22
460 Index
shunts (Cont’d)
saline-contrast
echocardiography 86
saturation data 23, 38, 39
simple 177, 177, 178
TEE 85–6
see also aortopulmonary
shunts, surgical; superior
cavopulmonary shunt
sickle cell disease 372
sildenaﬁl 181
single ventricle lesions 175,
224–39
Fontan proceduresee Fontan
procedure
initial procedures 226–31
management of single
ventricle physiology
228–30, 232–4,233
staged approach to Fontan
procedure 225, 225–36
superior cavopulmonary
shunt/bidirectional Glenn
232–6
two-ventricle repair 224–5
single ventricle physiology
172–6, 176
anatomic subtypes 175
management 228–30, 232–4,
233
myocardial ischemia 182
shunts 179
sinoatrial (SA) node dysfunction,
heart transplant recipients
265
sinus venosus defects 197
sirolimus 268
smoking 12
Society of Cardiovascular
Anesthesiologists
mitral valve classiﬁcation
148–9
recommended TEE views 67
sodium, cardioplegia solutions
414
sodium nitroprussidesee
nitroprusside, sodium
somatosensory-evoked
potentials (SSEPs)
314–15, 316
spinal cord
blood supply 312, 314
ischemia
coarctation repair 205, 206
intraoperative monitoring
314–15, 316
thoracic aorta surgery
312–15, 315
spinal cord perfusion pressure
(SCPP) 312–14, 315
spirometry 11
square root sign, constrictive
pericarditis 297, 297
Stanford classiﬁcation, aortic
dissection 306, 306
stents, endovascular, coarctation
of aorta 204–5
steroids see corticosteroids
stiffness see elastance
stress echocardiography 7, 10
stress testing 5–7
exercise 6–7
methods compared 7
pharmacological 5–6
stroke 430–1, 432
stroke index (SI) 59
stroke volume (SV) 59
angiographic measurement
21
aortic stenosis 135, 136, 137,
138–40, 139
dilated cardiomyopathy 254,
256
Doppler measurement 64
pressure–volume loops 25–6,
26
right ventricular ejection
fraction (RVEF) catheters
56
stroke work (SW) 23, 24, 31
ST segment changes 7, 43–4
stunned myocardium 8
subaortic stenosis 218, 224
subclavian vein cannulation 46
subendocardial perfusion
congenital heart disease
181–2
during CPB 349, 350
single ventricle physiology
230
subendocardial pressure,
congenital heart disease
182
succinylcholine
aortic regurgitation 147
aortic surgery 320
congenital heart disease 193
emergency CABG 118
heart transplantation 261
lung transplantation 283
mitral valve surgery 160
suction, cardiotomy 333
sufentanil
aortic surgery 319, 320
aortic valve surgery 140–1,
142, 147
congenital heart disease 193
coronary revascularization
111, 112
emergency CABG 118
heart transplantation 261,
262
lung transplantation 283
mitral valve surgery 154, 160
pericardial disease 295–6, 303
superior cavopulmonary shunt
(bidirectional Glenn
procedure; BDG) 225,
232–6
anatomy 232, 235
anesthetic management
232–4
Fontan procedure after 237–8
post-CPB management 234–6
vs.aortopulmonary shunt
232, 234
superior vena cava (SVC)
cannulation for CPB 324
poordrainage,CPB325–6,343
pressure, after bidirectional
Glenn 236
TEE views 68, 69
supravalvular aortic stenosis
(SVAS), congenital 224
sympathetic nervous system
development at birth 171
stimulation, congenital heart
disease 181
transplanted heart 268–9
syphilis 371
systemic blood ﬂow (QS) 39, 172
during CPB 345–6,346
effective (QSeff ) 39, 172, 173
optimizing, single ventricle
lesions 227–8
single ventricle physiology
172
transposition of great arteries
174, 176
systemic inﬂammatory response
syndrome (SIRS) 433,
434–7, 435
interventions to modulate
436, 436–7
systemic lupus erythematosus
299
systemic vascular resistance
(SVR) 22–3, 24, 59
on CPB 346, 351
CPB termination 356, 357
systole, length, aortic stenosis
138, 138
systolic function 30–2, 34
impaired, newly transplanted
heart 264–5Alice Nelson Dinardo: “index” — 2007/7/16 — 12:41 — page 461 — #23
Index 461
pre-CABG evaluation 106–7,
109
TEE assessment 72–3
see also left ventricular systolic
(dys)function; right
ventricular function
TA see tricuspid atresia
tachycardia
aortic regurgitation 146
aortic stenosis 138, 138, 141,
143
coronary revascularization
112
heart transplantation 262
myocardial oxygen balance
94–5, 95, 104
preoperative 2
treatment 104–5
tacrolimus 268
TAH see total artiﬁcial heart
tamponade, pericardialsee
pericardial tamponade
TandemHeart device 376, 398,
399
technetium-99m 9
technetium-99m-labeled red
cells 9
technetium-99m
methoxyisobutyl isonitrile
see Sestamibi
TEE see transesophageal
echocardiography
temperature
afterdrop, after CPB 352–3
CPB 345, 346
DHCA 427
monitoring 43
CPB 342–3
pediatric patients 189–90
during rewarming 352
myocardial preservation 413,
422
see also hypothermia
tetralogyofFallot(TOF) 206–13
anatomy 206–7, 207, 208
anesthetic management
211–12
cyanotic 179, 207
hypoxic or hypercyanotic
episodes ("Tet spells")
208–9
physiology 179, 207
post-CPB management
212–13
preoperative evaluation
11–12
with pulmonary atresia
(TOF/PA) 175, 243–5,
244
shunting 177–9
single ventricle physiology
172, 175
surgical procedures 209–11
TGA see transposition of great
arteries
thallium-201 imaging 7, 8
THAM 413, 414, 418
theophylline 12–13
thermodilution (TD) technique,
cardiac output 21–2,
55–7
thiopental
aortic surgery 319–20
contraindications 193, 283
for DHCA 429
thoracic aortasee aorta
Thoratec VAD system 376,
390–2, 391
indications 378
insertion 391
management 391–2
in parallel 379
thrombin 365, 434
thrombin inhibitors, direct 18,
373–4
thrombin time, high dose (HiTT)
88
thrombocytopenia 18, 88
heparin-induced (HIT) 18,
372–4, 373
post-CPB period 364
thromboelastography (TEG) 89,
89, 363
thromboembolism, heart
transplant recipients 259
thrombosis 96, 97
thyroid hormone replacement
16
ticlopidine 363
tiroﬁban 18, 363, 374
tissue Doppler 75, 76
tissue plasminogen activator
(t-PA) 365
tobacco use 12
total anomalous pulmonary
venous return (TAPVR)
173, 220–3
anatomy 220–1, 221
management 222–3
total artiﬁcial heart (TAH)377,
385–90, 388, 389
anesthetic management of
recipients 406, 407, 408
bridge to heart transplantation
259, 385–6, 403
insertion 388–9, 403–4
management 389, 389–90,
390
total cavopulmonary connection
(TCPC) see Fontan
procedure
total spinal anesthesia, coronary
revascularization 117
tracheal intubation
aortic valve surgery 141
congenital heart disease 192
coronary revascularization
112
thoracic aortic surgery 320
tranexamic acid (TXA) 365, 367
dosage and administration
366
efﬁcacy 368
transbronchial biopsies 287
transcranial Doppler (TCD)
190–1
transesophageal
echocardiography (TEE)
10, 59–87
after valve surgery 82, 132,
133
aortic lesions 309–11, 310,
310
aortic surgery 321, 321–2
atrial septum movement 83
basic physics 60, 60–1
complications 87
congenital heart disease
84–6, 191
contraindications 87
CPB cannulas 87, 344
Doppler spectra measurements
64–5, 65
examination 72
heart transplantation 260–1,
266
imaging techniques 61–3
intracardiac air 82–3, 353
intracardiac and endovascular
catheters 86–7
intracardiac pressure estimates
83
lung transplantation 279–80
LV diastolic function 74–6
LV systolic function, ejection
fraction and preload
72–3
mechanical assist devices
404, 406, 408
myocardial ischemia 102–3
pericardial effusion 291, 296
probes 65–6, 66
insertion 66Alice Nelson Dinardo: “index” — 2007/7/16 — 12:41 — page 462 — #24
462 Index
transesophageal
echocardiography (TEE)
(Cont’d)
pulmonary and hepatic
venous blood ﬂow 83
regional wall motion analysis
73–4
RV function 76
saline contrast 86
thoracic aorta 83–4
transposition of great arteries
85, 220
valvular heart disease 76–82,
130, 131
views 67, 67–72, 68, 69, 70,
71, 72
transfusion of blood products
429–30
interventions to limit 430
lung transplantation 284
mechanical assist device
insertion 403
post-CPB bleeding 369, 370
risks 430
thoracic aortic surgery 319,
320
transmembrane pressure
gradient (TMP) 335
transposition of great arteries
(TGA) 213–20
anatomy 213, 213–14, 214
anesthetic management
218–19
dextro- (D-TGA) 213, 213–14
physiology 174, 176, 214–16
post-CPB management
219–20
surgical procedures 216,
216–18, 217
TEE 85, 220
tricuspid atresia with 227,
228
transpulmonary gradient (TPG)
23
single ventricle lesions 235,
236, 239
tricuspid atresia (TA) 239–41
anatomy 239–41
classiﬁcation 227, 228, 241
management 241
physiology 172, 175, 241
staged approach to Fontan
procedure 225, 225–36
tricuspid regurgitation (TR) 162
after LVAD implantation 405
cardiac catheterization 38
cardiac output determination
57
causes 162, 162
peak pressure gradient
estimation 83
TEE 81, 81, 162
tricuspidstenosis(TS) 81–2,162
tricuspid valve 161–2
assessment, VAD insertion
404
TEE 68, 81–2
triiodothyronine (T3) 258
triple index (TI) 103
trisomy 21 (Down syndrome)
11, 185, 200
tromethamine (THAM) solution
413, 414, 418
troponin I 421, 421
truncus arteriosus 248–9
anatomy 248, 248
physiology 172, 175, 248
tuberculosis, pericardial disease
296, 298
Turner syndrome 202
22q11.2 chromosomal deletion
185
two-dimensional (2-D)
echocardiography 61,
61–2
two-ventricle repair 224–5,
247, 248
tympanic membrane,
temperature monitoring
342
ultraﬁltration
continuous (CUF) 335, 336
dilutional (DUF) 336, 336–7
modiﬁed (MUF) 335–6, 337
zero-balance (ZBUF) 336,
336–7
ultraﬁltrators 335–7
ultrasound
basic physics 60, 60–1
epiaortic scanning 83, 84
guidance, internal jugular vein
cannulation 46, 47, 47
intravascular (IVUS), cardiac
allograft vasculopathy
270
umbilical artery
arterial pressure monitoring
46, 188
cardiac catheterization via 20
umbilical vein 20, 167
univentricular lesionssee single
ventricle lesions
Univent tube 281–2, 320
uremia
pericardial effusions 294, 298
platelet dysfunction 13,
18–19, 298
urinalysis 16
urine output, during CPB 350–1,
352
VACTERL association 185
vacuumassistedvenousdrainage
(VAVD) 326
VADs see ventricular assist
devices
vagolytic/vagotonic agents, heart
transplant recipients 272
Valsalva maneuver 86
valve areas
cardiac catheterization
evaluation 35, 36–7
Doppler measurement 64–5
valve prosthesis-patient
mismatch (VP-PM) 134
valvular heart disease 129–66
alternatives to surgical repair
166, 166
anesthesia induction and
maintenance 132
cardiac catheterization 23,
35–8
long-term prognosis 134
monitoring 130, 131
multiple valve lesions 163–4
postoperative TEE 82, 132,
133
premedication 130–2
preoperative evaluation 5,
129–30, 130
previouslyundiagnosed,found
during CABG 165–6
pulmonary assessment 12
special considerations 133–4
TEE monitoring 76–82, 130,
131
weaning from bypass and
post-bypass period
132–3, 354
vasectomy, protamine allergy
360
vasodilator therapy 105
aortic regurgitation 146, 147
aortic surgery 319
during CPB 351–2, 353
DHCA management 427
mitral valve surgery 154, 160
see also pulmonary vasodilator
therapy
vasopressin 110, 259, 407
VATER association 185
vecuronium
aortic surgery 319
aortic valve surgery 141, 147
congenital heart disease
192–3Alice Nelson Dinardo: “index” — 2007/7/16 — 12:41 — page 463 — #25
Index 463
coronary revascularization
112, 113
heart transplantation 261
lung transplantation 283
velocardiofacial syndrome 185
velocity, red blood cell ﬂow
60–1
velocity–time integral (VTI)
64–5, 65
vena contracta 79
venous cannulas for CPB 324–5
placement 342
removal 369
TEE evaluation 87
venous drainage, for CPB 323–6
assessment 343
assisted 326
ventilation
circulatory assist device
recipients 407
congenital heart disease 186,
192
discontinuation, start of CPB
344
lung transplant recipients 286
monitoring methods 42
resumption, after CPB 356
thoracic aortic lesions 311–12
ventilatory interventions
control of PVR 180, 181, 239,
267
single ventricle physiology
230–1, 234–5
venting, during CPB 333–5,
334, 344, 422
ventricular arrhythmias, heart
transplantrecipients 259,
271
ventricular assist devices (VAD)
376, 377, 379, 390–401
anesthetic management of
recipients 404–8
insertion 403–4
in parallel/in series 379, 379
TEE evaluation 87
triggering modes/percentage
of systole 380–1
see also left ventricular assist
devices; speciﬁc devices
ventricular distension, during
CPB
myocardial oxygen delivery
349
venting 333–4, 344
ventricular failure 375
see also heart failure
ventricular ﬁbrillation, during
CPB 349, 350, 350, 351
ventricular remodeling, dilated
cardiomyopathy 253–4
ventricular rupture, mitral valve
replacement 155
ventricular septal defects (VSD)
194–6
anatomy 194, 194
anesthetic management 195,
195
physiology 194–5
post-CPB management 196,
196
repaired, TEE evaluation 86,
191
surgical therapy 195
tetralogy of Fallot 207, 207,
211, 212
transposition of great arteries
214, 215
tricuspid atresia with 227,
228
video-assisted thoracoscopic
surgery (VATS) 201, 202
viral pericarditis 298
vital capacity (VC) 12
Vo2max 6
volatile anesthetic agents
aortic stenosis 142
coronary revascularization
113
CPB management 351–2, 353
myocardial protection 99,
100, 115–16, 116
see also individual agents
volume infusionsee ﬂuid
management
von Willebrand factor (vWF)
363, 364–5
VSD see ventricular septal defects
V waves 51, 52–3
mitral regurgitation 37–8, 52,
53
wall motion abnormalitiessee
regional wall motion
abnormalities
wall segments
blood supply 32, 32–3
left ventriculography 21, 31,
32
TEE imaging 73, 73
wall tension, myocardial 93–4
neonates 423
Waterston shunt 209–10, 210
Williams–Beurin syndrome 224
X descent 51, 53–4, 290, 290
constrictive pericarditis 297,
297
pericardial tamponade 291,
291
Y descent 51, 53–4, 290, 290
constrictive pericarditis 297,
297
pericardial tamponade 291,
291