Dan L. Longo, md
Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School;  
Senior Physician, Brigham and Women’s Hospital;  
Deputy Editor, New England Journal of Medicine,  
Boston, Massachusetts
Dennis L. Kasper, md
William Ellery Channing Professor of Medicine,  
Professor of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics,  
Harvard Medical School; Director, Channing Laboratory,  
Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital,  
Boston, Massachusetts
J. Larry Jameson, md, PhD
Robert G. Dunlop Professor of Medicine;  
Dean, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine;  
Executive Vice-President of the University of Pennsylvania  
for the Health System, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
Anthony S. Fauci, md
Chief, Laboratory of Immunoregulation; 
Director, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, 
National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, Maryland
Stephen L. Hauser, md
Robert A. Fishman Distinguished Professor 
and Chairman, Department of Neurology, 
University of California, San Francisco, 
San Francisco, California
Joseph Loscalzo, md, PhD
Hersey Professor of the Theory and Practice of Medicine, 
Harvard Medical School; Chairman, Department of Medicine; 
Physician-in-Chief, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, 
Boston, Massachusetts
Derived from Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 18th Edition
Editor
Joseph Loscalzo, MD, PhD
Hersey Professor of the Theory and Practice of Medicine, Harvard Medical School;  
Chairman, Department of Medicine; Physician-in-Chief, Brigham and Women’s Hospital,  
Boston, Massachusetts
New York    Chicago    San Francisco    Lisbon    London    Madrid    Mexico City  
Milan    New Delhi    San Juan    Seoul    Singapore    Sydney    Toronto
2nd Edition
HARRISON’S
TM
Cardiovascular 
Medicine
Copyright © 2013 by McGraw-Hill Education, LLC. All rights reserved. Except as permitted under the United States Copyright Act of 1976, no part of this publica-
tion may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the prior written permission of the publisher.
ISBN: 978-0-07-181499-7
MHID: 0-07-181499-X
The material in this eBook also appears in the print version of this title: ISBN: 978-0-07-181498-0,    
MHID: 0-07-181498-1.
All trademarks are trademarks of their respective owners. Rather than put a trademark symbol after every occurrence of a trademarked name, we use names in an 
editorial fashion only, and to the beneﬁ t of the trademark owner, with no intention of infringement of the trademark. Where such designations appear in this book, 
they have been printed with initial caps.
McGraw-Hill Education eBooks are available at special quantity discounts to use as premiums and sales promotions, or for use in corporate training programs. To 
contact a representative please e-mail us at bulksales@mcgraw-hill.com.
Dr. Fauci’s work as an editor and author was performed outside the scope of his employment as a U.S. government employee. This work represents his personal and
professional views and not necessarily those of the U.S. government.
This book was set in Bembo by Cenveo® Publisher Services. The editors were James F. Shanahan and Kim J. Davis. The production supervisor was Catherine 
H. Saggese. Project management was provided by Tania Andrabi, Cenveo Publisher Services. The cover design was by Thomas DePierro. Cover illustration, the 
coronary vessels of the heart, © MedicalRF.com/Corbis.
TERMS OF USE
This is a copyrighted work and McGraw-Hill Education, LLC. and its licensors reserve all rights in and to the work. Use of this work is subject to these terms. 
Except as permitted under the Copyright Act of 1976 and the right to store and retrieve one copy of the work, you may not decompile, disassemble, reverse engineer, 
reproduce, modify, create derivative works based upon, transmit, distribute, disseminate, sell, publish or sublicense the work or any part of it without McGraw-Hill 
Education’s prior consent. You may use the work for your own noncommercial and personal use; any other use of the work is strictly prohibited. Your right to use 
the work may be terminated if you fail to comply with these terms.
THE WORK IS PROVIDED “AS IS.” McGRAW-HILL EDUCATION AND ITS LICENSORS MAKE NO GUARANTEES OR WARRANTIES AS TO THE 
ACCURACY, ADEQUACY OR COMPLETENESS OF OR RESULTS TO BE OBTAINED FROM USING THE WORK, INCLUDING ANY INFORMATION 
THAT CAN BE ACCESSED THROUGH THE WORK VIA HYPERLINK OR OTHERWISE, AND EXPRESSLY DISCLAIM ANY WARRANTY, EXPRESS 
OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
McGraw-Hill Education and its licensors do not warrant or guarantee that the functions contained in the work will meet your requirements or that its operation will 
be uninterrupted or error free. Neither McGraw-Hill Education nor its licensors shall be liable to you or anyone else for any inaccuracy, error or omission, regardless 
of cause, in the work or for any damages resulting therefrom. McGraw-Hill Education has no responsibility for the content of any information accessed through 
the work. Under no circumstances shall McGraw-Hill Education and/or its licensors be liable for any indirect, incidental, special, punitive, consequential or similar 
damages that result from the use of or inability to use the work, even if any of them has been advised of the possibility of such damages. This limitation of liability 
shall apply to any claim or cause whatsoever whether such claim or cause arises in contract, tort or otherwise.
v
Contributors. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . vii
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ix
SECTION I
Introduction to Cardiovascular  
Disorders
  1	 Basic Biology of the Cardiovascular System. . . . . . 2
Joseph Loscalzo, Peter Libby, Jonathan Epstein
  2	 Epidemiology of Cardiovascular Disease. . . . . . . 20
Thomas A. Gaziano, J. Michael Gaziano
  3	 Approach to the Patient with Possible 
Cardiovascular Disease. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
Joseph Loscalzo
SECTION II
Diagnosis of Cardiovascular  
Disorders
  4	 Chest Discomfort . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
Thomas H. Lee
  5	 Dyspnea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
Richard M. Schwartzstein
  6	 Hypoxia and Cyanosis. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
Joseph Loscalzo
  7	 Edema . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
Eugene Braunwald, Joseph Loscalzo
  8	 Palpitations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
Joseph Loscalzo
  9	 Physical Examination of 
the Cardiovascular System. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
Patrick T. O’Gara, Joseph Loscalzo
10	 Approach to the Patient with a Heart Murmur. . . 76
Patrick T. O’Gara, Joseph Loscalzo
11	 Electrocardiography. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89
Ary L. Goldberger
12	 Noninvasive Cardiac Imaging: 
Echocardiography, Nuclear Cardiology,  
and MRI/CT Imaging. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
Rick A. Nishimura, Panithaya Chareonthaitawee,  
Matthew Martinez
13	 Diagnostic Cardiac Catheterization and 
Coronary Angiography. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117
Jane A. Leopold, David P. Faxon
SECTION III
Heart Rhythm Disturbances
14	 Principles of Electrophysiology. . . . . . . . . . . . . 128
David D. Spragg, Gordon F. Tomaselli
15	 The Bradyarrhythmias. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 137
David D. Spragg, Gordon F. Tomaselli
16	 The Tachyarrhythmias. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 151
Francis Marchlinski
SECTION IV
Disorders of the heart
17	 Heart Failure and Cor Pulmonale. . . . . . . . . . . 182
Douglas L. Mann, Murali Chakinala
18	 Cardiac Transplantation and 
Prolonged Assisted Circulation. . . . . . . . . . . . . 201
Sharon A. Hunt, Hari R. Mallidi
19	 Congenital Heart Disease in the Adult. . . . . . . 207
John S. Child, Jamil Aboulhosn
20	 Valvular Heart Disease. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 219
Patrick O’Gara, Joseph Loscalzo
21	 Cardiomyopathy and Myocarditis. . . . . . . . . . . 248
Lynne Warner Stevenson, Joseph Loscalzo
22	 Pericardial Disease. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 273
Eugene Braunwald
23	 Tumors and Trauma of the Heart. . . . . . . . . . . 284
Eric H. Awtry, Wilson S. Colucci
24	 Cardiac Manifestations of Systemic Disease. . . . 289
Eric H. Awtry, Wilson S. Colucci
25	 Infective Endocarditis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 294
Adolf W. Karchmer
26	 Acute Rheumatic Fever. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 309
Jonathan R. Carapetis
27	 Chagas’ Disease. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 316
Louis V. Kirchhoff, Anis Rassi, Jr.
Contents
Contents
28	 Cardiogenic Shock and Pulmonary Edema. . . . 320
Judith S. Hochman, David H. Ingbar
29	 Cardiovascular Collapse, Cardiac Arrest, and 
Sudden Cardiac Death. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 328
Robert J. Myerburg, Agustin Castellanos
SECTION V
Disorders of the vasculature
30	 The Pathogenesis, Prevention, and 
Treatment of Atherosclerosis. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 340
Peter Libby
31	 Disorders of Lipoprotein Metabolism. . . . . . . . 353
Daniel J. Rader, Helen H. Hobbs
32	 The Metabolic Syndrome . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 377
Robert H. Eckel
33	 Ischemic Heart Disease . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 385
Elliott M. Antman, Andrew P. Selwyn,  
Joseph Loscalzo
34	 Unstable Angina and Non-ST-Segment 
Elevation Myocardial Infarction. . . . . . . . . . . . 407
Christopher P. Cannon, Eugene Braunwald
35	 ST-Segment Elevation Myocardial Infarction. . . 415
Elliott M. Antman, Joseph Loscalzo
36	 Percutaneous Coronary Interventions and 
Other Interventional Procedures . . . . . . . . . . . 434
David P. Faxon, Deepak L. Bhatt
37	 Hypertensive Vascular Disease. . . . . . . . . . . . . 443
Theodore A. Kotchen
38	 Diseases of the Aorta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 467
Mark A. Creager, Joseph Loscalzo
39	 Vascular Diseases of the Extremities. . . . . . . . . 476
Mark A. Creager, Joseph Loscalzo
40	 Pulmonary Hypertension. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 490
Stuart Rich
SECTION VI
Cardiovascular Atlases
41	 Atlas of Electrocardiography. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 500
Ary L. Goldberger
42	 Atlas of Noninvasive Cardiac Imaging . . . . . . . 517
Rick A. Nishimura, Panithaya Chareonthaitawee,  
Matthew Martinez
43	 Atlas of Cardiac Arrhythmias. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 526
Ary L. Goldberger
44	 Atlas of Percutaneous Revascularization. . . . . . 539
Jane A. Leopold, Deepak L. Bhatt,  
David P. Faxon
Appendix 
	
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance. . . . . . . . 549
Alexander Kratz, Michael A. Pesce,  
Robert C. Basner, Andrew J. Einstein
Review and Self-Assessment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 575
Charles Wiener, Cynthia D. Brown,  
Anna R. Hemnes
Index. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 615
vi
vii
Jamil Aboulhosn, MD
Assistant Professor, Departments of Medicine and Pediatrics,  
David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California,  
Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California [19]
Elliott M. Antman, MD
Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Brigham and 
Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts [33, 35]
Eric H. Awtry, MD
Assistant Professor of Medicine, Boston University School of  
Medicine; Inpatient Clinical Director, Section of Cardiology,  
Boston Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts [23, 24]
Robert C. Basner, MD
Professor of Clinical Medicine, Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and 
Critical Care Medicine, Columbia University College of Physicians 
and Surgeons, New York, New York [Appendix]
Deepak L. Bhatt, MD, MPH
Associate Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Chief 
of Cardiology, VA Boston Healthcare System; Director, Integrated 
Interventional Cardiovascular Program, Brigham and Women’s 
Hospital and VA Boston Healthcare System; Senior Investigator, 
TIMI Study Group, Boston, Massachusetts [36, 44]
Eugene Braunwald, MD, MA (Hon), ScD (Hon) FRCP
Distinguished Hersey Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical 
School; Founding Chairman, TIMI Study Group, Brigham and 
Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts [7, 22, 34]
Cynthia D. Brown, MD
Assistant Professor of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary and Critical 
Care Medicine, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia 
[Review and Self-Assessment]
Christopher P. Cannon, MD
Associate Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Senior 
Investigator, TIMI Study Group, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, 
Boston, Massachusetts [34]
Jonathan Carapetis, PhD, MBBS, FRACP, FAFPHM
Director, Menzies School of Health Research, Charles Darwin  
University, Darwin, Australia [26]
Agustin Castellanos, MD
Professor of Medicine, and Director, Clinical Electrophysiology, 
Division of Cardiology, University of Miami Miller School of 
Medicine, Miami, Florida [29]
Murali Chakinala, MD
Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary and  
Critical Care Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, 
St. Louis, Missouri [17]
Panithaya Chareonthaitawee, MD
Associate Professor of Medicine, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, 
Rochester, Minnesota [12, 42]
John S. Child, MD, FACC, FAHA, FASE
Streisand Professor of Medicine and Cardiology, Geffen School of 
Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA); Director, 
Ahmanson-UCLA Adult Congenital Heart Disease Center; Director, 
UCLA Adult Noninvasive Cardiodiagnostics Laboratory, Ronald 
Reagan-UCLA Medical Center, Los Angeles, California [19]
Wilson S. Colucci, MD
Thomas J. Ryan Professor of Medicine, Boston University School 
of Medicine; Chief of Cardiovascular Medicine, Boston Medical 
Center, Boston, Massachusetts [23, 24]
Mark A. Creager, MD
Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Simon C. Fireman  
Scholar in Cardiovascular Medicine; Director, Vascular Center, 
Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts [38, 39]
Robert H. Eckel, MD
Professor of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism and 
Diabetes, Division of Cardiology; Professor of Physiology and  
Biophysics, Charles A. Boettcher, II Chair in Atherosclerosis,  
University of Colorado School of Medicine, Anschutz Medical 
Campus, Director Lipid Clinic, University of Colorado Hospital, 
Aurora, Colorado [32]
Andrew J. Einstein, MD, PhD
Assistant Professor of Clinical Medicine, Columbia University  
College of Physicians and Surgeons; Department of Medicine,  
Division of Cardiology, Department of Radiology, Columbia  
University Medical Center and New York-Presbyterian Hospital, 
New York, New York [Appendix]
Jonathan A. Epstein, MD, DTMH
William Wikoff Smith Professor of Medicine; Chairman,  
Department of Cell and Developmental Biology; Scientific Director, 
Cardiovascular Institute, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania [1]
David P. Faxon, MD
Senior Lecturer, Harvard Medical School; Vice Chair of Medicine 
for Strategic Planning, Department of Medicine, Brigham and 
Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts [13, 36, 44]
J. Michael Gaziano, MD, MPH
Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Chief, Division of 
Aging, Brigham and Women’s Hospital; Director, Massachusetts 
Veterans Epidemiology Center, Boston VA Healthcare System, 
Boston, Massachusetts [2]
Thomas A. Gaziano, MD, MSc
Assistant Professor, Harvard Medical School; Assistant Professor,  
Health Policy and Management, Center for Health Decision  
Sciences, Harvard School of Public Health; Associate Physician in 
Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Cardiology, Brigham and 
Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts [2]
Ary L. Goldberger, MD
Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Wyss Institute for 
Biologically Inspired Engineering, Harvard University; Beth Israel 
Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts [11, 41, 43]
Anna R. Hemnes, MD
Assistant Professor, Division of Allergy, Pulmonary, and Critical 
Care Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, 
Tennessee [Review and Self-Assessment]
CONTRIBUTORS
Numbers in brackets refer to the chapter(s) written or cowritten by the contributor.
Contributors
viii
Helen H. Hobbs, MD
Professor of Internal Medicine and Molecular Genetics, University 
of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas; Investigator, 
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, Maryland [31]
Judith S. Hochman, MD
Harold Snyder Family Professor of Cardiology; Clinical Chief,  
Leon Charney Division of Cardiology; Co-Director, NYU-HHC 
Clinical and Translational Science Institute; Director, Cardiovascular 
Clinical Research Center, New York University School of  
Medicine, New York, New York [28]
Sharon A. Hunt, MD, FACC
Professor, Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Stanford University, 
Palo Alto, California [18]
David H. Ingbar, MD
Professor of Medicine, Pediatrics, and Physiology; Director,  
Pulmonary Allergy, Critical Care and Sleep Division, University of 
Minnesota School of Medicine, Minneapolis, Minnesota [28]
Adolf W. Karchmer, MD
Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Division of  
Infectious Diseases, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center,  
Boston, Massachusetts [25]
Louis V. Kirchhoff, MD, MPH
Professor of Internal Medicine (Infectious Diseases) and Epidemiology, 
Department of Internal Medicine, The University of Iowa,  
Iowa City, Iowa [27]
Theodore A. Kotchen, MD
Professor Emeritus, Department of Medicine; Associate Dean for 
Clinical Research, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, 
Wisconsin [37]
Alexander Kratz, MD, PhD, MPH
Associate Professor of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia  
University College of Physicians and Surgeons; Director, Core 
Laboratory, Columbia University Medical Center, New York,  
New York [Appendix]
Thomas H. Lee, MD, MSc
Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Network President, 
Partners Healthcare System, Boston, Massachusetts [4]
Jane A. Leopold, MD
Associate Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School;  
Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts [13, 44]
Peter Libby, MD
Mallinckrodt Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School;  
Chief, Cardiovascular Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, 
Boston, Massachusetts [1, 30]
Joseph Loscalzo, MD, PhD
Hersey Professor of the Theory and Practice of Medicine,  
Harvard Medical School; Chairman, Department of Medicine; 
Physician-in-Chief, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston,  
Massachusetts [1, 3, 6–10, 20, 21, 33, 35, 38, 39]
Hari R. Mallidi, MD
Assistant Professor of Cardiothoracic Surgery; Director of  
Mechanical Circulatory Support, Stanford University Medical  
Center, Stanford, California [18]
Douglas L. Mann, MD
Lewin Chair and Chief, Cardiovascular Division; Professor of  
Medicine, Cell Biology and Physiology, Washington University 
School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri [17]
Francis Marchlinski, MD
Professor of Medicine; Director, Cardiac Electrophysiology, University 
of Pennsylvania Health System, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania [16]
Matthew Martinez, MD
Lehigh Valley Physician Group, Lehigh Valley Heart Specialists,  
Allentown, Pennsylvania [12, 42]
Robert J. Myerburg, MD
Professor, Departments of Medicine and Physiology, Division of 
Cardiology; AHA Chair in Cardiovascular Research, University of 
Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, Florida [29]
Rick A. Nishimura, MD, FACC, FACP
Judd and Mary Morris Leighton Professor of Cardiovascular Diseases; 
Professor of Medicine; Consultant, Division of Cardiovascular 
Diseases and Internal Medicine, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, 
Rochester, Minnesota [12, 42]
Patrick T. O’Gara, MD
Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Director, Clinical 
Cardiology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 
[9, 10, 20]
Michael A. Pesce, PhD
Professor Emeritus of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia  
University College of Physicians and Surgeons; Columbia  
University Medical Center, New York, New York [Appendix]
Daniel J. Rader, MD
Cooper-McClure Professor of Medicine and Pharmacology,  
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia,  
Pennsylvania [31]
Anis Rassi, Jr., MD, PhD, FACC, FACP, FAHA
Scientific Director, Anis Rassi Hospital, Goiânia, Brazil [27]
Stuart Rich, MD
Professor of Medicine, Department of Medicine, Section of  
Cardiology, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois [40]
Richard M. Schwartzstein, MD
Ellen and Melvin Gordon Professor of Medicine and Medical 
Education; Associate Chief, Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, 
and Sleep Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts [5]
Andrew P. Selwyn, MD, MBCHB
Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Brigham and 
Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts [33]
David D. Spragg, MD
Assistant Professor of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University,  
Baltimore, Maryland [14, 15]
Lynne Warner Stevenson, MD
Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Director,  
Heart Failure Program, Brigham and Women’s Hospital,  
Boston, Massachusetts [21]
Gordon F. Tomaselli, MD
Michel Mirowski, MD Professor of Cardiology; Professor of Medicine 
and Cellular and Molecular Medicine; Chief, Division of Cardiology, 
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland [14, 15]
Charles M. Wiener, MD
Dean/CEO Perdana University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Selangor, Malaysia; Professor of Medicine and Physiology, Johns 
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland  
[Review and Self-Assessment]
ix
Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine has been a respected 
information source for more than 60 years. Over time, 
the traditional textbook has evolved to meet the needs of 
internists, family physicians, nurses, and other health care 
providers. The growing list of Harrison’s products now 
includes Harrison’s for the iPad, Harrison’s Manual of Medi-
cine, and Harrison’s Online. This book, Harrison’s Cardiovas-
cular Medicine, now in its second edition, is a compilation 
of chapters related to cardiovascular disorders.
Our readers consistently note the sophistication of 
the material in the specialty sections of Harrison’s. Our 
goal was to bring this information to our audience in 
a more compact and usable form. Because the topic is 
more focused, it is possible to enhance the presentation 
of the material by enlarging the text and the tables. We 
have also included a Review and Self-Assessment section 
that includes questions and answers to provoke reflection 
and to provide additional teaching points.
Cardiovascular disease is the leading cause of death in 
the United States, and is rapidly becoming a major cause 
of death in the developing world. Advances in the ther-
apy and prevention of cardiovascular diseases have clearly 
improved the lives of patients with these common, poten-
tially devastating disorders; yet, the disease prevalence 
and the risk factor burden for disease (especially obesity 
in the United States and smoking worldwide) continue to 
increase globally. Cardiovascular medicine is, therefore, of 
crucial importance to the field of internal medicine.
Cardiovascular medicine is a large and growing sub-
specialty, and comprises a number of specific subfields, 
including coronary heart disease, congenital heart disease, 
valvular heart disease, cardiovascular imaging, electro-
physiology, and interventional cardiology. Many of these 
areas involve novel technologies that facilitate diagnosis 
and therapy. The highly specialized nature of these disci-
plines within cardiology and the increasing specialization 
of cardiologists argue for the importance of a broad view 
of cardiovascular medicine by the internist in helping to 
guide the patient through illness and the decisions that 
arise in the course of its treatment.
The scientific underpinnings of cardiovascular medi-
cine have also been evolving rapidly. The molecular 
pathogenesis and genetic basis for many diseases are now 
known and, with this knowledge, diagnostics and thera-
peutics are becoming increasingly individualized. Car-
diovascular diseases are largely complex phenotypes, and 
this structural and physiological complexity recapitulates 
the complex molecular and genetic systems that underlie 
it. As knowledge about these complex systems expands, 
the opportunity for identifying unique therapeutic targets 
increases, holding great promise for definitive interven-
tions in the future. Regenerative medicine is another area 
of cardiovascular medicine that is rapidly achieving trans-
lation. Recognition that the adult human heart can repair 
itself, albeit sparingly with typical injury, and that cardiac 
precursor (stem) cells reside within the myocardium to do 
this can be expanded, and can be used to repair if not 
regenerate a normal heart is an exciting advance in the 
field. These concepts represent a completely novel para-
digm that will revolutionize the future of the subspecialty.
In view of the importance of cardiovascular medicine to 
the field of internal medicine, and the rapidity with which 
the scientific basis for the discipline is advancing, Harrison’s 
Cardiovascular Medicine was developed. The purpose of this 
sectional is to provide the readers with a succinct overview 
of the field of cardiovascular medicine. To achieve this 
goal, Harrison’s Cardiovascular Medicine comprises the key 
cardiovascular chapters contained in the eighteenth edition 
of Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, contributed by 
leading experts in the field. This sectional is designed not 
only for physicians-in-training on cardiology rotations, but 
also for practicing clinicians, other health care professionals, 
and medical students who seek to enrich and update their 
knowledge of this rapidly changing field. The editors trust 
that this book will increase both the readers’ knowledge of 
the field, and their appreciation for its importance.
The first section of the book, “Introduction to Car-
diovascular Disorders,” provides a systems overview, 
beginning with the basic biology of the cardiovascu-
lar system, followed by epidemiology of cardiovascular 
disease, and approach to the patient. The integration 
of pathophysiology with clinical management is a hall-
mark of Harrison’s, and can be found throughout each 
of the subsequent disease-oriented chapters. The book 
is divided into six main sections that reflect the scope of 
cardiovascular medicine: (I) Introduction to the Cardio-
vascular System; (II) Diagnosis of Cardiovascular Disor-
ders; (III) Heart Rhythm Disturbances; (IV) Disorders 
of the Heart; (V) Disorders of the Vasculature;  and (VI) 
Cardiovascular Atlases.
Our access to information through web-based jour-
nals and databases is remarkably efficient. Although 
these sources of information are invaluable, the daunting 
body of data creates an even greater need for synthesis 
by experts in the field. Thus, the preparation of these 
chapters is a special craft that requires the ability to distill 
PREFACE
Preface
core information from the ever-expanding knowledge 
base. The editors are, therefore, indebted to our authors, 
a group of internationally recognized authorities who 
are masters at providing a comprehensive overview 
while being able to distill a topic into a concise and 
interesting chapter. We are indebted to our colleagues at 
McGraw-Hill. Jim Shanahan is a champion for Harri-
son’s and these books were impeccably produced by Kim 
Davis. We hope you find this book useful in your effort 
to achieve continuous learning on behalf of your patients.
Joseph Loscalzo, MD, PhD
x
NOTICE
Medicine is an ever-changing science. As new research and clinical experi-
ence broaden our knowledge, changes in treatment and drug therapy are 
required. The authors and the publisher of this work have checked with 
sources believed to be reliable in their efforts to provide information that is 
complete and generally in accord with the standards accepted at the time of 
publication. However, in view of the possibility of human error or changes 
in medical sciences, neither the authors nor the publisher nor any other party 
who has been involved in the preparation or publication of this work war-
rants that the information contained herein is in every respect accurate or 
complete, and they disclaim all responsibility for any errors or omissions or 
for the results obtained from use of the information contained in this work. 
Readers are encouraged to confirm the information contained herein with 
other sources. For example and in particular, readers are advised to check 
the product information sheet included in the package of each drug they 
plan to administer to be certain that the information contained in this work 
is accurate and that changes have not been made in the recommended dose 
or in the contraindications for administration. This recommendation is of 
particular importance in connection with new or infrequently used drugs.
The global icons call greater attention to key epidemiologic and clinical differences in the practice of medicine 
throughout the world.
The genetic icons identify a clinical issue with an explicit genetic relationship.
Review and self-assessment questions and answers were taken from Wiener CM, 
Brown CD, Hemnes AR (eds). Harrison’s Self-Assessment and Board Review, 18th ed. 
New York, McGraw-Hill, 2012, ISBN 978-0-07-177195-5.
This page intentionally left blank 
SECTION I
Introduction to  
Cardiovascular  
Disorders
 Joseph loscalzo  I   Peter libby  I   Jonathan epstein 
2
 tHe Blood Vessel 
 VaSCulaR ulTRaSTRuCTuRE 
 Blood vessels participate in homeostasis on a moment-
to-moment basis and contribute to the pathophysiology 
of diseases of virtually every organ system. Hence, 
an understanding of the fundamentals of vascular  biology 
furnishes a foundation for understanding the  normal 
function of all organ systems and many diseases. 
The smallest blood vessels—capillaries—consist of a 
 monolayer of endothelial cells apposed to a basement 
membrane, adjacent to occasional smooth-muscle-like 
cells known as  pericytes  ( Fig. 1-1 A ) . Unlike larger ves-
sels, pericytes do not invest the entire microvessel to 
form a continuous sheath. Veins and arteries typically 
have a trilaminar structure  ( Fig. 1-1 B–E ) . The  intima
consists of a monolayer of endothelial cells  continuous 
with those of the capillaries. The middle layer, or 
tunica media , consists of layers of smooth-muscle cells; 
in veins, the media can contain just a few layers of 
smooth-muscle cells  ( Fig. 1-1 B ). The outer layer, 
the  adventitia , consists of looser extracellular matrix 
with occasional fi broblasts, mast cells, and nerve 
terminals. Larger arteries have their own vasculature, 
the  vasa vasorum , which nourishes the outer aspects 
of the tunica media. The adventitia of many veins 
 surpasses the intima in thickness. 
 The tone of muscular arterioles regulates blood 
pressure and fl ow through various arterial beds. These 
smaller arteries have a relatively thick tunica media in 
relation to the adventitia  ( Fig. 1-1 C ). Medium-size 
muscular arteries similarly contain a prominent tunica 
media  ( Fig. 1-1 D ) ; atherosclerosis commonly affects 
this type of muscular artery. The larger elastic  arteries 
have a much more structured tunica media consisting 
of concentric bands of smooth-muscle cells, inter-
spersed with strata of elastin-rich extracellular matrix 
 BASIC BIOLOGY OF THE CARDIOVASCULAR 
SYSTEM 
 CHaPter 1 
sandwiched between layers of smooth-muscle cells 
 ( Fig. 1-1 E  ) . Larger arteries have a clearly demarcated 
internal elastic lamina that forms the barrier between 
the intima and the media. An external elastic lamina 
demarcates the media of arteries from the surrounding 
adventitia. 
 ORIgIN OF VaSCulaR CEllS 
 The intima in human arteries often contains occasional 
resident smooth-muscle cells beneath the monolayer 
of vascular endothelial cells. The embryonic origin of 
smooth-muscle cells in various types of arteries differs. 
Some upper-body arterial smooth-muscle cells derive 
from the neural crest, whereas lower-body arteries gen-
erally recruit smooth-muscle cells from neighboring 
mesodermal structures during development. Deriva-
tives of the proepicardial organ, which gives rise to the 
epicardial layer of the heart, contribute to the vascular 
smooth-muscle cells of the coronary arteries. Recent 
evidence suggests that bone marrow may give rise to 
both vascular endothelial cells and smooth-muscle cells, 
particularly under conditions of injury repair or vascular 
lesion formation. Indeed, the ability of bone  marrow to 
repair an injured endothelial monolayer may contribute 
to maintenance of vascular health, whereas failure to 
do so may lead to arterial disease. The precise sources 
of endothelial and mesenchymal progenitor cells or 
their stem cell precursors remain the subject of active 
 investigation. 
 VaSCulaR CEll bIOlOgy 
 Endothelial cell 
 The key cell of the vascular intima, the endothelial cell, 
has manifold functions in health and disease. Most obvi-
ously, the endothelium forms the interface between 
 
CHAPTER 1
Basic Biology of the Cardiovascular System
3
tissues and the blood compartment. It therefore must 
regulate the entry of molecules and cells into tissues in a 
selective manner. The ability of endothelial cells to serve 
as a selectively permeable barrier fails in many vascular 
disorders, including atherosclerosis and hypertension. 
This dysregulation of permeability also occurs in pulmo-
nary edema and other situations of “capillary leak.”
The endothelium also participates in the local regu-
lation of blood flow and vascular caliber. Endogenous 
substances produced by endothelial cells such as prosta-
cyclin, endothelium-derived hyperpolarizing factor, nitric 
oxide (NO), and hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) provide 
tonic vasodilatory stimuli under physiologic conditions 
in vivo (Table 1-1). Impaired production or excess 
catabolism of NO impairs this endothelium-dependent 
vasodilator function and may contribute to excessive 
vasoconstriction in various pathologic situations. By 
contrast, endothelial cells also produce potent vaso-
constrictor substances such as endothelin in a regulated 
fashion. Excessive production of reactive oxygen spe-
cies, such as superoxide anion (O2
−), by endothelial or 
smooth-muscle cells under pathologic conditions (e.g., 
excessive exposure to angiotensin II) can promote local 
oxidative stress and inactivate NO.
The endothelial monolayer contributes critically 
to inflammatory processes involved in normal host 
defenses and pathologic states. The normal endothe-
lium resists prolonged contact with blood leukocytes; 
however, when activated by bacterial products such as 
endotoxin or proinflammatory cytokines released during 
infection or injury, endothelial cells express an array of 
­leukocyte adhesion molecules that bind various classes of 
Table 1-1
Endothelial Functions in Health and Disease
Homeostatic  
Phenotype
Dysfunctional 
Phenotype
Vasodilation
Impaired dilation, 
­vasoconstriction
Antithrombotic,  
profibrinolytic
Prothrombotic, 
­antifibrinolytic
Anti-inflammatory
Proinflammatory
Antiproliferative
Proproliferative
Antioxidant
Prooxidant
Permselectivity
Impaired barrier function
Figure 1-1
Schematics of the structures of various types of blood 
vessels. A. Capillaries consist of an endothelial tube in con-
tact with a discontinuous population of pericytes. B. Veins 
typically have thin medias and thicker adventitias. C. A small
muscular artery features a prominent tunica media. D. Larger 
muscular arteries have a prominent media with smooth-
muscle cells embedded in a complex extracellular matrix. 
E. Larger elastic arteries have cylindrical layers of elastic tissue 
alternating with concentric rings of smooth-muscle cells.
A. Capillary
B. Vein
C. Small muscular artery
D. Large muscular artery
Vascular
smooth-muscle cell
E. Large elastic artery
Internal elastic
lamina
External elastic
lamina
Adventitia
Pericyte
Endothelial cell
SECTION I
Introduction to Cardiovascular Disorders
4
leukocytes. The endothelial cells appear to recruit selec-
tively different classes of leukocytes in different patho-
logic conditions. The gamut of adhesion molecules and 
chemokines generated during acute bacterial infection 
tends to recruit granulocytes. In chronic inflammatory 
diseases such as tuberculosis and atherosclerosis, endo-
thelial cells express adhesion molecules that favor the 
recruitment of mononuclear leukocytes that characteris-
tically accumulate in these conditions.
The endothelium also dynamically regulates thrombosis 
and hemostasis. Nitric oxide, in addition to its vasodila-
tory properties, can limit platelet activation and aggre-
gation. Like NO, prostacyclin produced by endothelial 
cells under normal conditions not only provides a vaso-
dilatory stimulus but also antagonizes platelet activation 
and aggregation. Thrombomodulin expressed on the 
surface of endothelial cells binds thrombin at low con-
centrations and inhibits coagulation through activation 
of the protein C pathway, inactivating clotting ­factors 
Va and VIIIa and thus combating thrombus forma-
tion. The surface of endothelial cells ­contains heparan 
sulfate glycosaminoglycans that furnish an endogenous 
antithrombotic coating to the vasculature. Endothe-
lial cells also participate actively in fibrinolysis and its 
regulation. They express receptors for plasminogen and 
­plasminogen activators and produce tissue-type plasmin-
ogen activators. Through local generation of plasmin, 
the normal endothelial monolayer can promote the lysis 
of nascent thrombi.
When activated by inflammatory cytokines, bacte-
rial endotoxin, or angiotensin II, for example, endothe-
lial cells can produce substantial quantities of the major 
inhibitor of fibrinolysis, plasminogen activator inhibitor 
1 (PAI-1). Thus, in pathologic circumstances, the endo-
thelial cell may promote local thrombus accumulation 
rather than combat it. Inflammatory stimuli also induce 
the expression of the potent procoagulant tissue factor, a 
contributor to disseminated intravascular coagulation in 
sepsis.
Endothelial cells also participate in the pathophysi-
ology of a number of immune-mediated diseases. Lysis 
of endothelial cells mediated by complement provides 
an example of immunologically mediated tissue injury. 
The presentation of foreign histocompatibility complex 
antigens by endothelial cells in solid-organ allografts can 
trigger immunologic rejection. In addition, immune-
mediated endothelial injury may contribute in some 
patients with thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura 
and patients with hemolytic-uremic syndrome. Thus, 
in addition to contributing to innate immune responses, 
endothelial cells participate actively in both humoral 
and cellular limbs of the immune response.
Endothelial cells regulate growth of the subjacent 
smooth-muscle cells as well. Heparan sulfate glycos-
aminoglycans elaborated by endothelial cells can hold 
smooth-muscle proliferation in check. In contrast, 
when exposed to various injurious stimuli, ­endothelial 
cells can elaborate growth factors and chemoattrac-
tants, such as platelet-derived growth factor, that can 
promote the migration and proliferation of vascular 
smooth-­muscle cells. Dysregulated elaboration of these 
­growth-stimulatory molecules may promote smooth-
muscle accumulation in atherosclerotic lesions.
Clinical assessment of endothelial function
Various invasive and noninvasive approaches can be 
used to evaluate endothelial vasodilator function in 
humans. Either pharmacologic agonists or increased 
flow stimulates the endothelium to release acutely 
molecular effectors that alter underlying smooth-­muscle 
cell tone. Invasively, infusion of the cholinergic ago-
nists acetylcholine and methacholine stimulates the 
release of NO from normal endothelial cells. Changes 
in coronary diameter can be quantitatively measured 
in response to an intracoronary infusion of these short-
lived, rapidly acting agents. Noninvasive assessment of 
endothelial function in the forearm circulation typically 
involves occlusion of brachial artery blood flow with 
a blood pressure cuff, which elicits reactive ­hyperemia 
after release; the resulting flow increase normally causes 
endothelium-dependent vasodilation, which is mea-
sured as the change in brachial artery blood flow and 
diameter by ultrasound (Fig. 1-2). This approach depends 
on shear stress–dependent changes in endothelial release of 
NO after restoration of blood flow, as well as the effect of 
adenosine released (transiently) from ischemic tissue in 
the forearm.
Typically, these invasive and noninvasive approaches 
detect inducible vasodilatory changes in vessel diameter 
of ∼10%. In individuals with atherosclerosis or its risk 
factors (especially hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, 
diabetes mellitus, and smoking), such studies can detect 
endothelial dysfunction as defined by a smaller change 
in diameter and, in the extreme case, a so-called para-
doxical vasoconstrictor response owing to the direct 
effect of cholinergic agonists on vascular smooth-muscle 
cell tone.
Vascular smooth-muscle cell
The vascular smooth-muscle cell, the major cell type 
of the media layer of blood vessels, also ­contributes 
actively to vascular pathobiology. Contraction and 
relaxation of smooth-muscle cells at the level of the 
muscular arteries controls blood pressure, and, hence, 
regional blood flow and the afterload experienced 
by the left ventricle (see later). The vasomotor tone 
of veins, which is governed by smooth-muscle cell 
tone, regulates the capacitance of the venous tree and 
influences the preload experienced by both ventri-
cles. Smooth-muscle cells in the adult vessel seldom 
 
CHAPTER 1
Basic Biology of the Cardiovascular System
5
replicate. This homeostatic quiescence of smooth-
muscle cells changes in conditions of arterial injury or 
inflammatory activation. Proliferation and migration of 
arterial smooth-muscle cells, which is associated with 
a change in phenotype characterized by lower content 
Figure 1-2
Assessment of endothelial function in vivo using blood 
pressure cuff-occlusion and release. Upon deflation of 
the cuff, changes in diameter (A) and blood flow (B) of the 
brachial artery are monitored with an ultrasound probe (C). 
(Reproduced with permission of J. Vita, MD.)
of contractile proteins and greater production of extra-
cellular matrix macromolecules, can contribute to the 
development of arterial stenoses in atherosclerosis, 
­arteriolar remodeling that can sustain and propagate 
hypertension, and the hyperplastic response of arter-
ies injured by angioplasty or stent deployment. In the 
pulmonary circulation, smooth-muscle migration and 
proliferation contribute decisively to the pulmonary 
vascular disease that gradually occurs in response to sus-
tained high-flow states such as left-to-right shunts. Such 
pulmonary vascular disease provides a major obstacle to 
the management of many patients with adult congeni-
tal heart disease. Elucidation of the signaling pathways 
that regulate the reversible transition of the vascular 
smooth-muscle cell phenotype remains an active focus 
of investigation. Among other mediators, microRNAs 
have emerged as powerful regulators of this transition, 
offering new targets for intervention.
The activated, phenotypically modulated smooth-muscle 
cells secrete the bulk of vascular extracellular matrix. 
Excessive production of collagen and glycosaminogly-
cans contributes to the remodeling and altered biology 
and biomechanics of arteries affected by hypertension 
or atherosclerosis. In larger elastic arteries, the elastin 
­synthesized by smooth-muscle cells serves to maintain 
not only normal arterial structure but also hemody-
namic function. The ability of the larger arteries, such 
as the aorta, to store the kinetic energy of systole pro-
motes tissue perfusion during diastole. Arterial stiffness 
associated with aging or disease, as manifested by a 
­widening pulse pressure, increases left ventricular afterload 
and portends a poor outcome.
Like endothelial cells, vascular smooth-muscle cells 
do not merely respond to vasomotor or inflammatory 
stimuli elaborated by other cell types but can themselves 
serve as a source of such stimuli. For example, when 
exposed to bacterial endotoxin or other proinflamma-
tory stimuli, smooth-muscle cells can elaborate cytokines 
and other inflammatory mediators. Like endothelial 
cells, upon inflammatory activation, arterial smooth-
muscle cells can produce prothrombotic mediators such 
as tissue factor, the antifibrinolytic protein PAI-1, and 
other molecules that modulate thrombosis and fibri-
nolysis. Smooth-muscle cells also elaborate autocrine 
growth factors that can amplify hyperplastic responses to 
arterial injury.
Vascular smooth-muscle cell function
Vascular smooth-muscle cells govern vessel tone. Those 
cells contract when stimulated by a rise in intracellu-
lar calcium concentration by calcium influx through 
the plasma membrane and by calcium release from 
intracellular stores (Fig. 1-3). In vascular smooth-
muscle cells, voltage-dependent L-type calcium chan-
nels open with membrane depolarization, which is 
SECTION I
Introduction to Cardiovascular Disorders
6
regulated by energy-dependent ion pumps such as 
the Na+,K+-ATPase pump and ion channels such as 
the ­Ca2+-­sensitive K+ channel. Local changes in intra-
cellular ­calcium concentration, termed calcium sparks, 
result from the influx of calcium through the voltage-
dependent calcium channel and are caused by the coor-
dinated activation of a cluster of ryanodine-sensitive 
­calcium release channels in the sarcoplasmic reticulum 
(see later). ­Calcium sparks directly augment intracellu-
lar calcium concentration and indirectly increase intra-
cellular calcium concentration by activating chloride 
channels. In addition, calcium sparks reduce smooth-
muscle contractility by activating large-conductance 
calcium-sensitive K+ channels, hyperpolarizing the cell 
­membrane and thereby limiting further voltage-dependent 
increases in intracellular calcium.
Biochemical agonists also increase intracellular calcium 
concentration, in this case by receptor-­dependent acti-
vation of phospholipase C with hydrolysis of phospha-
tidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate, resulting in generation of 
diacylglycerol (DAG) and inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate 
(IP3). These membrane lipid derivatives in turn activate 
protein kinase C and increase intracellular calcium con-
centration. In addition, IP3 binds to specific receptors 
on the sarcoplasmic reticulum membrane to increase 
calcium efflux from this calcium storage pool into the 
cytoplasm.
Vascular smooth-muscle cell contraction is ­controlled 
principally by the phosphorylation of myosin light 
chain, which in the steady state depends on the ­balance 
between the actions of myosin light chain kinase and 
myosin light chain phosphatase. Calcium activates 
myosin light chain kinase through the formation of a 
­calcium-calmodulin complex. Phosphorylation of myo-
sin light chain by this kinase augments myosin ATPase 
activity and enhances contraction. Myosin light chain 
phosphatase dephosphorylates myosin light chain, 
reducing myosin ATPase activity and contractile force. 
Phosphorylation of the myosin-binding ­subunit (thr695) 
of myosin light chain phosphatase by Rho kinase 
PIP2
NE, ET-1, Ang II
PLC
ANP
NO
pGC
AC
RhoA
Rho
Kinase
IP3
G
G
SR
Calcium
MLCK
MLCP
IP3R
RyrR
Plb
ATPase
cGMP
GTP
ATP
cAMP
DAG
PKC
Caldesmon
Calponin
VDCC
K+ Ch
Na-K ATPase
sGC
Beta-
Agonist
PKG
PKA
Figure 1-3
Regulation of vascular smooth-muscle cell calcium 
­concentration and actomyosin ATPase-dependent con-
traction. AC, adenylyl cyclase; Ang II, angiotensin II; 
ANP, antrial natriuretic peptide; DAG, diacylglycerol; ET-1, 
­endothelin-1; G, G-protein; IP3, inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate; 
MLCK, myosin light chain kinase; MLCP, myosin light 
chain phosphatase; NE, norepinephrine; NO, nitric oxide; 
pGC, particular guanylyl cyclase; PIP2, phosphatidylinosi-
tol 4,5-bisphosphate; PKA, protein kinase A; PKC, protein 
kinase C; PKG, protein kinase G; PLC, phospholipase C; 
sGC, soluble guanylyl cyclase; SR, sarcoplasmic reticulum; 
VDCC, voltage-dependent calcium channel. (Modified from 
B Berk, in Vascular Medicine, 3rd ed, p 23. Philadelphia, 
Saunders, Elsevier, 2006; with permission.)
 
CHAPTER 1
Basic Biology of the Cardiovascular System
7
inhibits phosphatase activity and induces calcium sensi-
tization of the contractile apparatus. Rho kinase is itself 
activated by the small GTPase RhoA, which is stimu-
lated by guanosine exchange factors and inhibited by 
GTPase-activating proteins.
Both cyclic AMP and cyclic GMP relax vascular 
smooth-muscle cells through complex mechanisms. 
β  agonists, acting through their G-protein-coupled 
receptors activate adenylyl cyclase to convert ATP 
to cyclic AMP; NO and atrial natriuretic peptide act-
ing directly and via a G-protein-coupled receptor, 
respectively, activate guanylyl cyclase to convert GTP 
to cyclic GMP. These agents in turn activate pro-
tein kinase A and protein kinase G, respectively, which 
inactivate myosin light chain kinase and decrease vas-
cular smooth-muscle cell tone. In addition, protein 
kinase G  can interact directly with the myosin-binding 
substrate subunit of myosin light chain phosphatase, 
increasing phosphatase activity and decreasing vascu-
lar tone. Finally, several mechanisms drive NO-depen-
dent, ­protein kinase G–mediated reductions in vascular 
smooth-muscle cell calcium concentration, including 
phosphorylation-dependent 
inactivation 
of 
RhoA; 
decreased IP3 formation; phosphorylation of the IP3 
receptor–associated cyclic GMP kinase substrate, with 
subsequent inhibition of IP3 receptor function; phos-
phorylation of phospholamban, which increases calcium 
ATPase activity and sequestration of calcium in the sar-
coplasmic reticulum; and protein kinase G–dependent 
stimulation of plasma membrane calcium ATPase activ-
ity, perhaps by activation of the Na+,K+-ATPase pump or 
hyperpolarization of the cell membrane by activation of 
calcium-dependent K+ channels.
Control of vascular smooth-muscle cell tone
The tone of vascular smooth-muscle cells is governed 
by the autonomic nervous system and by the endothe-
lium in tightly regulated control networks. Autonomic 
neurons enter the blood vessel medial layer from the 
adventitia and modulate vascular smooth-muscle cell 
tone in response to baroreceptors and chemoreceptors 
within the aortic arch and carotid bodies and in response 
to thermoreceptors in the skin. These regulatory com-
ponents include rapidly acting reflex arcs modulated 
by central inputs that respond to sensory inputs (olfac-
tory, visual, auditory, and tactile) as well as emotional 
stimuli. Three classes of nerves mediate autonomic 
regulation of vascular tone: sympathetic, whose princi-
pal neurotransmitters are epinephrine and norepineph-
rine; ­parasympathetic, whose principal neurotransmitter 
is acetylcholine; and nonadrenergic/noncholinergic, which 
include two ­subgroups—nitrergic, whose principal neu-
rotransmitter is NO, and peptidergic, whose principal 
­neurotransmitters are substance P, vasoactive intestinal 
peptide, ­calcitonin gene-related peptide, and ATP.
Each of these neurotransmitters acts through spe-
cific receptors on the vascular smooth-muscle cell to 
modulate intracellular calcium and, consequently, con-
tractile tone. Norepinephrine activates α receptors, 
and epinephrine activates α and β receptors (adrenergic 
receptors); in most blood vessels, norepinephrine acti-
vates postjunctional α1 receptors in large arteries and 
α2 receptors in small arteries and arterioles, lead-
ing to vasoconstriction. Most blood vessels express 
­β2-adrenergic receptors on their vascular smooth-muscle 
cells and respond to β agonists by cyclic ­AMP–dependent 
relaxation. Acetylcholine released from parasympathetic 
neurons binds to muscarinic receptors (of which there are 
five subtypes, M1–5) on vascular smooth-muscle cells to 
yield vasorelaxation. In addition, NO stimulates presyn-
aptic neurons to release acetylcholine, which can stimu-
late the release of NO from the endothelium. Nitrergic 
neurons release NO ­produced by neuronal NO synthase, 
which causes vascular smooth-muscle cell relaxation via 
the cyclic GMP–dependent and –independent mecha-
nisms described earlier. The peptidergic neurotrans-
mitters all potently vasodilate, acting either directly or 
through endothelium-dependent NO release to decrease 
vascular smooth-muscle cell tone.
The endothelium modulates vascular ­smooth-muscle 
tone by the direct release of several effectors, ­including 
NO, prostacyclin, hydrogen sulfide, and ­endothelium-­ 
derived hyperpolarizing factor, all of which cause 
­vasorelaxation, and endothelin, which causes vaso-
constriction. The release of these endothelial effectors 
of ­vascular smooth-muscle cell tone is stimulated by 
mechanical (shear stress, cyclic strain, etc.) and bio-
chemical mediators (purinergic agonists, muscarinic 
agonists, peptidergic agonists), with the biochemical 
mediators acting through endothelial receptors specific 
to each class. In addition to these local paracrine modu-
lators of vascular smooth-muscle cell tone, circulating 
mediators can affect tone, including norepinephrine and 
epinephrine, vasopressin, angiotensin II, bradykinin, and 
the natriuretic peptides (ANP, BNP, CNP, and DNP), 
as discussed earlier.
Vascular Regeneration
Growth of new blood vessels can occur in response 
to conditions such as chronic hypoxemia and tissue 
­ischemia. Growth factors, including vascular endo-
thelial growth factor (VEGF) and forms of fibroblast 
growth factor (FGF), activate a signaling cascade that 
stimulates endothelial proliferation and tube formation, 
defined as angiogenesis. The development of ­collateral 
vascular networks in the ischemic myocardium reflects 
this process and can result from selective activation 
of endothelial progenitor cells, which may reside in 
the blood vessel wall or home to the ischemic ­tissue 
SECTION I
Introduction to Cardiovascular Disorders
8
­subtended by an occluded or severely stenotic ­vessel 
from the bone marrow. True arteriogenesis, or the 
development of a new blood vessel that includes all 
three cell layers, normally does not occur in the car-
diovascular system of adult mammals. The molecular 
mechanisms and progenitor cells that can recapitulate 
blood vessel development de novo are under rapidly 
advancing study.
Vascular Pharmacogenomics
The last decade has witnessed considerable progress 
in efforts to define the genetic differences underly-
ing individual variations in vascular pharmacologic 
responses. Many investigators have focused on recep-
tors and enzymes associated with neurohumoral 
modulation of vascular function as well as hepatic 
enzymes that metabolize drugs that affect vascular 
tone. The genetic polymorphisms thus far associated 
with differences in vascular response often (but not 
invariably) relate to functional differences in the activ-
ity or expression of the receptor or enzyme of interest. 
Some of these ­polymorphisms appear to have different 
allele frequencies in specific ethnic groups. A summary 
of recently identified polymorphisms defining these 
vascular ­pharmacogenomic differences is provided in 
Table 1-2. 
Cellular Basis of Cardiac 
Contraction
Cardiac Ultrastructure
About three-fourths of the ventricular mass is composed 
of cardiomyocytes, normally 60–140 μm in length and 
17–25 μm in diameter (Fig. 1-4A). Each cell contains 
multiple, rodlike cross-banded strands (myofibrils) that 
Table 1-2
Genetic Polymorphisms in Vascular Function and Disease Risk
Gene
Polymorphic Allele
Clinical Implications
`-Adrenergic Receptors
`1A
Arg492Cys
None
`2B
Glu9/G1712
Increased CHD events
`2C
A2cDcl3232-325
Ethnic differences in risk of hypertension or heart failure
Angiotensin-converting 
enzyme (ACE)
Insertion/deletion polymor-
phism in intron 16
D allele or DD genotype-increased response to ACE inhibitors; 
inconsistent data for increased risk of atherosclerotic heart 
­disease, and hypertension
Ang II type I receptor
1166A → C Ala-Cys
Increased response to Ang II and increased risk of pregnancy-­
associated hypertension
a-Adrenergic Receptors
β1
Ser49Gly
Increased HR and DCM risk
Arg389Gly
Increased heart failure in blacks
β2
Arg16Gly
Familial hypertension, increased obesity risk
Glu27Gln
Hypertension in white type II diabetics
Thr164Ile
Decreased agonist affinity and worse HF outcome
B2-Bradykinin receptor
Cys58Thr, Cys412Gly, 
Thr21Met
Increased risk of hypertension in some ethnic groups
Endothelial nitric oxide 
synthase (eNOS)
Nucleotide repeats 
in introns 4 and 13, 
­Glu298Asp
Increased MI and venous thrombosis
Thr785Cys
Early coronary artery disease
Abbreviations: CHD, coronary heart disease; HR, heart rate; DCM, dilated cardiomyopathy; HF, heart failure; MI, myocardial infarction.
Source: Derived from B Schaefer et al: Heart Dis 5:129, 2003.
 
CHAPTER 1
Basic Biology of the Cardiovascular System
9
run the length of the cell and are composed of serially 
repeating structures, the sarcomeres. The cytoplasm 
between the myofibrils contains other cell constituents, 
including the single centrally located nucleus, numerous 
mitochondria, and the intracellular membrane ­system, 
the sarcoplasmic reticulum.
The sarcomere, the structural and functional unit of 
contraction, lies between adjacent Z lines, which are 
dark repeating bands that are apparent on transmis-
sion electron microscopy. The distance between Z lines 
varies with the degree of contraction or stretch of the 
muscle and ranges between 1.6 and 2.2 μm. Within 
the confines of the sarcomere are alternating light and 
dark bands, giving the myocardial fibers their striated 
appearance under the light microscope. At the cen-
ter of the sarcomere is a dark band of constant length 
M
y
o
c
y
t
e
Myofibril
Myofibril
Myofibril
Mitochondrion
T tubule
10 µm
SR
Myofiber
Myocyte
Ca2+
enters
Ca2+
leaves
Na+
Exchange
Ca2+
Pump
Free
Ca2+
Ca2+
“trigger”
Contract
Relax
Systole
Diastole
Head
43 nm
Myosin
Titin
Actin
Z
Z
D
C
B
A
M
Figure 1-4 
A shows the branching myocytes ­making 
up the cardiac myofibers. B illustrates the 
critical role played by the changing [Ca2+] in 
the myocardial cytosol. Ca2+ ions are sche-
matically shown as entering through the cal-
cium channel that opens in response to the 
wave of depolarization that ­travels along the 
sarcolemma. These Ca2+ ions “trigger” the 
release of more calcium from the sarcoplas-
mic reticulum (SR) and thereby initiate a con-
traction-relaxation cycle. Eventually, the small 
quantity of Ca2+ that has entered the cell 
leaves predominantly through an Na+/Ca2+ 
exchanger, with a lesser role for the sarco-
lemmal Ca2+ pump. The varying actin-­myosin 
overlap is shown for (B) systole, when [Ca2+] 
is maximal, and (C) diastole, when [Ca2+] is 
­minimal. D. The myosin heads, attached to 
the thick filaments, interact with the thin actin 
filaments. (From LH Opie, Heart  ­Physiology, 
reprinted with permission. Copyright LH Opie, 
2004.)
(1.5 μm), the A band, which is flanked by two lighter 
bands, the I bands, which are of variable length. The 
­sarcomere of heart muscle, like that of skeletal mus-
cle, consists of two sets of interdigitating myofilaments. 
Thicker filaments, composed principally of the pro-
tein myosin, ­traverse the A band; they are about 10 nm 
(100 Å) in diameter, with tapered ends. Thinner fila-
ments, composed primarily of actin, course from the 
Z lines through the I band into the A band; they are 
approximately 5 nm (50 Å) in diameter and 1.0 μm in 
length. Thus, thick and thin filaments overlap only within 
the (dark) A band, whereas the (light) I band contains 
only thin filaments. On electron-microscopic examina-
tion, bridges may be seen to extend between the thick and 
thin filaments within the A band; these are myosin heads 
bound to actin filaments.
SECTION I
Introduction to Cardiovascular Disorders
10
The Contractile Process
The sliding filament model for muscle contraction rests 
on the fundamental observation that both the thick and 
the thin filaments are constant in overall length during 
both contraction and relaxation. With activation, the 
actin filaments are propelled farther into the A band. 
In the process, the A band remains constant in length, 
whereas the I band shortens and the Z lines move 
toward one another.
The myosin molecule is a complex, asymmetric fibrous 
protein with a molecular mass of about 500,000 Da; it 
has a rodlike portion that is about 150 nm (1500 Å) in 
length with a globular portion (head) at its end. These 
globular portions of myosin form the bridges between 
the myosin and actin molecules and are the site of 
ATPase activity. In forming the thick myofilament, 
which is composed of ∼300 longitudinally stacked 
myosin molecules, the rodlike segments of the myosin 
molecules are laid down in an orderly, polarized man-
ner, leaving the globular portions projecting outward so 
that they can interact with actin to generate force and 
shortening (Fig. 1-4B).
Actin has a molecular mass of about 47,000 Da. The 
thin filament consists of a double helix of two chains 
of actin molecules wound about each other on a 
larger molecule, tropomyosin. A group of regulatory 
­proteins—troponins C, I, and T—are spaced at regu-
lar intervals on this filament (Fig. 1-5). In contrast to 
myosin, actin lacks intrinsic enzymatic activity but does 
combine reversibly with myosin in the presence of 
ATP and Ca2+. The calcium ion activates the myosin 
ATPase, which in turn breaks down ATP, the energy 
source for contraction (Fig. 1-5). The activity of ­myosin 
ATPase determines the rate of forming and breaking of 
the actomyosin cross-bridges and ultimately the ­velocity 
of muscle contraction. In relaxed muscle, tropomyosin 
inhibits this interaction. Titin (Fig. 1-4D) is a large, 
Figure 1-5 
Four steps in cardiac muscle contraction and relaxation. 
In relaxed muscle (upper left), ATP bound to the myosin 
cross-bridge dissociates the thick and thin filaments. Step 1: 
Hydrolysis of myosin-bound ATP by the ATPase site on the 
myosin head transfers the chemical energy of the nucleotide 
to the activated cross-bridge (upper right). When cytosolic 
Ca2+ concentration is low, as in relaxed muscle, the reac-
tion cannot proceed because tropomyosin and the ­troponin 
complex on the thin filament do not allow the active sites 
on actin to interact with the cross-bridges. Therefore, even 
though the cross-bridges are energized, they cannot inter-
act with actin. Step 2: When Ca2+ binding to troponin C has 
exposed active sites on the thin filament, actin interacts 
with the myosin cross-bridges to form an active complex 
(lower right) in which the energy derived from ATP is 
retained in the actin-bound cross-bridge, whose orientation 
has not yet shifted. Step 3: The muscle contracts when ADP 
dissociates from the cross-bridge. This step leads to the for-
mation of the low-energy rigor complex (lower left) in which 
the chemical energy derived from ATP hydrolysis has been 
expended to perform mechanical work (the “rowing” motion 
of the cross-bridge). Step 4: The muscle returns to its resting 
state, and the cycle ends when a new molecule of ATP binds 
to the rigor complex and dissociates the cross-bridge from the 
thin filament. This cycle continues until calcium is dissociated 
from troponin C in the thin filament, which causes the contrac-
tile proteins to return to the resting state with the cross-bridge 
in the energized state. ATP, adenosine triphosphate; ATPase, 
adenosine triphosphatase; ADP, adenosine diphosphate. (From 
AM Katz: Heart failure: Cardiac function and dysfunction, in 
Atlas of Heart Diseases, 3rd ed, WS Colucci [ed]. ­Philadelphia, 
Current Medicine, 2002. Reprinted with permission.)
ATP
ATP hydrolysis
Dissociation of
actin and myosin
ADP
ADP
ADP
Actin
Relaxed, energized
Relaxed
Actin
ATP
Rigor complex
Active complex
Formation of 
active complex
Product
dissociation
Pi
Pi
1.
3.
2.
4.
 
CHAPTER 1
Basic Biology of the Cardiovascular System
11
flexible, myofibrillar protein that connects myosin to 
the Z line; its stretching contributes to the elasticity 
of the heart. Dystrophin is a long cytoskeletal protein 
that has an amino-terminal actin-binding domain and a 
carboxy-terminal domain that binds to the dystroglycan 
complex at adherens junctions on the cell ­membrane, 
thus tethering the sarcomere to the cell membrane at 
regions tightly coupled to adjacent contracting myo-
cytes. Mutations in components of the ­dystrophin 
complex lead to muscular dystrophy and associated 
cardiomyopathy.
During activation of the cardiac myocyte, Ca2+ 
becomes attached to one of three components of the 
heterotrimer troponin C, which results in a conforma-
tional change in the regulatory protein tropomyosin; 
the latter, in turn, exposes the actin cross-bridge inter-
action sites (Fig. 1-5). Repetitive interaction between 
myosin heads and actin filaments is termed cross-bridge 
cycling, which results in sliding of the actin along the 
myosin filaments, ultimately causing muscle shorten-
ing and/or the development of tension. The split-
ting of ATP then dissociates the myosin cross-bridge 
from actin. In the presence of ATP (Fig. 1-5), linkages 
between actin and myosin filaments are made and bro-
ken cyclically as long as sufficient Ca2+ is present; these 
linkages cease when [Ca2+] falls below a critical level, 
and the troponin-tropomyosin complex once more 
prevents interactions between the myosin cross-bridges 
and actin filaments (Fig. 1-6).
Intracytoplasmic Ca2+ is a principal determinant of 
the inotropic state of the heart. Most agents that stimu-
late myocardial contractility (positive inotropic ­stimuli), 
including the digitalis glycosides and β-adrenergic 
­agonists, increase the [Ca2+] in the vicinity of the myo-
filaments, which in turn triggers cross-bridge cycling. 
Increased impulse traffic in the cardiac adrenergic 
nerves stimulates myocardial contractility as a conse-
quence of the release of norepinephrine from cardiac 
adrenergic nerve endings. Norepinephrine activates 
myocardial β receptors and, through the Gs-­stimulated 
guanine nucleotide-binding protein, activates the 
enzyme adenylyl cyclase, which leads to the formation 
of the intracellular second messenger cyclic AMP from 
ATP (Fig. 1-6). Cyclic AMP in turn activates protein 
kinase A (PKA), which phosphorylates the Ca2+ chan-
nel in the myocardial sarcolemma, thereby enhancing 
the influx of Ca2+ into the myocyte. Other functions of 
PKA are discussed later.
The sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) (Fig. 1-7), a complex
network of anastomosing intracellular channels, invests 
the myofibrils. Its longitudinally disposed tubules closely 
invest the surfaces of individual sarcomeres but have no 
direct continuity with the outside of the cell. However, 
closely related to the SR, both structurally and func-
tionally, are the transverse tubules, or T system, formed 
by tubelike invaginations of the sarcolemma that extend 
into the myocardial fiber along the Z lines, i.e., the ends 
of the sarcomeres.
Cardiac Activation
In the inactive state, the cardiac cell is electrically polar-
ized; i.e., the interior has a negative charge relative to 
the outside of the cell, with a transmembrane potential 
of −80 to −100 mV (Chap. 14). The sarcolemma, which 
in the resting state is largely impermeable to Na+, has a 
Na+- and K+-stimulating pump energized by ATP that 
extrudes Na+ from the cell; this pump plays a critical role 
in establishing the resting potential. Thus, intracellular 
[K+] is relatively high and [Na+] is far lower; conversely, 
extracellular [Na+] is high and [K+] is low. At the same 
time, in the resting state, extracellular [Ca2+] greatly 
exceeds free intracellular [Ca2+].
The action potential has four phases (Fig. 14-1B). 
During the plateau of the action potential (phase 2), 
there is a slow inward current through L-type Ca2+ 
channels in the sarcolemma (Fig. 1-7). The depolar-
izing current not only extends across the surface of 
the cell but penetrates deeply into the cell by way of 
the ramifying T tubular system. The absolute quantity 
of Ca2+ that crosses the sarcolemma and the T system 
is relatively small and by itself appears to be insufficient 
to bring about full activation of the contractile appara-
tus. However, this Ca2+ current triggers the release of 
much larger quantities of Ca2+ from the SR, a process 
termed Ca2+-induced Ca2+ release. The latter is a major 
­determinant of intracytoplasmic [Ca2+] and therefore of 
myocardial contractility.
Ca2+ is released from the SR through a Ca2+ release 
channel, a cardiac isoform of the ryanodine receptor 
(RyR2), which controls intracytoplasmic [Ca2+] and, 
as in vascular smooth-muscle cells, leads to the local 
changes in intracellular [Ca2+] called calcium sparks. 
A number of regulatory proteins, including calstabin 
2, inhibit RyR2 and thereby the release of Ca2+ from 
the SR. PKA dissociates calstabin from the RyR2, 
­enhancing Ca2+ release and thereby myocardial con-
tractility. Excessive plasma catecholamine levels and 
cardiac sympathetic neuronal release of norepinephrine 
cause hyperphosphorylation of PKA, leading to calstabin 
2–depleted RyR2. The latter depletes SR Ca2+ stores 
and thereby impairs cardiac contraction, leading to heart 
failure, and also triggers ventricular arrhythmias.
The Ca2+ released from the SR then diffuses 
toward the myofibrils, where, as already described, 
it combines with troponin C (Fig. 1-6). By repress-
ing this inhibitor of contraction, Ca2+ activates the 
myofilaments to shorten. During repolarization, the 
activity of the Ca2+ pump in the SR, the SR Ca2+ 
ATPase ­(SERCA2A), reaccumulates Ca2+ against 
a concentration ­gradient, and the Ca2+ is stored in 
the SR by its attachment to a protein, calsequestrin. 
SECTION I
Introduction to Cardiovascular Disorders
12
This reaccumulation of Ca2+ is an energy (ATP)-requiring 
process that lowers the ­cytoplasmic [Ca2+] to a level 
that inhibits the ­actomyosin interaction responsible 
for contraction, and in this manner leads to myocar-
dial relaxation. Also, there is an exchange of Ca2+ for 
Na+ at the sarcolemma (Fig. 1-7), reducing the cyto-
plasmic [Ca2+]. Cyclic ­AMP–dependent PKA phos-
phorylates the SR ­protein ­phospholamban; the latter, 
in turn, permits activation of the Ca2+ pump, thereby 
increasing the uptake of Ca2+ by the SR, accelerating 
Figure 1-6 
Signal systems involved in positive inotropic and lusitropic 
(enhanced relaxation) effects of a-adrenergic stimulation. 
When the β-adrenergic agonist interacts with the β receptor, a 
series of G protein–mediated changes leads to ­activation of ade-
nylyl cyclase and the formation of cyclic adenosine monophos-
phate (cAMP). The latter acts via protein kinase A to stimulate 
metabolism (left) and phosphorylate the Ca2+ channel protein 
(right). The result is an enhanced opening probability of the 
Ca2+ channel, thereby increasing the inward movement of Ca2+ 
ions through the sarcolemma (SL) of the T tubule. These Ca2+ 
ions release more calcium from the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) 
to increase cytosolic  Ca2+ and activate troponin C. Ca2+ ions 
 
also increase the rate of breakdown of adenosine triphosphate 
(ATP) to adenosine diphosphate (ADP) and inorganic phosphate 
(Pi). Enhanced myosin ATPase activity explains the increased 
rate of contraction, with increased activation of troponin C 
explaining increased peak force development. An increased 
rate of relaxation is explained by the fact that cAMP also acti-
vates the protein phospholamban, situated on the membrane 
of the SR, that controls the rate of uptake of calcium into the 
SR. The latter effect explains enhanced relaxation (lusitropic 
effect). P, phosphorylation; PL, phospholamban; TnI, troponin I. 
(Modified from LH Opie, Heart Physiology, reprinted with per-
mission. Copyright LH Opie, 2004.)
P
P
2
1
3
β
GTP
ADP + Pi
Myosin
ATPase
cAMP
cAMP
via Tnl
cAMP
via PL
Control
Pattern of contraction
Time
Force
ATP
Troponin C
ADP + Pi
Via protein kinase A
Metabolic
• glycolysis
• lipolysis
• citrate cycle
Increased
1. rate of contraction
2. peak force
3. rate of relaxation
Adenyl
cyclase
SL
SR
Ca2+
Ca2+
Ca2+
β - Adrenergic agonist
β
Receptor
β
γ
αs
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
the rate of relaxation and providing larger quantities of 
Ca2+ in the SR for release by subsequent depolariza-
tion, thereby stimulating contraction.
Thus, the combination of the cell membrane, 
­transverse tubules, and SR, with their ability to ­transmit 
the action potential and release and then reaccumulate 
Ca2+, plays a fundamental role in the rhythmic con-
traction and relaxation of heart muscle. Genetic or 
­pharmacologic alterations of any component, whatever 
its ­etiology, can disturb these functions.
 
CHAPTER 1
Basic Biology of the Cardiovascular System
13
  Z-line
  Troponin C
Thin
filament
Contractile
proteins
Thick
filament
Sarcoplasmic reticulum
Ca2+ pump
Sarcotubular network
Mitochondria
Calsequestrin
Sarcoplasmic reticulum
Intracellular
(cytosol)
Plasma
membrane
Extracellular
Cisterna
Plasma
membrane
Ca2+
channel
Ca2+-
release channel
('foot' protein)
Na+
pump
Plasma membrane
Ca2+ pump
Na+/Ca2+
exchanger
T tubule
B2
B1
A
G
C
E
F
D
H
A1
Figure 1-7
The Ca2+ fluxes and key structures involved in cardiac 
excitation-contraction coupling. The arrows denote the 
direction of Ca2+ fluxes. The thickness of each arrow indi-
cates the magnitude of the calcium flux. Two Ca2+ cycles 
regulate excitation-contraction coupling and relaxation. The 
larger cycle is entirely intracellular and involves Ca2+ fluxes 
into and out of the sarcoplasmic reticulum, as well as Ca2+ 
binding to and release from troponin C. The smaller extra-
cellular Ca2+ cycle occurs when this cation moves into and 
out of the cell. The action potential opens plasma mem-
brane Ca2+ channels to allow passive entry of Ca2+ into 
the cell from the extracellular fluid (arrow A). Only a small 
portion of the Ca2+ that enters the cell directly activates 
the contractile proteins (arrow A1). The extracellular cycle 
is completed when Ca2+ is actively transported back out 
to the extracellular fluid by way of two plasma membrane 
fluxes mediated by the sodium-calcium exchanger (arrow 
B1) and the plasma membrane calcium pump (arrow B2). 
In the intracellular Ca2+ cycle, passive Ca2+ release occurs 
through channels in the cisternae (arrow C) and initiates 
contraction; active Ca2+ uptake by the Ca2+ pump of the 
sarcotubular network (arrow D) relaxes the heart. Diffusion 
of Ca2+ within the sarcoplasmic reticulum (arrow G) returns 
this activator cation to the cisternae, where it is stored in a 
complex with calsequestrin and other calcium-binding pro-
teins. Ca2+ released from the sarcoplasmic reticulum initi-
ates systole when it binds to troponin C (arrow E). Lowering 
of cytosolic [Ca2+] by the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) causes 
this ion to dissociate from troponin (arrow F) and relaxes the 
heart. Ca2+ also may move between mitochondria and cyto-
plasm (H). (Adapted from AM Katz: Physiology of the Heart, 
4th ed. Philadelphia, Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins, 2005; with 
permission.)
Control of Cardiac Performance 
and Output
The extent of shortening of heart muscle and, therefore, 
the stroke volume of the ventricle in the intact heart 
depend on three major influences: (1) the length of the 
muscle at the onset of contraction, i.e., the preload; 
(2) the tension that the muscle is called on to develop 
during contraction, i.e., the afterload; and (3) the con-
tractility of the muscle, i.e., the extent and velocity 
of shortening at any given preload and afterload. The 
major determinants of preload, afterload, and contractil-
ity are shown in Table 1-3.
The role of muscle length (preload)
The preload determines the length of the ­sarcomeres at 
the onset of contraction. The length of the ­sarcomeres 
associated with the most forceful contraction is 
Table 1-3
Determinants of Stroke Volume
I.    Ventricular Preload
A. Blood volume
B. Distribution of blood volume
1. Body position
2. Intrathoracic pressure
3. Intrapericardial pressure
4. Venous tone
5. Pumping action of skeletal muscles
C.  Atrial contraction
II. Ventricular Afterload
A. Systemic vascular resistance
B. Elasticity of arterial tree
C. Arterial blood volume
D. Ventricular wall tension
1. Ventricular radius
2. Ventricular wall thickness
III. Myocardial Contractilitya
A. Intramyocardial [Ca2+] ↑↓
B. Cardiac adrenergic nerve activity ↑↓b
C. Circulating catecholamines ↑↓b
D. Cardiac rate ↑↓b
E. Exogenous inotropic agents↑
F.   Myocardial ischemia ↓
G. Myocardial cell death (necrosis, apoptosis,  
autophagy) ↓
H. Alterations of sarcomeric and cytoskeletal proteins ↓
1. Genetic
2. Hemodynamic overload
I.   Myocardial fibrosis ↓
J.  Chronic overexpression of neurohormones ↓
K. Ventricular remodeling ↓
L.  Chronic and/or excessive myocardial hypertrophy ↓
aArrows indicate directional effects of determinants of contractility.
bContractility rises initially but later becomes depressed.
SECTION I
Introduction to Cardiovascular Disorders
14
∼2.2 μm. This length provides the optimum con-
figuration for the interaction between the two sets of 
­myofilaments. The length of the sarcomere also regu-
lates the extent of activation of the contractile system, 
i.e., its sensitivity to Ca2+. According to this concept, 
termed length-dependent activation, myofilament sensitivity to 
Ca2+ is also maximal at the optimal sarcomere length. 
The relation between the initial length of the muscle 
fibers and the developed force has prime importance 
for the function of heart muscle. This relationship forms 
the basis of Starling’s law of the heart, which states 
that within limits, the force of ventricular contraction 
depends on the end-diastolic length of the cardiac mus-
cle; in the intact heart, the latter relates closely to the 
ventricular end-diastolic volume.
Cardiac performance
The ventricular end-diastolic or “filling” pressure some-
times is used as a surrogate for the end-diastolic volume. 
In isolated heart and heart-lung preparations, the stroke 
volume varies directly with the end-diastolic fiber 
length (preload) and inversely with the arterial resistance 
(afterload), and as the heart fails—i.e., as its contractil-
ity declines—it delivers a progressively smaller stroke 
volume from a normal or even elevated end-diastolic 
volume. The relation between the ventricular end-
diastolic pressure and the stroke work of the ventricle 
(the ventricular function curve) provides a useful defini-
tion of the level of contractility of the heart in the intact 
organism. An increase in contractility is accompanied by 
a shift of the ventricular function curve upward and to 
the left (greater stroke work at any level of ventricular 
end-diastolic pressure, or lower end-diastolic volume 
at any level of stroke work), whereas a shift downward 
and to the right characterizes depression of contractility 
(Fig. 1-8).
Ventricular afterload
In the intact heart, as in isolated cardiac muscle, the 
extent and velocity of shortening of ventricular muscle 
fibers at any level of preload and of myocardial con-
tractility relate inversely to the afterload, i.e., the load 
that opposes shortening. In the intact heart, the after-
load may be defined as the tension developed in the 
ventricular wall during ejection. Afterload is determined 
by the aortic pressure as well as by the volume and 
thickness of the ventricular cavity. Laplace’s law states 
that the tension of the myocardial fiber is the product 
of the intracavitary ventricular pressure and ventricular 
radius divided by wall thickness. Therefore, at any par-
ticular level of aortic pressure, the afterload on a dilated 
left ventricle exceeds that on a normal-sized ventricle. 
Conversely, at the same aortic pressure and ventricu-
lar diastolic volume, the afterload on a hypertrophied 
ventricle is lower that of a normal chamber. The ­aortic 
pressure in turn depends on the peripheral vascu-
lar resistance, the physical characteristics of the arterial 
tree, and the volume of blood it contains at the onset of 
ejection.
Ventricular afterload critically regulates cardiovascular 
performance (Fig. 1-9). As already noted, elevations 
in both preload and contractility increase myocardial 
fiber shortening, whereas increases in afterload reduce 
it. The extent of myocardial fiber shortening and left 
­ventricular size determine stroke volume. An increase in 
arterial pressure induced by vasoconstriction, for exam-
ple, ­augments afterload, which opposes myocardial fiber 
shortening, reducing stroke volume.
When myocardial contractility becomes impaired and 
the ventricle dilates, afterload rises (Laplace’s law) and 
limits cardiac output. Increased afterload also may result 
from neural and humoral stimuli that occur in response 
to a fall in cardiac output. This increased afterload may 
reduce cardiac output further, thereby increasing ven-
tricular volume and initiating a vicious circle, especially 
in patients with ischemic heart disease and limited myo-
cardial O2 supply. Treatment with vasodilators has the 
Ventricular performance
Maximal activity
Walking
Rest
Normal-exercise
Normal-rest
Contractile state of myocardium
Exercise
Heart failure
Fatal myocardial
depression
Dyspnea
Pulmonary edema
Ventricular EDV
Stretching of myocardium
2
C
A
D
B
1
3
3′
E
4
Figure 1-8
The interrelations among influences on ventricular end-
diastolic volume (EDV) through stretching of the myo-
cardium and the contractile state of the myocardium. Lev-
els of ventricular EDV associated with filling pressures that 
result in dyspnea and pulmonary edema are shown on the 
abscissa. Levels of ventricular performance required when 
the subject is at rest, while walking, and during maximal 
activity are ­designated on the ordinate. The broken lines are 
the descending limbs of the ventricular-performance curves, 
which are rarely seen during life but show the level of ventric-
ular performance if end-diastolic volume could be elevated 
to very high levels. For further explanation, see text. (Modi-
fied from WS Colucci and E Braunwald: Pathophysiology of 
heart failure, in ­Braunwald’s Heart Disease, 7th ed, DP Zipes 
et al [eds]. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2005, pp 509–538.)
 
CHAPTER 1
Basic Biology of the Cardiovascular System
15
Contractility
Stroke volume
Heart rate
Afterload
Preload
Higher
nervous
centers
Medullary
vasomotor
and cardiac
centers
Venous
return
Cardiac
output
Peripheral
resistance
Arterial
pressure
Carotid and
aortic
pressoreceptors
opposite effect; when afterload is reduced, cardiac out-
put rises (Chap. 17).
Under normal circumstances, the various influences 
acting on cardiac performance enumerated earlier inter-
act in a complex fashion to maintain cardiac output at a 
level appropriate to the requirements of the metaboliz-
ing tissues (Fig. 1-9); interference with a single mecha-
nism may not influence the cardiac output. For example, 
a moderate reduction of blood volume or the loss of the 
atrial contribution to ventricular contraction ordinarily 
can be sustained without a reduction in the cardiac out-
put at rest. Under these circumstances, other factors, 
such as increases in the frequency of adrenergic nerve 
impulses to the heart, heart rate, and venous tone, will 
serve as compensatory mechanisms and sustain cardiac 
output in a normal individual.
Exercise
The integrated response to exercise illustrates the inter-
actions among the three determinants of stroke volume: 
Figure 1-9
Interactions in the intact circulation of preload, contrac-
tility, and afterload in producing stroke volume. Stroke 
volume combined with heart rate determines cardiac output, 
which, when combined with peripheral vascular resistance, 
determines arterial pressure for tissue perfusion. The char-
acteristics of the arterial system also contribute to afterload, 
an increase which reduces stroke volume. The interaction of 
these components with carotid and aortic arch barorecep-
tors provides a feedback mechanism to higher medullary 
and vasomotor cardiac centers and to higher levels in the 
central nervous system to effect a modulating influence on 
heart rate, peripheral vascular resistance, venous return, 
and contractility. (From MR Starling: Physiology of myocar-
dial contraction, in Atlas of Heart Failure: Cardiac Function 
and Dysfunction, 3rd ed, WS Colucci and E Braunwald [eds]. 
Philadelphia: Current Medicine, 2002, pp 19–35.)
preload, afterload, and contractility (Fig. 1-8). Hyper-
ventilation, the pumping action of the exercising 
­muscles, and venoconstriction during exercise all aug-
ment venous return and hence ventricular filling and 
preload (Table 1-3). Simultaneously, the increase in the 
adrenergic nerve impulse traffic to the myocardium, 
the increased concentration of circulating catechol-
amines, and the tachycardia that occur during exercise 
combine to augment the contractility of the myocar-
dium (Fig. 1-8, curves 1 and 2) and together elevate 
stroke volume and stroke work, without a change in or 
even a reduction of end-diastolic pressure and volume 
(Fig. 1-8, points A and B). Vasodilation occurs in the 
exercising muscles, thus tending to limit the increase in 
arterial pressure that otherwise would occur as cardiac 
output rises to levels as high as five times greater than 
basal levels during maximal exercise. This vasodilation 
ultimately allows the achievement of a greatly elevated 
cardiac output during exercise at an arterial pressure 
only moderately higher than in the resting state.
Assessment of Cardiac Function
Several techniques can define impaired cardiac 
­function in clinical practice. The cardiac output and 
stroke ­volume may be depressed in the presence of 
heart failure, but not uncommonly, these variables are 
within normal limits in this condition. A somewhat 
more ­sensitive index of cardiac function is the ejec-
tion fraction, i.e., the ratio of stroke volume to end-
diastolic volume (normal value = 67 ± 8%), which 
is frequently depressed in systolic heart failure even 
when the stroke volume itself is normal. Alternatively, 
abnormally elevated ventricular end-diastolic volume 
(normal value = 75 ± 20 mL/m2) or end-systolic volume 
(normal value = 25 ± 7 mL/m2) signifies impairment 
of left ventricular systolic function.
Noninvasive techniques, particularly echocardiog-
raphy as well as radionuclide scintigraphy and cardiac 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) (Chap. 12), have 
great value in the clinical assessment of myocardial 
function. They provide measurements of end-diastolic 
and end-systolic volumes, ejection fraction, and ­systolic 
shortening rate, and they allow assessment of ven-
tricular filling (see later) as well as regional contraction 
and relaxation. The latter measurements are particu-
larly important in ischemic heart disease, as myocardial 
infarction causes regional myocardial damage.
A limitation of measurements of cardiac output, ejec-
tion fraction, and ventricular volumes in assessing cardiac 
function is that ventricular loading conditions strongly 
influence these variables. Thus, a depressed ejection frac-
tion and lowered cardiac output may be observed in 
patients with normal ventricular function but reduced 
preload, as occurs in hypovolemia, or with increased 
afterload, as occurs in acutely elevated arterial pressure.
SECTION I
Introduction to Cardiovascular Disorders
16
Figure 1-10
The responses of the left ventricle to increased afterload, 
increased preload, and increased and reduced contrac-
tility are shown in the pressure-volume plane. Left. Effects 
of increases in preload and afterload on the pressure-volume 
loop. Since there has been no change in contractility, ESPVR 
(the end-systolic pressure-volume relation) is unchanged. 
With an increase in afterload, stroke volume falls (1 → 2); 
with an increase in preload, stroke volume rises (1 → 3). 
Right. With increased myocardial contractility and constant 
LV end-diastolic volume, the ESPVR moves to the left of the 
normal line (lower end-systolic volume at any end-systolic 
pressure) and stroke volume rises (1 → 3). With reduced 
myocardial contractility, the ESPVR moves to the right; end-
systolic volume is increased, and stroke volume falls (1 → 2).
The end-systolic left ventricular pressure-volume 
relationship is a particularly useful index of ventricular 
performance since it does not depend on preload and 
afterload (Fig. 1-10). At any level of myocardial con-
tractility, left ventricular end-systolic volume varies 
inversely with end-systolic pressure; as ­contractility 
declines, end-systolic volume (at any level of ­end-­systolic 
pressure) rises.
Diastolic Function
Ventricular filling is influenced by the extent and speed of 
myocardial relaxation, which in turn depends on the rate 
of uptake of Ca2+ by the SR; the latter may be enhanced 
by adrenergic activation and reduced by ischemia, which 
reduces the ATP available for pumping Ca2+ into the SR 
(see earlier). The stiffness of the ventricular wall also may 
impede filling. Ventricular stiffness increases with hyper-
trophy and conditions that infiltrate the ventricle, such as 
amyloid, or is caused by an extrinsic constraint (e.g., peri-
cardial compression) (Fig. 1-11).
Ventricular filling can be assessed by continuously 
measuring the velocity of flow across the mitral valve, 
using Doppler ultrasound. Normally, the velocity of 
inflow is more rapid in early diastole than during atrial 
systole; with mild to moderately impaired relaxation, 
the rate of early diastolic filling declines, whereas the 
rate of presystolic filling rises. With further impairment 
of filling, the pattern is “pseudo-normalized,” and early 
ventricular filling becomes more rapid as left atrial pres-
sure upstream to the stiff left ventricle rises.
Cardiac Metabolism
The heart requires a continuous supply of energy (in 
the form of ATP) not only to perform its mechanical 
pumping functions, but also to regulate intracellular and 
transsarcolemmal ionic movements and concentration 
gradients. Among its pumping functions, the develop-
ment of tension, the frequency of contraction, and the 
level of myocardial contractility are the principal deter-
minants of the heart’s substantial energy needs, making 
its O2 requirements approximately 15% of that of the 
entire organism.
Most ATP production depends on the oxida-
tion of substrate (glucose and free fatty acids [FFAs]). 
­Myocardial FFAs are derived from circulating FFAs, 
which result principally from lipolysis in adipose tis-
sue, whereas the myocyte’s glucose derives from plasma 
as well as from the cell’s breakdown of its glycogen 
stores (glycogenolysis). These two principal sources 
of acetyl coenzyme A in cardiac muscle vary recipro-
cally. ­Glucose is broken down in the cytoplasm into a 
three-carbon product, pyruvate, which passes into the 
Abnormal relaxation
Pericardial restraint
Chamber
dilation
Increased chamber
stiffness
Left ventricular volume
Left ventricular pressure
Figure 1-11
Mechanisms that cause diastolic dysfunction reflected 
in the pressure-volume relation. The bottom half of the 
pressure-volume loop is depicted. Solid lines represent nor-
mal subjects; broken lines represent patients with diastolic 
dysfunction. (From JD Carroll et al: The differential effects of 
positive inotropic and vasodilator therapy on diastolic prop-
erties in patients with congestive cardiomyopathy. Circulation 
74:815, 1986; with permission.)
3
LV volume
ESPVR
afterload
LV pressure
1
2
preload
3
LV volume
LV pressure
1
2
Contractility
Contractility
Normal
  contractility
 
CHAPTER 1
Basic Biology of the Cardiovascular System
17
mitochondria, where it is metabolized to the two-carbon 
fragment, acetyl-Co-A, and undergoes oxidation. FFAs 
are converted to acyl-CoA in the cytoplasm and acetyl-
CoA in the mitochondria. Acetyl-CoA enters the citric 
acid (Krebs) cycle to produce ATP by oxidative phos-
phorylation within the mitochondria; ATP then enters 
the cytoplasm from the mitochondrial compartment. 
Intracellular ADP, resulting from the breakdown of 
ATP, enhances mitochondrial ATP production.
In the fasted, resting state, circulating FFA concen-
trations and their myocardial uptake are high, and they 
furnish most of the heart’s acetyl-CoA (∼70%). In the 
fed state, with elevations of blood glucose and insulin, 
glucose oxidation increases and FFA oxidation subsides. 
Increased cardiac work, the administration of inotropic 
agents, hypoxia, and mild ischemia all enhance myo-
cardial glucose uptake, glucose production resulting 
from glycogenolysis, and glucose metabolism to pyru-
vate (glycolysis). By contrast, β-adrenergic stimulation, 
as occurs during stress, raises the circulating levels and 
metabolism of FFAs in favor of glucose. Severe ischemia 
inhibits the cytoplasmic enzyme pyruvate dehydroge-
nase, and despite both glycogen and glucose breakdown, 
glucose is metabolized only to lactic acid (anaerobic 
glycolysis), which does not enter the citric acid cycle. 
Anaerobic glycolysis produces much less ATP than does 
aerobic glucose metabolism, in which glucose is metab-
olized to pyruvate and subsequently oxidized to CO2. 
High concentrations of circulating FFAs, which can 
occur when adrenergic stimulation is superimposed on 
severe ischemia, reduce oxidative phosphorylation and 
also cause ATP wastage; the myocardial content of ATP 
declines and impairs myocardial contraction. In addi-
tion, products of FFA breakdown can exert toxic effects 
on cardiac cell membranes and may be arrhythmogenic.
Myocardial energy is stored as creatine phosphate 
(CP), which is in equilibrium with ATP, the immedi-
ate source of energy. In states of reduced energy avail-
ability, the CP stores decline first. Cardiac hypertrophy, 
fibrosis, tachycardia, increased wall tension resulting 
from ventricular dilation, and increased intracytoplas-
mic [Ca2+] all contribute to increased myocardial energy 
needs. When coupled with reduced coronary flow 
reserve, as occurs with obstruction of coronary arter-
ies or abnormalities of the coronary microcirculation, 
an imbalance in myocardial ATP production relative 
to demand may occur, and the resulting ischemia can 
worsen or cause heart failure.
Developmental biology of the cardiovascular 
system
The heart is the first organ to form during embryogen-
esis (Fig. 1-12) and must accomplish the simultaneous 
challenges of circulating blood, nutrients, and oxygen 
to the other forming organs while continuing to grow 
and undergo complex morphogenetic changes. Early 
progenitors of the heart arise within very early crescent-
shaped fields of lateral splanchnic mesoderm under the 
influence of multiple signals, including those derived 
from neural ectoderm long before neural tube closure. 
Early cardiac precursors express regulatory transcrip-
tion factors that play reiterated roles in cardiac devel-
opment, such as NKX2-5 and GATA4; these mutations 
are responsible for some forms of inherited congenital 
heart disease. Early cardiac precursors form two bilat-
eral heart tubes, each composed of a single cell layer of 
endocardium surrounded by a single layer of myocardial 
precursors. Subsequently, a single midline heart tube is 
formed by the medial migration and midline fusion of 
these bilateral structures. The caudal, inflow region of 
the heart tube adopts a more rostral final position and 
represents the atrial anlagen, whereas the rostral, out-
flow portion of the tube forms the truncus arteriosus, 
which divides to produce the aorta and the proximal 
pulmonary artery. Between these extremes lie the struc-
tural precursors of the ventricles.
The linear heart tube undergoes an asymmetric 
­looping process (the first gross evidence of left-right 
asymmetry in the developing embryo), which posi-
tions the portion of the heart tube destined to become 
the left ventricle to the left of the more rostral precur-
sors of the right ventricle and outflow tract. Looping is 
­coordinated with chamber specification and balloon-
ing of various regions of the heart tube to produce the 
­presumptive atria and ventricles.
Relatively recent work has demonstrated that signifi-
cant portions of the right ventricle are formed by cells 
that are added to the developing heart after looping has 
occurred. These cells, which are derived from what is 
called the second heart field, derive from progenitors in 
the ventral pharynx and express markers that allow for 
their identification, including islet-1. Different embryo-
logic origins of cells within the right and left ventricles 
may help explain why some forms of congenital and 
adult heart diseases affect these regions of the heart to 
varying degrees.
After looping and chamber formation, a series of sep-
tation events divide the left and right sides of the heart, 
separate the atria from the ventricles, and form the aorta 
and pulmonary artery from the truncus arteriosus. Car-
diac valves form between the atria and the ventricles 
and between the ventricles and the outflow vessels. 
Early in development, the single layer of myocardial 
cells secretes an extracellular matrix rich in hyaluronic 
acid. This extracellular matrix, termed “cardiac jelly,” 
accumulates within the endocardial cushions, precursors 
of the cardiac valves. Signals from overlying myocardial 
cells, including members of the transforming growth 
factor β family, trigger migration, invasion, and phe-
notypic changes of underlying endocardial cells, which 
undergo an epithelial-mesenchymal transformation and 
SECTION I
Introduction to Cardiovascular Disorders
18
invade the cardiac jelly to cellularize the endocardial 
cushions. Mesenchymal components proliferate and 
remodel to form the mature valve leaflets.
The great vessels form as a series of bilaterally sym-
metric aortic arch arteries that undergo asymmetric 
remodeling events to form the mature vasculature. The 
immigration of neural crest cells that arise in the dor-
sal neural tube orchestrates this process. These cells are 
required for aortic arch remodeling and septation of the 
truncus arteriosus. They develop into smooth-muscle cells 
within the tunica media of the aortic arch, the duc-
tus arteriosus, and the carotid arteries. Smooth-muscle 
cells within the descending aorta arise from a different 
embryologic source, the lateral plate mesoderm. Neural 
crest cells are sensitive to both vitamin A and folic acid, 
and congenital heart disease involving abnormal remod-
eling of the aortic arch arteries has been associated with 
maternal deficiencies of these vitamins. Genetic syn-
dromes associated with ­aortic arch defects can be associ-
ated with other abnormalities of neural crest craniofacial 
derivatives, including the palate.
Coronary artery formation requires yet another cell 
population that initiates extrinsic to the embryonic heart 
fields. Epicardial cells arise in the proepicardial organ, a 
derivative of the septum transversum, which also con-
tributes to the fibrous portion of the ­diaphragm and to 
Neural folds
Early heart-forming
regions
Second heart field
RA
RV
RV
LV
LV
LA
First heart field
Pericardial
coelom
Foregut
Forming heart
A
B
C
D
E
F
Figure 1-12
A. Schematic depiction of a transverse section through 
an early embryo depicts the bilateral regions where early 
heart tubes form. B. The bilateral heart tubes subsequently 
migrate to the midline and fuse to form the linear heart tube. 
C. At the early cardiac crescent stage of embryonic develop-
ment, cardiac precursors include a primary heart field fated 
to form the linear heart tube and a second heart field fated 
to add myocardium to the inflow and outflow poles of the 
heart. D. Second heart field cells populate the pharyngeal 
region before subsequently migrating to the maturing heart. 
E. Large portions of the right ventricle and outflow tract and 
some cells within the atria derive from the second heart field. 
F. The aortic arch arteries form as symmetric sets of vessels 
that then remodel under the influence of the neural crest to 
form the asymmetric mature vasculature.
 
CHAPTER 1
Basic Biology of the Cardiovascular System
19
the liver. Proepicardial cells contribute to the smooth-
muscle cells of the coronary arteries and are required 
for their proper patterning. Other cell types within the 
heart, including fibroblasts and ­potentially some myo-
cardial cells, also can arise from the proepicardium.
The cardiac conduction system, which functions 
both to generate and to propagate electrical impulses, 
develops primarily from multipotential cardiac pre-
cursors. The conduction system is composed of slow 
(proximal) components, such as the sinoatrial (SA) and 
atrioventricular (AV) nodes, as well as fast (distal) com-
ponents, including the His bundle, bundle branches, 
and Purkinje fibers. The AV node primarily serves to 
delay the electrical impulse between atria and ventri-
cles (manifesting decremental conduction), whereas the 
distal conduction system rapidly delivers the impulse 
throughout the ventricles. Significant recent attention 
has been focused on the embryologic origins of ­various 
components of the specialized conduction network. 
Precursors within the sinus venosus give rise to the SA 
node, whereas those within the AV canal mature into 
heterogeneous cell types that compose the AV node. 
Myocardial cells transdifferentiate into Purkinje fibers 
to form the distal conduction system. Fast and slow 
conducting cell types within the nodes and bundles 
are characterized by expression of distinct gap junction 
­proteins, including connexins, and ion channels that 
characterize unique cell fates and electrical properties of 
the tissues. Developmental defects in conduction ­system 
morphogenesis and lineage determination can lead to 
various electrophysiologic disorders, including con-
genital heart block and preexcitation syndromes such as 
Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome (Chap. 16).
Studies of cardiac stem and progenitor cells suggest 
that progressive lineage restriction results in the gradual 
and stepwise determination of mature cell fates within 
the heart, with early precursors capable of adopting 
endothelial, smooth-muscle, or cardiac phenotypes, and 
subsequent further specialization into atrial, ventricular, 
and specialized conduction cell types.
Regenerating Cardiac Tissue
Until very recently, adult mammalian myocardial cells 
were viewed as fully differentiated and without regen-
erative potential. Evidence currently supports the exis-
tence of limited endogenous regenerative potential of 
mature cardiac myocytes, resident cardiac progenitors, 
and/or bone marrow–derived stem cells. Considerable 
current effort is being devoted to evaluating the utility 
of cells from these sources to enhance the regenerative 
potential of the heart. The success of such approaches 
would offer the exciting possibility of reconstructing an 
infarcted or failing ventricle.
 Thomas A. Gaziano  
I   J. Michael Gaziano 
20
 Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is now the most  common 
cause of death worldwide. Before 1900, infectious dis-
eases and malnutrition were the most common causes 
and CVD was responsible for less than 10% of all 
deaths. Today, CVD accounts for approximately 30% 
of deaths worldwide, including nearly 40% in high-
income countries and about 28% in low- and middle-
income countries. 
 THE EPIDEMIOLOGIC TRANSITION 
 The global rise in CVD is the result of an unprece-
dented transformation in the causes of morbidity and 
mortality during the twentieth and twenty-fi rst centu-
ries. Known as the epidemiologic transition, this shift 
is driven by industrialization, urbanization, and associ-
ated lifestyle changes and is taking place in every part 
of the world among all races, ethnic groups, and cul-
tures. The transition is divided into four basic stages: 
pestilence and famine, receding pandemics, degenera-
tive and human-made diseases, and delayed degenera-
tive diseases. A fi fth stage, characterized by an epidemic 
of inactivity and obesity, may be emerging in some 
 countries  ( Table 2-1 ). 
 Malnutrition, infectious diseases, and high infant and 
child mortality rates that are offset by high fertility mark 
the  age of pestilence and famine . Tuberculosis, dysentery, 
cholera, and infl uenza are often fatal, resulting in a mean 
life expectancy of about 30 years. Cardiovascular dis-
ease, which accounts for less than 10% of deaths, takes 
the form of rheumatic heart disease and cardiomyopa-
thies due to infection and malnutrition. Approximately 
10% of the world’s population remains in the age of 
 pestilence and famine. 
 Per capita income and life expectancy increase 
 during the  age of receding pandemics as the emergence 
of public health systems, cleaner water supplies, and 
improved nutrition combine to drive down deaths 
from infectious disease and malnutrition. Infant and 
childhood mortality rates also decline, but deaths due to 
CVD increase to between 10% and 35% of all deaths. 
Rheumatic valvular disease, hypertension, coronary 
heart disease (CHD), and stroke are the predominant 
forms of CVD. Almost 40% of the world’s population is 
 currently in this stage. 
 The  age of degenerative and human-made diseases is 
 distinguished by mortality from noncommunicable 
 diseases—primarily CVD—surpassing mortality from 
malnutrition and infectious diseases. Caloric intake, par-
ticularly from animal fat, increases. Coronary heart disease 
and stroke are prevalent, and 35–65% of all deaths can 
be traced to CVD. Typically, the rate of CHD deaths 
exceeds that of stroke by a ratio of 2:1 to 3:1. During 
this period, average life expectancy surpasses 50 years. 
Roughly 35% of the world’s population falls into this 
category. 
 In the  age of delayed degenerative diseases , CVD and 
cancer remain the major causes of morbidity and 
 mortality, with CVD accounting for 40% of all deaths. 
However, age-adjusted CVD mortality declines, 
aided by preventive strategies such as smoking cessa-
tion  programs and effective blood pressure control, acute 
 hospital management, and technological advances such 
as the availability of bypass surgery. CHD, stroke, and 
congestive heart failure are the  primary forms of CVD. 
About 15% of the world’s population is now in the age 
of delayed degenerative diseases or is exiting this age 
and moving into the fi fth stage of the epidemiologic 
transition. 
 In the industrialized world, physical activity contin-
ues to decline while total caloric intake increases. The 
resulting epidemic of overweight and obesity may sig-
nal the start of the  age of inactivity and obesity . Rates of 
 EPIDEMIOLOGY OF CARDIOVASCULAR 
DISEASE 
 CHAPTER 2 
 
CHAPTER 2
Epidemiology of Cardiovascular Disease
21
type 2 diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and lipid abnor-
malities are on the rise, trends that are particularly evi-
dent in children. If these risk factor trends continue, 
age-adjusted CVD mortality rates could increase in the 
coming years.
The Epidemiologic Transition in  
the United States
The United States, like other high-income countries, 
has proceeded through four stages of the epidemiologic 
transition. Recent trends, however, suggest that the 
rates of decline of some chronic and degenerative ­diseases 
have slowed. Because of the large amount of available 
data, the United States serves as a useful ­reference point 
for comparisons.
The age of pestilence and famine (before 1900)
The American colonies were born into pestilence and 
famine, with half the Pilgrims who arrived in 1620 
dying of infection and malnutrition by the following 
spring. At the end of the 1800s, the U.S. economy was 
still largely agrarian, with more than 60% of the pop-
ulation living in rural settings. By 1900, average life 
expectancy had increased to about 50 years. However, 
­tuberculosis, pneumonia, and other infectious diseases 
still accounted for more deaths than any other cause. 
CVD accounted for less than 10% of all deaths.
The age of receding pandemics (1900–1930)
By 1900, a public health infrastructure was in place: 
Forty states had health departments, many larger towns 
had major public works efforts to improve the water 
Table 2-1
Five Stages of the Epidemiologic Transition
Stage
Description
Deaths Related to CVD, %
Predominant CVD Type
Pestilence and famine
Predominance of malnutrition and 
infectious diseases as causes of 
death; high rates of infant and child 
mortality; low mean life expectancy
<10
Rheumatic heart ­disease, 
cardiomyopathies 
caused by infection and 
­malnutrition
Receding pandemics
Improvements in nutrition and public 
health lead to decrease in rates of 
deaths related to malnutrition and 
infection; precipitous decline in 
infant and child mortality rates
10–35
Rheumatic valvular 
­disease, ­hypertension, 
CHD, and stroke 
­(predominantly 
­hemorrhagic)
Degenerative and 
human-made diseases
Increased fat and caloric intake and 
decrease in physical activity lead 
to emergence of hypertension and 
atherosclerosis; with increase in life 
expectancy, mortality from chronic, 
noncommunicable diseases exceeds 
mortality from malnutrition and 
­infectious disease
35–65
CHD and stroke (ischemic 
and hemorrhagic)
Delayed degenerative 
diseases
CVD and cancer are the major causes 
of morbidity and mortality; better 
treatment and prevention efforts 
help avoid deaths among those with 
disease and delay primary events; 
age-adjusted CVD morality rate 
declines; CVD affecting older and 
older individuals
40–50
CHD, stroke, and conges-
tive heart failure
Inactivity and obesity
Overweight and obesity increase 
at alarming rate; diabetes and 
­hypertension increase; decline in 
smoking rates levels off; a minority 
of the population meets physical 
activity recommendations
Possible reversal of 
­age-adjusted declines in 
mortality
CHD, stroke, and conges-
tive heart failure, periph-
eral vascular disease
Abbreviations: CHD, coronary heart disease; CVD, cardiovascular disease.
Source: Adapted from AR Omran: Milbank Mem Fund Q 49:509, 1971; and SJ Olshansky, AB Ault: Milbank Q 64:355, 1986.
SECTION I
Introduction to Cardiovascular Disorders
22
supply and sewage systems, municipal use of chlorine 
to disinfect water was widespread, pasteurization and 
other improvements in food handling were introduced, 
and the educational quality of health care personnel 
improved. Those changes led to dramatic declines in 
infectious disease mortality rates. However, the con-
tinued shift from a rural, agriculture-based economy to 
an urban, industrial economy had a number of conse-
quences on risk behaviors and factors for CVD. Owing 
to a lack of refrigerated transport from farms to urban 
centers, consumption of fresh fruits and vegetables 
declined and consumption of meat and grains increased, 
resulting in diets that were higher in animal fat and 
processed carbohydrates. In addition, the availability of 
factory-rolled cigarettes made tobacco more accessible 
and affordable for the mass population. Age-adjusted 
CVD mortality rates rose from 300 per 100,000 people 
in 1900 to approximately 390 per 100,000 during this 
period, driven by rapidly rising CHD rates.
The age of degenerative and human-made 
diseases (1930–1965)
During this period, deaths from infectious diseases fell 
to fewer than 50 per 100,000 per year and life expec-
tancy increased to almost 70 years. At the same time, 
the country became increasingly urbanized and indus-
trialized, precipitating a number of important lifestyle 
changes. By 1955, 55% of adult men were smoking, 
and fat consumption accounted for approximately 40% 
of total calories. Lower activity levels, high-fat diets, 
and increased smoking pushed CVD death rates to peak 
levels.
The age of delayed degenerative diseases 
(1965–2000)
Substantial declines in age-adjusted CVD mortality rates 
began in the mid-1960s. In the 1970s and 1980s, age-
adjusted CHD mortality rates fell approximately 2% per 
year and stroke rates fell 3% per year. A main charac-
teristic of this phase is the steadily rising age at which 
a first CVD event occurs. Two significant advances 
have been credited with the decline in CVD mortality 
rates: new therapeutic approaches and the implemen-
tation of prevention measures. Treatments once con-
sidered advanced, such as angioplasty, bypass surgery, 
and implantation of defibrillators, are now considered 
the standard of care. Treatments for hypertension and 
elevated cholesterol along with the widespread use of 
aspirin have also contributed significantly to reducing 
deaths from CVD. In addition, Americans have been 
exposed to public health campaigns promoting lifestyle 
modifications effective at reducing the prevalence of 
smoking, hypertension, and dyslipidemia.
Is the United States entering the fifth age?
The decline in the age-adjusted CVD death rate of 3% 
per year through the 1970s and 1980s tapered off in the 
1990s to 2%. However, CVD death rates declined by 
3–5% per year during the first decade of the new mil-
lennium. In 2000, the age-adjusted CVD death rate 
was 341 per 100,000. By 2006, it had fallen to 263 
per 100,000. Competing trends appear to be in play. 
On the one hand, the well-recognized increase in the 
prevalence of diabetes and obesity, a slowing in the rate 
of decline of smoking, and a leveling off in the rate of 
detection and treatment for hypertension are in the 
negative column. On the other hand, cholesterol levels 
continue to decline in the face of increased statin use.
Current Worldwide Variations
An epidemiologic transition much like that 
which occurred in the United States is occurring 
throughout the world, but unique regional fea-
tures have modified aspects of the transition in various 
parts of the world. In terms of economic development, 
the world can be divided into two broad categories, (1) 
high-income countries and (2) low- and middle-income 
countries, which can be further subdivided into six dis-
tinct economic/geographic regions. Currently, 85% of 
the world’s population lives in low- and middle-income 
countries, and it is those countries which are driving the 
rates of change in the global burden of CVD (Fig. 2-1). 
Three million CVD deaths occurred in high-income 
countries in 2001, compared with 13 million in the rest 
of the world.
High-income countries
Approximately 940 million people live in ­high-income 
countries, where CHD is the dominant form of 
CVD, with rates that tend to be twofold to fivefold 
higher than stroke rates. The rates of CVD in Canada, 
New  Zealand, Australia, and Western Europe tend 
to be similar to those in the United States; however, 
among the countries of Western Europe, the absolute 
rates vary threefold with a clear north/south gradi-
ent. The highest CVD death rates are in the northern 
countries, such as Finland, Ireland, and Scotland, and 
the lowest rates are in the Mediterranean countries of 
France, Spain, and Italy. Japan is unique among the 
high-income countries: stroke rates increased dramati-
cally, but CHD rates did not rise as sharply over the last 
century. This difference may stem in part from genetic 
factors, but it is more likely that the fish- and plant-
based low-fat diet and resulting low cholesterol levels 
have played a larger role. Importantly, Japanese dietary 
habits are undergoing substantial changes, reflected in 
an increase in cholesterol levels.
 
CHAPTER 2
Epidemiology of Cardiovascular Disease
23
Low- and middle-income countries
The World Bank groups the low- and middle-income 
countries (gross national income per capita less than US 
$9200) into six geographic regions: East Asia and the 
Pacific, (Eastern) Europe and Central Asia, Latin ­America 
and the Caribbean, Middle East and North Africa, 
South Asia, and Sub-Saharan Africa. Although commu-
nicable diseases continue to be a major cause of death, 
CVD has emerged as a significant health concern in 
Figure 2-1
CVD data compared with other causes of death. CVD: 
cardiovascular disease. (Based on data from CD Mathers 
et al: Deaths and Disease Burden by Cause: Global Burden of 
Disease Estimates for 2001 by World Bank Country Groups. 
Disease Control Priorities Working Paper 18. April 2004, 
revised January 2005.)
Low and 
middle income
High
income
CVD
30%
Other
17%
Maternal/
perinatal 6%
Respiratory
6%
Injuries
9%
Cancer
13%
Infectious
19%
East Asia & Pacific
Eastern Europe & Central Asia
South Asia
Middle East & North Africa
Latin America & the Caribbean
Sub-Saharan Africa
High income
27.8%
(526 million)
35%
(310 million)
9.7%
(668 million)
58.1%
(477 million)
30.6%
(1,849 million)
25.2%
(1,388 million)
High income
38.5%
(940 million)
Figure 2-2
CVD death as a percentage of total deaths and total popu-
lation in seven economic regions of the world defined by the 
World Bank. (Based on data from CD Mathers et al: Deaths and
Disease Burden by Cause: Global Burden of Disease Estimates 
for 2001 by World Bank Country Groups. Disease Control 
­Priorities Working Paper 18. April 2004, revised January 2005.)
low- and middle-income countries. In most, an urban/
rural gradient has emerged for CHD, stroke, and hyper-
tension, with higher rates in urban centers.
Although CVD rates are rapidly rising, there are 
vast differences among the regions and countries and 
even within individual countries (Fig. 2-2). Many fac-
tors contribute to this heterogeneity. First, the regions 
are in various stages of the epidemiologic transition. 
Second, vast differences in lifestyle and behavioral risk 
SECTION I
Introduction to Cardiovascular Disorders
24
factors exist. Third, racial and ethnic differences may 
lead to altered susceptibilities to various forms of CVD. 
In addition, it should be noted that for most countries 
in these regions, accurate countrywide data on cause-
specific mortality are not complete, as death certificate 
completion is not routine and most of those countries 
do not have a centralized registry for deaths.
The East Asia and Pacific region, home to nearly 
2 billion people, appears to be straddling the second 
and third phases of the epidemiologic transition, with 
China, Indonesia, and Sri Lanka’s large combined pop-
ulation driving most of the trends. ­Overall, CVD is a 
major cause of death in China, but as in Japan, stroke 
(particularly hemorrhagic) causes more deaths than 
does  CHD, at a ratio of about 3:1. However, age-
adjusted CHD mortality increased 40% from 1984 
to 1999, suggesting further epidemiologic transition. 
China also appears to have a geographic gradient like that 
of Western Europe, with higher CVD rates in northern 
China than in southern China by a factor of 6. Other 
countries, such as Vietnam and Cambodia, are just 
emerging from the pestilence and famine era.
The Eastern Europe and Central Asia region is firmly at 
the peak of the third phase, with the highest death rates 
(58%) due to CVD in the world, nearly double the rate 
of high-income countries. More troubling is that nearly 
35% of deaths from CHD occur among working-
age adults, which is three times the rate in the United 
States. In Russia, increased CVD rates have contributed 
to falling life expectancy, particularly for men, whose 
life expectancy dropped from 71.6 in 1986 to 59 years 
today. In Poland, by contrast, the age-adjusted mortal-
ity rate decreased by approximately 30% for men during 
the 1990s and slightly more among women. Slovenia, 
Hungary, the Czech Republic, and Slovakia have had 
similar declines.
In general, Latin America appears to be in the third 
phase of the epidemiologic transition, although as in 
other low- and middle-income regions, there is vast 
regional heterogeneity, with some areas in the sec-
ond phase of the transition and some in the fourth. 
Today, approximately 28% of all deaths in this region 
are attributable to CVD, with CHD rates (35%) higher 
than stroke rates (29%). As in Eastern Europe, some 
­countries—Mexico, Costa Rica, and Venezuela—­
continued an overall increase in age-adjusted CHD 
mortality of 3–10% between 1970 and 2002, whereas 
in others—Argentina, Brazil, Chile, and Columbia—
rates appear to have declined by as much as 2% per year 
over the same period. The Middle East and North Africa 
region appears to be entering the third phase of the epi-
demiologic transition, with increasing life expectancy 
overall and CVD death rates just below those of devel-
oped nations. CHD is responsible for 17% of all deaths, 
and stroke for 7%. The traditional high-fiber diet, low 
in fat and cholesterol, has changed rapidly. Over the 
last few decades, daily fat consumption has increased in 
most of these countries, ranging from a 13.6% increase 
in Sudan to a 143.3% increase in Saudi Arabia. Over 
75% of Egyptians are overweight or obese, and the rate 
is 67% in Iraq and Jordan. Nearly 60% of Syrians and 
Iraqis report that they are physically inactive (less than 
10 min per day).
Most people in South Asia live in rural India, a 
country that is experiencing an alarming increase in 
heart disease. CVD accounted for 32% of all deaths in 
2000, and an estimated 2 million deaths were expected 
to occur due to CHD by 2010, representing a 30% 
increase over the preceding decade. The transition 
appears to be in the Western style, with CHD as the 
dominant form of CVD. In 1960, CHD represented 
4% of all CVD deaths in India, whereas in 1990 the 
proportion was >50%. This is somewhat unexpected 
because stroke tends to be a more dominant factor early 
in the epidemiologic transition. This finding may reflect 
inaccuracies in cause-specific mortality estimates or 
­possibly an underlying genetic component. It has been 
suggested that Indians have exaggerated insulin insen-
sitivity in response to the Western lifestyle pattern that 
may differentially increase rates of CHD over stroke. 
The South Asia region has the highest overall prevalence 
of diabetes in the low-income regions, with rates as high 
as 14% in urban centers. In certain rural areas, the preva-
lence of CVD and its risk factors is approaching urban 
rates. Nonetheless, rheumatic heart disease continues to 
be a major cause of morbidity and mortality.
For the most part, Sub-Saharan Africa remains in the 
first phase of the epidemiologic transition, with CVD 
rates half those in developed nations. Life expectancy 
has decreased by an average of 5 years since the early 
1990s largely because of HIV/AIDS and other chronic 
diseases, according to the World Bank; life expectan-
cies are the lowest in the world. Still, CVD accounts 
for 46% of noncommunicable deaths and is the leading 
cause of death among adults >age 35. As more HIV/
AIDS patients receive antiretroviral treatment, manag-
ing CVD risk factors such as dyslipidemia in this popu-
lation requires more attention. However, hypertension 
continues to be the major public health concern and has 
resulted in stroke being the dominant form of CVD. 
Rheumatic heart disease is still an important cause of 
CVD mortality and morbidity.
Global Trends in Cardiovascular 
Disease
In 1990, CVD accounted for 28% of the world’s 
50.4  million deaths and 9.7% of the 1.4 billion lost 
­disability-adjusted life years (DALYs), and by 2001, 
CVD was responsible for 29% of all deaths and 14% of 
the 1.5 billion lost DALYs. By 2030, when the popula-
tion is expected to reach 8.2 billion, 33% of all deaths 
 
CHAPTER 2
Epidemiology of Cardiovascular Disease
25
Table 2-2
Estimated Morbidity Related to Heart 
Disease: 2010-2030
Deaths
By 2010
By 2030
CVD deaths: annual number 
of all deaths
18.1 million
24.2 million
CVD deaths: percentage of 
all deaths
30.8%
32.5%
CHD deaths: percentage of 
all male deaths
13.1%
14.9%
CHD deaths: percentage of 
all female deaths
13.6%
13.1%
Stroke deaths: percentage of 
all male deaths
9.2%
10.4%
Stroke deaths: percentage of 
all female deaths
11.5%
11.8%
Abbreviations: CVD, cardiovascular disease; CHD, coronary heart 
disease.
Source: Adapted from J Mackay, G Mensah: Atlas of Heart Disease 
and Stroke. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2004.
will be the result of CVD (Table 2-2). Of these, 14.9% 
of deaths in men and 13.1% of deaths in women will be 
due to CHD. Stroke will be responsible for 10.4% of all 
male deaths and 11.8% of all female deaths.
In the high-income countries, population growth will be 
fueled by emigration from the low- and middle-income 
countries, but the populations of high-income ­countries 
will shrink as a proportion of the world’s population. 
The modest decline in CVD death rates that began 
in the high-income countries in the latter third of the 
twentieth century will continue, but the rate of decline 
appears to be slowing. However, these countries are 
expected to see an increase in the prevalence of CVD, as 
well as the absolute number of deaths as the population 
ages.
Significant proportions of the population living in 
low- and middle-income countries have entered the third 
phase of the epidemiologic transition, and some are 
entering the fourth stage. Changing demographics 
play a significant role in future predictions for CVD 
throughout the world. For example, between 1990 and 
2001, the population of Eastern Europe and Central 
Asia grew by 1 million people per year, whereas South 
Asia added 25 million people each year.
CVD rates will also have an economic impact. Even 
assuming no increase in CVD risk factors, most coun-
tries, but especially India and South Africa, will see a 
large number of people between 35 and 64 die of CVD 
over the next 30 years as well as an increasing level of 
morbidity among middle-aged people related to heart 
disease and stroke. In China, it is estimated that there 
will be 9 million deaths from CVD in 2030—up from 
2.4 million in 2002—with half occurring in individuals 
between 35 and 64 years old.
Regional Trends In Risk Factors
As indicated earlier, the global variation in CVD rates 
is related to temporal and regional variations in known 
risk behaviors and factors. Ecological analyses of major 
CVD risk factors and mortality demonstrate high cor-
relations between expected and observed mortality rates 
for the three main risk factors—smoking, serum choles-
terol, and hypertension—and suggest that many of the 
regional variations are based on differences in conven-
tional risk factors.
Behavioral Risk Factors
Tobacco
Every year, more than 5.5 trillion cigarettes are produced, 
enough to provide every person on the planet with 
1000 cigarettes. Worldwide, 1.3 billion people smoked 
in 2003, a number that is projected to increase to 
1.6 billion by 2030. Tobacco currently causes about 
5 million deaths—9% of all deaths—annually. Approxi-
mately 1.6 million are CVD-related. If current smoking 
patterns continue, by 2030 the global burden of disease 
attributable to tobacco will reach 10 million deaths annu-
ally. A unique feature of the low- and ­middle-income 
countries is easy access to smoking during the early stages 
of the epidemiologic transition due to the availability of 
relatively inexpensive tobacco products. In South Asia, 
the prominence of locally ­produced forms of tobacco 
other than manufactured cigarettes makes control of 
consumption more challenging.
Diet
Total caloric intake per capita increases as countries 
develop. With regard to cardiovascular disease, a key 
element of dietary change is an increase in intake of 
saturated animal fats and hydrogenated vegetable fats, 
which contain atherogenic trans-fatty acids, along with 
a decrease in intake of plant-based foods and an increase 
in simple carbohydrates. Fat contributes less than 20% 
of calories in rural China and India, less than 30% in 
Japan, and well above 30% in the United States. Caloric 
contributions from fat appear to be falling in the high-
income countries. In the United States, between 1971 
and 2000, the percentage of calories derived from satu-
rated fat decreased from 13% to 11%.
Physical inactivity
The increased mechanization that accompanies the 
economic transition leads to a shift from physically 
demanding agriculture-based work to largely sedentary 
SECTION I
Introduction to Cardiovascular Disorders
26
industry- and office-based work. In the United States, 
approximately one-quarter of the population does not 
participate in any leisure-time physical activity and only 
22% report engaging in sustained physical activity for 
at least 30 min on 5 or more days per week (the cur-
rent recommendation). In contrast, in countries such as 
China, physical activity is still integral to everyday life. 
Approximately 90% of the urban population walks or 
rides a bicycle to work, shopping, or school daily.
Metabolic Risk Factors
Lipid levels
Worldwide, high cholesterol levels are estimated to cause 
56% of ischemic heart disease and 18% of strokes, 
amounting to 4.4 million deaths annually. As coun-
tries move through the epidemiologic transition, mean 
population plasma cholesterol levels tend to rise. Social 
and individual changes that accompany urbanization 
clearly play a role because plasma cholesterol levels 
tend to be higher among urban residents than among 
rural residents. This shift is driven largely by greater 
­consumption of dietary fats—primarily from animal 
products and processed vegetable oils—and decreased 
physical activity. In the high-income countries, in 
general, mean population cholesterol levels are fall-
ing, whereas wide variation is seen in the low- and 
­middle-income countries.
Hypertension
Elevated blood pressure is an early indicator of the epi-
demiologic transition. Worldwide, approximately 62% 
of strokes and 49% of cases of ischemic heart disease 
are attributable to suboptimal (>115 mmHg systolic) 
blood pressure, which is believed to account for more 
than 7 million deaths annually. Remarkably, nearly half 
of this burden occurs among those with systolic blood 
pressure <140 mmHg, even as this level is used at the 
arbitrary threshold for defining hypertension in many 
national guidelines. Rising mean population blood pres-
sure is apparent as populations industrialize and move 
from rural to urban settings. Among urban-dwelling 
men and women in India, for example, the preva-
lence of hypertension is 25.5% and 29.0%, respectively, 
whereas it is 14.0% and 10.8%, respectively, in rural 
communities. One major concern in low- and middle-
income countries is the high rate of undetected, and 
therefore untreated, hypertension. This may explain, at 
least in part, the higher stroke rates in these countries 
in relation to CHD rates during the early stages of the 
transition. The high rates of hypertension, especially 
undiagnosed hypertension, throughout Asia probably 
contribute to the high prevalence of hemorrhagic stroke 
in the region.
Obesity
Although clearly associated with increased risk of CHD, 
much of the risk posed by obesity may be ­mediated 
by other CVD risk factors, including ­hypertension, 
diabetes mellitus, and lipid profile imbalances. In 
the ­mid-1980s, the World Health ­Organization’s 
­MONICA 
Project 
sampled 
48 
populations 
for 
­cardiovascular risk factors. In all but one male popu-
lation (China) and in most of the female populations, 
between 50% and 75% of adults age 35–64 years were 
overweight or obese. In ­addition, the prevalence of 
extreme obesity (BMI >40 kg/m2) more than tripled, 
increasing from 1.3% to 4.9%. In many of the low- and 
­middle-income countries, obesity appears to coex-
ist with undernutrition and malnutrition. Obesity is 
increasing throughout the world, particularly in devel-
oping countries, where the trajectories are steeper than 
those experienced in the developed countries. Accord-
ing to the latest World Health ­Organization (WHO) 
data, this is equivalent to about 1.3 billion overweight 
adults in the world. A survey undertaken in 1998 found 
that as many as 58% of ­African women living in South 
Africa might have been overweight or obese.
Diabetes mellitus
As a consequence of, or in addition to, increasing body 
mass index and decreasing levels of physical activity, 
worldwide rates of diabetes—predominantly type 2 
diabetes—are on the rise. In 2003, 194 million adults, 
or 5% of the world’s population, had diabetes. By 
2025, this number is predicted to increase 72 percent 
to 333 million. By 2025, the number of people with 
type 2 diabetes is projected to double in three of the 
six low- and middle-income regions: the Middle East 
and North Africa, South Asia, and Sub-Saharan Africa. 
There appear to be clear genetic susceptibilities to dia-
betes mellitus in various racial and ethnic groups. For 
example, migration studies suggest that South Asians 
and Indians tend to be at higher risk than are people of 
European ancestry.
Summary
Although CVD rates are declining in the high-income 
countries, they are increasing in virtually every other 
region of the world. The consequences of this prevent-
able epidemic will be substantial on many levels: indi-
vidual mortality and morbidity rates, family suffering, 
and staggering economic costs.
Three complementary strategies can be used to lessen 
the impact. First, the overall burden of CVD risk ­factors 
can be lowered through population-wide public health 
measures such as national campaigns against cigarette 
 
CHAPTER 2
Epidemiology of Cardiovascular Disease
27
smoking, unhealthy diets, and physical inactivity. 
­Second, it is important to identify higher-risk subgroups 
of the population that stand to benefit the most from 
specific, low-cost prevention interventions, including 
screening for and treatment of hypertension and ele-
vated cholesterol. Simple, low-cost interventions, such 
as the “polypill,” a regimen of aspirin, a statin, and an 
anithypertensive agent, also need to be explored. Third, 
resources should be allocated to acute as well as second-
ary prevention interventions. For countries with ­limited 
resources, a critical first step in developing a com-
prehensive plan is better assessment of cause-specific 
mortality and morbidity, as well as the prevalence of the 
major preventable risk factors.
In the meantime, the high-income countries must 
continue to bear the burden of research and develop-
ment aimed at prevention and treatment, being ­mindful 
of the economic limitations of many countries. The 
concept of the epidemiologic transition provides insight 
into methods to alter the course of the CVD epidemic. 
The efficient transfer of low-cost preventive and ther-
apeutic strategies could alter the natural course of this 
epidemic and thereby reduce the excess global burden 
of preventable CVD.
 Joseph Loscalzo 
28
 APPROACH TO THE PATIENT WITH POSSIBLE 
CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE 
 CHaPter 3 
 tHe MaGnitude of tHe ProBleM 
 Cardiovascular diseases comprise the most prevalent 
serious disorders in industrialized nations and are a rap-
idly growing problem in developing nations ( Chap. 2 ). 
Age-adjusted death rates for coronary heart disease have 
declined by two-thirds in the last four decades in the 
United States, refl ecting the identifi cation and reduction 
of risk factors as well as improved treatments and inter-
ventions for the management of coronary artery disease, 
arrhythmias, and heart failure. Nonetheless, cardiovas-
cular diseases remain the most common causes of death, 
responsible for 35% of all deaths, almost 1 million deaths 
each year.  Approximately one-fourth of these deaths are 
sudden. In addition, cardiovascular diseases are highly 
prevalent, diagnosed in 80 million adults, or ∼35% of 
the adult population. The growing prevalence of obe-
sity, type 2 diabetes mellitus, and metabolic syndrome 
( Chap. 32 ), which are important risk factors for athero-
sclerosis, now threatens to reverse the progress that has 
been made in the age-adjusted reduction in the mortality 
rate of coronary heart disease. 
 For many years cardiovascular disease was considered 
to be more common in men than in women. In fact, 
the percentage of all deaths secondary to cardiovascular 
disease is higher among women (43%) than among men 
(37%). In addition, although the absolute number of 
deaths secondary to cardiovascular disease has declined 
over the past decades in men, this number has actually 
risen in women. Infl ammation, obesity, type 2 diabetes 
mellitus, and the metabolic syndrome appear to play 
more prominent roles in the development of coronary 
atherosclerosis in women than in men.  Coronary artery 
disease (CAD) is more frequently associated with dys-
function of the coronary microcirculation in women 
than in men. Exercise electrocardiography has a lower 
diagnostic accuracy in the prediction of epicardial obstruc-
tion in women than in men. 
 CardiaC sYMPtoMs 
 The symptoms caused by heart disease result most 
commonly from myocardial ischemia, disturbance of 
the contraction and/or relaxation of the myocardium, 
obstruction to blood fl ow, or an abnormal cardiac 
rhythm or rate. Ischemia, which is caused by an imbal-
ance between the heart’s oxygen supply and demand, 
is manifest most frequently as chest discomfort ( Chap. 4 ), 
whereas reduction of the pumping ability of the heart 
commonly leads to fatigue and elevated intravascu-
lar pressure upstream of the failing ventricle. The latter 
results in abnormal fl uid accumulation, with peripheral 
edema ( Chap. 7 ) or pulmonary congestion and dyspnea 
( Chap. 5 ). Obstruction to blood fl ow, as occurs in val-
vular stenosis, can cause symptoms resembling those 
of myocardial failure ( Chap. 17 ). Cardiac arrhythmias 
often develop suddenly, and the resulting symptoms and 
signs—palpitations ( Chap. 8 ), dyspnea, hypotension, and 
syncope—generally occur abruptly and may disappear as 
rapidly as they develop. 
 Although dyspnea, chest discomfort, edema, and 
syncope are cardinal manifestations of cardiac disease, 
they occur in other conditions as well. Thus, dyspnea 
is observed in disorders as diverse as pulmonary  disease, 
marked obesity, and anxiety ( Chap. 5 ). Similarly, chest 
discomfort may result from a variety of noncardiac 
and cardiac causes other than myocardial  ischemia 
( Chap. 4 ). Edema, an important fi nding in untreated 
or inadequately treated heart failure, also may occur 
with primary renal disease and in hepatic cirrhosis 
( Chap. 7 ). Syncope occurs not only with serious cardiac 
 
CHAPTER 3
29
Approach to the Patient with Possible Cardiovascular Disease
Table 3-1 
New York Heart Association Functional 
Classification
Class I
  No limitation of physical  
activity
  No symptoms with 
­ordinary exertion
Class II
  Slight limitation of physical  
activity
  Ordinary activity causes  
symptoms
Class III
  Marked limitation of 
physical activity
  Less than ordinary activ-
ity causes symptoms
  Asymptomatic at rest
Class IV
  Inability to carry out any 
physical activity without 
discomfort
  Symptoms at rest
Source: Modified from The Criteria Committee of the New York Heart 
Association: Nomenclature and Criteria for Diagnosis, 9th ed. Boston, 
Little, Brown, 1994.
arrhythmias but in a number of neurologic conditions 
as well. Whether heart disease is responsible for these 
symptoms frequently can be determined by carrying out 
a careful clinical examination (Chap. 9), supplemented 
by noninvasive testing using electrocardiography at rest 
and during exercise (Chap. 11), echocardiography, roent-
genography, and other forms of myocardial imaging 
(Chap. 12).
Myocardial or coronary function that may be ade-
quate at rest may be insufficient during exertion. Thus, 
dyspnea and/or chest discomfort that appear during 
activity are characteristic of patients with heart disease, 
whereas the opposite pattern, i.e., the appearance of 
these symptoms at rest and their remission during exer-
tion, is rarely observed in such patients. It is important, 
therefore, to question the patient carefully about the 
relation of symptoms to exertion.
Many patients with cardiovascular disease may be 
asymptomatic both at rest and during exertion but may 
present with an abnormal physical finding such as a 
heart murmur, elevated arterial pressure, or an abnor-
mality of the electrocardiogram (ECG) or the car-
diac silhouette on the chest roentgenogram or other 
imaging test. It is important to assess the global risk 
of CAD in asymptomatic individuals, using a combi-
nation of clinical assessment and measurement of cho-
lesterol and its fractions, as well as other biomarkers, 
such as C-reactive protein, in some patients (Chap. 30). 
Since the first clinical manifestation of CAD may be 
catastrophic—sudden cardiac death, acute ­myocardial 
infarction, or stroke in previous asymptomatic 
­persons—it is mandatory to identify those at high 
risk of such events and institute further testing and 
­preventive measures.
Diagnosis
As outlined by the New York Heart Association (NYHA), 
the elements of a complete cardiac diagnosis include the 
systematic consideration of the following:
1.	 The underlying etiology. Is the disease congenital, 
hypertensive, ischemic, or inflammatory in origin?
2.	 The anatomical abnormalities. Which chambers are 
involved? Are they hypertrophied, dilated, or both? 
Which valves are affected? Are they regurgitant and/
or stenotic? Is there pericardial involvement? Has 
there been a myocardial infarction?
3.	 The physiological disturbances. Is an arrhythmia pres-
ent? Is there evidence of congestive heart failure or 
myocardial ischemia?
4.	 Functional disability. How strenuous is the physical 
activity required to elicit symptoms? The classifica-
tion provided by the NYHA has been found to be 
useful in describing functional disability (Table 3-1).
One example may serve to illustrate the importance 
of establishing a complete diagnosis. In a patient who 
presents with exertional chest discomfort, the identifica-
tion of myocardial ischemia as the etiology is of great 
clinical importance. However, the simple recognition of 
ischemia is insufficient to formulate a therapeutic strategy 
or prognosis until the underlying anatomical abnormali-
ties responsible for the myocardial ischemia, e.g., coro-
nary atherosclerosis or aortic stenosis, are identified and 
a judgment is made about whether other physiologic 
disturbances that cause an imbalance between myo-
cardial oxygen supply and demand, such as severe ane-
mia, thyrotoxicosis, or supraventricular tachycardia, play 
contributory roles. Finally, the severity of the disability 
should govern the extent and tempo of the workup 
and strongly influence the therapeutic strategy that is 
selected.
The establishment of a correct and complete cardiac diag-
nosis usually commences with the history and physical 
examination (Chap. 9). Indeed, the clinical examination 
remains the basis for the diagnosis of a wide ­variety of dis-
orders. The clinical examination may then be supplemented 
by five types of laboratory tests: (1)  ECG (Chap. 11), 
(2) noninvasive imaging examinations (chest roentgeno-
gram, echocardiogram, radionuclide imaging, computed 
tomographic imaging, and magnetic resonance imaging 
(Chap. 12), (3) blood tests to assess risk (e.g., lipid deter-
minations, C-reactive protein [Chap. 30]) or cardiac func-
tion (e.g., brain natriuretic peptide [BNP] [Chap. 17]), (4) 
occasionally specialized invasive examinations (i.e., cardiac 
catheterization and coronary arteriography [Chap.  13]), 
and (5)  genetic tests to identify monogenic cardiac dis-
eases (e.g., hypertrophic cardiomyopathy [Chap. 21], 
­Marfan syndrome, and abnormalities of cardiac ion chan-
nels that lead to prolongation of the QT interval and an 
increase in the risk of sudden death [Chap. 16]). These 
tests are becoming more widely available.
SECTION I
Introduction to Cardiovascular Disorders
30
Figure 3-1
An alternative “echocardiography first” approach to the 
evaluation of a heart murmur that also uses the results of 
the electrocardiogram (ECG) and chest x-ray in asymptom-
atic patients with soft midsystolic murmurs and no other 
physical findings. This algorithm is useful for patients over 
age 40 years in whom the prevalence of coronary artery dis-
ease and aortic stenosis increases as the cause of systolic 
murmur. (From RA O’Rourke, in Primary Cardiology, 2nd ed, 
E Braunwald, L Goldman [eds]. Philadelphia, Saunders, 2003.)
PRESENCE OF CARDIAC MURMUR
Systolic Murmur
Diastolic or
Continuous Murmur
Grade I + II
and midsystolic
Grade III or >,
holosystolic,
or late systolic
Other signs or
symptoms of
cardiac disease
No further
workup
Normal ECG and
chest X-ray
Abnormal ECG
or chest X-ray
Asymptomatic and
no associated findings
Echocardiography
Cardiac consult
if appropriate
EVALUATION OF HEART MURMUR
Family History
In eliciting the history of a patient with known 
or ­suspected cardiovascular disease, particular atten-
tion should be directed to the family history. Familial 
clustering is common in many forms of heart disease. 
­Mendelian transmission of single-gene defects may 
occur, as in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (Chap. 21), 
­Marfan syndrome, and sudden death associated with a 
prolonged QT syndrome (Chap. 16). ­Premature coro-
nary disease and essential hypertension, type 2 diabetes 
mellitus, and hyperlipidemia (the most important risk 
factors for coronary artery disease) are usually polygenic 
disorders. Although familial transmission may be less 
obvious than in the monogenic disorders, it is helpful 
in assessing risk and prognosis in ­polygenic disorders. 
Familial clustering of cardiovascular diseases not only 
may occur on a genetic basis but also may be related to 
familial dietary or behavior ­patterns such as excessive 
ingestion of salt or calories and cigarette smoking.
Assessment of Functional 
Impairment
When an attempt is made to determine the severity of 
functional impairment in a patient with heart disease, 
it is helpful to ascertain the level of activity and the 
rate at which it is performed before symptoms develop. 
Thus, it is not sufficient to state that the patient com-
plains of dyspnea. The breathlessness that occurs after 
running up two long flights of stairs denotes far less 
functional impairment than do similar symptoms that 
occur after taking a few steps on level ground. Also, 
the degree of customary physical activity at work and 
during recreation should be considered. The devel-
opment of two-flight dyspnea in a well-conditioned 
marathon ­runner may be far more significant than the 
development of one-flight dyspnea in a previously sed-
entary person. The history should include a detailed 
consideration of the patient’s therapeutic regimen. For 
example, the persistence or development of edema, 
breathlessness, and other manifestations of heart failure 
in a patient who is receiving optimal doses of diuret-
ics and other therapies for heart failure (Chap. 17) is 
far graver than are similar manifestations in the absence 
of treatment. Similarly, the presence of angina pectoris 
despite treatment with optimal doses of multiple anti-
anginal drugs (Chap. 33) is more serious than it is in 
a patient on no therapy. In an effort to determine the 
progression of symptoms, and thus the severity of the 
underlying illness, it may be useful to ascertain what, if 
any, specific tasks the patient could have carried out 6 
months or 1 year earlier that he or she cannot carry out 
at present.
Electrocardiogram
(See also Chap. 11) Although an ECG usually should be 
recorded in patients with known or suspected heart dis-
ease, with the exception of the identification of arrhyth-
mias, conduction abnormalities, ventricular hypertrophy, 
and acute myocardial infarction, it generally does not 
establish a specific diagnosis. The range of normal elec-
trocardiographic findings is wide, and the tracing can be 
affected significantly by many noncardiac factors, such 
as age, body habitus, and serum electrolyte concentra-
tions. In general, electrocardiographic changes should 
be interpreted in the context of other abnormal cardio-
vascular findings.
Assessment of the Patient with a 
Heart Murmur
(Fig. 3-1) The cause of a heart murmur can often be 
readily elucidated from a systematic evaluation of its 
major attributes: timing, duration, intensity, quality, 
frequency, configuration, location, and radiation when 
considered in the light of the history, general physical 
examination, and other features of the cardiac examina-
tion, as described in Chap. 9.
 
CHAPTER 3
31
The majority of heart murmurs are midsystolic and 
soft (grades I–II/VI). When such a murmur occurs in 
an asymptomatic child or young adult without other 
evidence of heart disease on clinical examination, it is 
usually benign and echocardiography generally is not 
required. By contrast, two-dimensional and Doppler 
echocardiography (Chap. 12) are indicated in patients 
with loud systolic murmurs (grades ≥III/VI), especially 
those that are holosystolic or late systolic, and in most 
patients with diastolic or continuous murmurs.
Natural History
Cardiovascular disorders often present acutely, as in 
a previously asymptomatic person who develops an 
acute myocardial infarction (Chap. 35), or a previously 
asymptomatic patient with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy 
(Chap. 21), or with a prolonged QT interval (Chap. 16) 
whose first clinical manifestation is syncope or even 
sudden death. However, the alert physician may rec-
ognize the patient at risk for these complications long 
before they occur and often can take measures to pre-
vent their occurrence. For example, a patient with 
acute myocardial infarction will often have had risk fac-
tors for atherosclerosis for many years. Had these risk 
factors been recognized, their elimination or reduction 
might have delayed or even prevented the infarction. 
Similarly, a patient with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy 
may have had a heart murmur for years and a family 
history of this disorder. These findings could have led 
to an echocardiographic examination, recognition of 
the condition, and appropriate therapy long before the 
occurrence of a serious acute manifestation.
Patients with valvular heart disease or idiopathic 
dilated cardiomyopathy, by contrast, may have a pro-
longed course of gradually increasing dyspnea and other 
manifestations of chronic heart failure that is punctu-
ated by episodes of acute deterioration only late in 
the course of the disease. Understanding the natural 
­history of various cardiac disorders is essential for apply-
ing appropriate diagnostic and therapeutic measures to 
each stage of the condition, as well as for providing the 
patient and family with the likely prognosis.
Pitfalls in Cardiovascular 
Medicine
Increasing subspecialization in internal medicine and 
the perfection of advanced diagnostic techniques in car-
diology can lead to several undesirable consequences. 
Examples include the following:
1.	 Failure by the noncardiologist to recognize ­important 
cardiac manifestations of systemic illnesses. For example, 
the presence of mitral stenosis, patent foramen ovale, 
and/or transient atrial arrhythmia should be considered 
in a patient with stroke, or the presence of pulmonary 
hypertension and cor pulmonale should be consid-
ered in a patient with scleroderma or Raynaud’s 
syndrome. A cardiovascular examination should be 
carried out to identify and estimate the severity of 
the cardiovascular involvement that accompanies 
many noncardiac disorders.
2.	 Failure by the cardiologist to recognize underlying 
systemic disorders in patients with heart disease. 
For example, hyperthyroidism should be consid-
ered in an elderly patient with atrial fibrillation and 
­unexplained heart failure, and Lyme disease should 
be considered in a patient with an unexplained 
fluctuating atrioventricular block. A cardiovascular 
abnormality may provide the clue critical to the rec-
ognition of some systemic disorders. For instance, an 
unexplained pericardial effusion may provide an early 
clue to the diagnosis of tuberculosis or a neoplasm.
3.	 Overreliance on and overutilization of laboratory 
tests, particularly invasive techniques, for the evalu-
ation of the cardiovascular system. Cardiac cath-
eterization and coronary arteriography (Chap. 13) 
provide precise diagnostic information that may be 
crucial in developing a therapeutic plan in patients 
with known or suspected CAD. Although a great 
deal of attention has been directed to these examina-
tions, it is important to recognize that they serve to 
supplement, not supplant, a careful examination car-
ried out with clinical and noninvasive techniques. 
A coronary arteriogram should not be performed in 
lieu of a careful history in patients with chest pain 
suspected of having ischemic heart disease. Although 
coronary arteriography may establish whether the 
coronary arteries are obstructed and to what extent, 
the results of the procedure by themselves often do 
not provide a definitive answer to the question of 
whether a patient’s complaint of chest discomfort is 
attributable to coronary atherosclerosis and whether 
or not revascularization is indicated.
Despite the value of invasive tests in certain cir-
cumstances, they entail some small risk to the patient, 
involve discomfort and substantial cost, and place a 
strain on medical facilities. Therefore, they should be 
carried out only if the results can be expected to modify 
the patient’s management.
Disease Prevention and Management
The prevention of heart disease, especially of CAD, is 
one of the most important tasks of primary care health 
givers as well as cardiologists. Prevention begins with 
risk assessment, followed by attention to lifestyle, such 
Approach to the Patient with Possible Cardiovascular Disease
SECTION I
Introduction to Cardiovascular Disorders
32
as achieving optimal weight, physical activity, smoking 
cessation, and then aggressive treatment of all abnormal 
risk factors, such as hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and 
diabetes mellitus.
After a complete diagnosis has been established in 
patients with known heart disease, a number of man-
agement options are usually available. Several examples 
may be used to demonstrate some of the principles of 
cardiovascular therapeutics:
1.	 In the absence of evidence of heart disease, the 
patient should be clearly informed of this assessment 
and not be asked to return at intervals for repeated 
examinations. If there is no evidence of disease, such 
continued attention may lead to the patient’s devel-
oping inappropriate concern about the possibility of 
heart disease.
2.	 If there is no evidence of cardiovascular disease 
but the patient has one or more risk factors for the 
development of ischemic heart disease (Chap. 33), a 
plan for their reduction should be developed and the 
patient should be retested at intervals to assess com-
pliance and efficacy in risk reduction.
3.	 Asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic patients with 
valvular heart disease that is anatomically severe should 
be evaluated periodically, every 6 to 12  months, by 
clinical and noninvasive examinations. Early signs of 
deterioration of ventricular function may signify the 
need for surgical treatment before the development of 
disabling symptoms, irreversible myocardial damage, 
and excessive risk of surgical treatment (Chap. 20).
4.	 In patients with CAD (Chap. 33), available practice 
guidelines should be considered in the decision on 
the form of treatment (medical, percutaneous coro-
nary intervention, or surgical revascularization). 
Mechanical revascularization may be employed 
too frequently in the United States and too infre-
quently in Eastern Europe and developing nations. 
The mere presence of angina pectoris and/or the 
demonstration of critical coronary arterial narrow-
ing at angiography should not reflexively evoke 
a decision to treat the patient by revascularization. 
Instead, these interventions should be limited to 
patients with CAD whose angina has not responded 
adequately to medical treatment or in whom revas-
cularization has been shown to improve the natural 
history (e.g., acute coronary syndrome or multivessel 
CAD with left ventricular dysfunction).
Acknowledgment
Dr. Eugene Braunwald authored this chapter for the previous 
edition of Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine. Some of 
the material from the 17th edition has been carried forward.
SECTION II
Diagnosis of  
Cardiovascular  
Disorders
34
 Thomas H. lee 
34
 Chest discomfort is a common challenge for  clinicians 
in the offi ce or emergency department. The differ-
ential diagnosis includes conditions affecting organs 
throughout the thorax and abdomen, with prognostic 
implications that vary from benign to life threatening 
 ( Table 4-1 ) . Failure to recognize potentially serious 
conditions such as acute ischemic heart disease, aor-
tic dissection, tension pneumothorax, or pulmonary 
embolism can lead to serious complications, including 
death. Conversely, overly conservative management of 
low-risk patients leads to unnecessary hospital admis-
sions, tests, procedures, and anxiety. 
 CauSES OF ChEST DISCOMFOrT 
 Myocardial ischemia and injury 
 Myocardial ischemia occurs when the oxygen supply to 
the heart is insuffi cient to meet metabolic needs. This 
mismatch can result from a decrease in oxygen supply, 
a rise in demand, or both. The most common underly-
ing cause of myocardial ischemia is obstruction of coro-
nary arteries by atherosclerosis; in the presence of such 
obstruction, transient ischemic episodes are usually pre-
cipitated by an increase in oxygen demand as a result 
of physical exertion. However, ischemia can also result 
from psychological stress, fever, or large meals or from 
compromised oxygen delivery due to anemia, hypoxia, 
or hypotension. Ventricular hypertrophy due to valvular 
heart disease, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, or hyper-
tension can predispose the myocardium to ischemia 
because of impaired penetration of blood fl ow from 
epicardial coronary arteries to the endocardium. 
 angina pectoris 
 (See also  Chap. 33 ) The chest discomfort of myocar-
dial ischemia is a visceral discomfort that is  usually 
described as a heaviness, pressure, or squeezing 
 ( Table 4-2 ) . Other common adjectives for anginal 
pain are burning and aching. Some patients deny any 
 CHEST DISCOMFORT 
 CHAPTER 4 
Table 4-1
 DIagNOSES aMONg ChEST paIN paTIENTS 
WIThOuT MyOCarDIal INFarCTION 
DIagNOSIS
pErCENT
 Gastroesophageal disease a 
 Gastroesophageal refl ux 
 Esophageal motility disorders 
 Peptic ulcer 
 Gallstones 
42
Ischemic heart disease
31
Chest wall syndromes
28
Pericarditis
4
Pleuritis/pneumonia
2
Pulmonary embolism
2
Lung cancer
1.5
Aortic aneurysm
1
Aortic stenosis
1
Herpes zoster
1
 a In order of frequency.
 Source: P Fruergaard et al: Eur Heart J 17:1028, 1996.
“pain” but may admit to dyspnea or a vague sense 
of anxiety. The word “sharp” is sometimes used by 
patients to describe intensity rather than quality. 
 The location of angina pectoris is usually retroster-
nal; most patients do not localize the pain to any small 
area. The discomfort may radiate to the neck, jaw, 
teeth, arms, or shoulders, refl ecting the common origin 
in the posterior horn of the spinal cord of sensory neu-
rons supplying the heart and these areas. Some patients 
present with aching in sites of radiated pain as their only 
symptoms of ischemia. Occasional patients report epi-
gastric distress with ischemic episodes. Less common is 
radiation to below the umbilicus or to the back. 
 Stable angina pectoris usually develops gradually with 
exertion, emotional excitement, or after heavy meals. 
 
CHAPTER 4
Chest Discomfort
35
Table 4-2
Typical Clinical Features of Major Causes of Acute Chest Discomfort
Condition
Duration
Quality
Location
Associated Features
Angina
More than 2 and 
less than 10 min
Pressure, tightness, 
squeezing, heavi-
ness, burning
Retrosternal, often with 
radiation to or isolated 
discomfort in neck, jaw, 
shoulders, or arms—
frequently on left
Precipitated by exertion, exposure 
to cold, psychologic stress
S4 gallop or mitral regurgitation 
murmur during pain
Unstable angina
10–20 min
Similar to angina 
but often more 
severe
Similar to angina
Similar to angina, but occurs with 
low levels of exertion or even at 
rest
Acute 
­myocardial 
infarction
Variable; often more 
than 30 min
Similar to angina 
but often more 
severe
Similar to angina
Unrelieved by nitroglycerin
May be associated with evidence 
of heart failure or arrhythmia
Aortic stenosis
Recurrent episodes 
as described for 
angina
As described for 
angina
As described for 
angina
Late-peaking systolic murmur 
­radiating to carotid arteries
Pericarditis
Hours to days; may 
be episodic
Sharp
Retrosternal or 
toward cardiac apex; 
may radiate to left 
­shoulder
May be relieved by sitting up and 
leaning forward
Pericardial friction rub
Aortic ­dissection
Abrupt onset of 
unrelenting pain
Tearing or ripping 
sensation; knifelike
Anterior chest, often 
radiating to back, 
between shoulder 
blades
Associated with hypertension and/
or underlying connective tissue 
disorder, e.g., Marfan syndrome
Murmur of aortic insufficiency, 
­pericardial rub, pericardial 
­tamponade, or loss of peripheral 
pulses
Pulmonary 
embolism
Abrupt onset; 
­several minutes to 
a few hours
Pleuritic
Often lateral, on the 
side of the embolism
Dyspnea, tachypnea, tachycardia, 
and hypotension
Pulmonary 
hypertension
Variable
Pressure
Substernal
Dyspnea, signs of increased 
venous pressure including edema 
and jugular venous distention
Pneumonia or 
pleuritis
Variable
Pleuritic
Unilateral, often 
­localized
Dyspnea, cough, fever, rales, 
­occasional rub
Spontaneous 
pneumothorax
Sudden onset; 
­several hours
Pleuritic
Lateral to side of 
­pneumothorax
Dyspnea, decreased breath sounds 
on side of pneumothorax
Esophageal 
reflux
10–60 min
Burning
Substernal, epigastric
Worsened by postprandial 
­recumbency
Relieved by antacids
Esophageal 
spasm
2–30 min
Pressure, tightness, 
burning
Retrosternal
Can closely mimic angina
Peptic ulcer
Prolonged
Burning
Epigastric, substernal
Relieved with food or antacids
Gallbladder 
­disease
Prolonged
Burning, pressure
Epigastric, right upper 
quadrant, substernal
May follow meal
Musculoskeletal 
disease
Variable
Aching
Variable
Aggravated by movement
May be reproduced by localized 
pressure on examination
Herpes zoster
Variable
Sharp or burning
Dermatomal 
­distribution
Vesicular rash in area of discomfort
Emotional and 
psychiatric 
conditions
Variable; may be 
fleeting
Variable
Variable; may be 
retrosternal
Situational factors may precipitate 
symptoms
Anxiety or depression often 
­detectable with careful history
SECTION II
Diagnosis of Cardiovascular Disorders
36
Rest or treatment with sublingual nitroglycerin typi-
cally leads to relief within several minutes. In contrast, 
pain that is fleeting (lasting only a few seconds) is rarely 
ischemic in origin. Similarly, pain that lasts for several 
hours is unlikely to represent angina, particularly if the 
patient’s electrocardiogram (ECG) does not show evi-
dence of ischemia.
Anginal episodes can be precipitated by any physi-
ologic or psychological stress that induces tachycardia. 
Most myocardial perfusion occurs during diastole, when 
there is minimal pressure opposing coronary artery 
flow from within the left ventricle. Since tachycardia 
decreases the percentage of the time in which the heart 
is in diastole, it decreases myocardial perfusion.
Unstable angina and myocardial infarction
(See also Chaps. 34 and 35) Patients with these acute 
ischemic syndromes usually complain of symptoms sim-
ilar in quality to angina pectoris, but more prolonged 
and severe. The onset of these syndromes may occur 
with the patient at rest, or awakened from sleep, and 
sublingual nitroglycerin may lead to transient or no 
relief. Accompanying symptoms may include diaphore-
sis, dyspnea, nausea, and light-headedness.
The physical examination may be completely nor-
mal in patients with chest discomfort due to ischemic 
heart disease. Careful auscultation during ischemic epi-
sodes may reveal a third or fourth heart sound, reflecting 
­myocardial systolic or diastolic dysfunction. A transient 
murmur of mitral regurgitation suggests ischemic papillary 
muscle dysfunction. Severe episodes of ischemia can lead 
to pulmonary congestion and even pulmonary edema.
Other cardiac causes
Myocardial ischemia caused by hypertrophic cardio-
myopathy or aortic stenosis leads to angina pectoris 
­similar to that caused by coronary atherosclerosis. In 
such cases, a loud systolic murmur or other findings 
usually ­suggest that abnormalities other than coronary 
atherosclerosis may be contributing to the patient’s 
­symptoms. Some patients with chest pain and normal 
coronary angiograms have functional abnormalities of 
the coronary ­circulation, ranging from coronary spasm 
­visible on coronary angiography to abnormal vasodilator 
responses and heightened vasoconstrictor responses. The 
term “cardiac syndrome X” is used to describe patients 
with angina-like chest pain and ischemic-appearing 
ST-segment depression during stress despite normal 
coronary arteriograms. Some data indicate that many 
such patients have limited changes in coronary flow in 
response to pacing stress or coronary vasodilators.
Pericarditis
(See also Chap. 22) The pain in pericarditis is believed 
to be due to inflammation of the adjacent parietal 
pleura, since most of the pericardium is believed to be 
insensitive to pain. Thus, infectious pericarditis, which 
usually involves adjoining pleural surfaces, tends to 
be associated with pain, while conditions that cause 
only local inflammation (e.g., myocardial infarction or 
­uremia) and cardiac tamponade tend to result in mild or 
no chest pain.
The adjacent parietal pleura receives its sensory 
­supply from several sources, so the pain of pericarditis 
can be experienced in areas ranging from the shoulder 
and neck to the abdomen and back. Most typically, the 
pain is retrosternal and is aggravated by coughing, deep 
breaths, or changes in position—all of which lead to 
movements of pleural surfaces. The pain is often worse 
in the supine position and relieved by sitting upright 
and leaning forward. Less common is a steady aching 
discomfort that mimics acute myocardial infarction.
Diseases of the aorta
(See also Chap. 38) Aortic dissection is a potentially 
­catastrophic condition that is due to spread of a subinti-
mal hematoma within the wall of the aorta. The hema-
toma may begin with a tear in the intima of the aorta 
or with rupture of the vasa vasorum within the aortic 
media. This syndrome can occur with trauma to the 
aorta, including motor vehicle accidents or medical pro-
cedures in which catheters or intraaortic balloon pumps 
damage the intima of the aorta. Nontraumatic aortic 
dissections are rare in the absence of hypertension and/
or conditions associated with deterioration of the elastic 
or muscular components of the media within the aorta’s 
wall. Cystic medial degeneration is a feature of several 
inherited connective tissue diseases, including Marfan 
and Ehlers-Danlos syndromes. About half of all aortic 
dissections in women under 40 years of age occur dur-
ing pregnancy.
Almost all patients with acute dissections present with 
severe chest pain, although some patients with chronic 
dissections are identified without associated symptoms. 
Unlike the pain of ischemic heart disease, symptoms 
of aortic dissection tend to reach peak severity imme-
diately, often causing the patient to collapse from its 
intensity. The classic teaching is that the adjectives used 
to describe the pain reflect the process occurring within 
the wall of the aorta—“ripping” and “tearing”—but 
more recent data suggest that the most common pre-
senting complaint is sudden onset of severe, sharp pain. 
The location often correlates with the site and extent 
of the dissection. Thus, dissections that begin in the 
ascending aorta and extend to the descending aorta tend 
to cause pain in the front of the chest that extends into 
the back, between the shoulder blades.
Physical findings may also reflect extension of the 
aortic dissection that compromises flow into arteries 
branching off the aorta. Thus, loss of a pulse in one or 
 
CHAPTER 4
Chest Discomfort
37
both arms, cerebrovascular accident, or paraplegia can 
all be catastrophic consequences of aortic dissection. 
Hematomas that extend proximally and undermine the 
coronary arteries or aortic valve apparatus may lead to 
acute myocardial infarction or acute aortic insufficiency. 
Rupture of the hematoma into the pericardial space 
leads to pericardial tamponade.
Another abnormality of the aorta that can cause 
chest pain is a thoracic aortic aneurysm. Aortic aneurysms 
are frequently asymptomatic but can cause chest pain 
and other symptoms by compressing adjacent struc-
tures. This pain tends to be steady, deep, and sometimes 
severe.
Pulmonary embolism
Chest pain due to pulmonary embolism is believed to 
be due to distention of the pulmonary artery or infarc-
tion of a segment of the lung adjacent to the pleura. 
Massive pulmonary emboli may lead to substernal pain 
that is suggestive of acute myocardial infarction. More 
commonly, smaller emboli lead to focal pulmonary 
infarctions that cause pain that is lateral and pleuritic. 
Associated symptoms include dyspnea and, occasionally, 
hemoptysis. Tachycardia is usually present. Although 
not always present, certain characteristic ECG changes 
can support the diagnosis.
Pneumothorax
Sudden onset of pleuritic chest pain and respiratory dis-
tress should lead to consideration of spontaneous pneu-
mothorax, as well as ­pulmonary embolism. Such events 
may occur without a ­precipitating event in persons 
without lung disease, or as a ­consequence of underlying 
lung disorders.
Pneumonia or pleuritis
Lung diseases that damage and cause inflammation of 
the pleura of the lung usually cause a sharp, knifelike 
pain that is aggravated by inspiration or coughing.
Gastrointestinal conditions
Esophageal pain from acid reflux from the stomach, 
spasm, obstruction, or injury can be difficult to differen-
tiate from myocardial syndromes. Acid reflux typically 
causes a deep burning discomfort that may be exacer-
bated by alcohol, aspirin, or some foods; this discom-
fort is often relieved by antacid or other acid-reducing 
therapies. Acid reflux tends to be exacerbated by lying 
down and may be worse in early morning when the 
stomach is empty of food that might otherwise absorb 
gastric acid.
Esophageal spasm may occur in the presence or 
absence of acid reflux and leads to a squeezing pain 
indistinguishable from angina. Prompt relief of esopha-
geal spasm is often provided by antianginal therapies 
such as sublingual nifedipine, further promoting con-
fusion between these syndromes. Chest pain can also 
result from injury to the esophagus, such as a Mallory-
Weiss tear caused by severe vomiting.
Chest pain can result from diseases of the gastroin-
testinal tract below the diaphragm, including peptic ulcer 
disease, biliary disease, and pancreatitis. These conditions 
usually cause abdominal pain as well as chest discomfort; 
symptoms are not likely to be associated with exertion. 
The pain of ulcer disease typically occurs 60 to 90 min 
after meals, when postprandial acid production is no 
longer neutralized by food in the stomach. Cholecystitis 
usually causes a pain that is described as aching, occur-
ring an hour or more after meals.
Neuromusculoskeletal conditions
Cervical disk disease can cause chest pain by compres-
sion of nerve roots. Pain in a dermatomal distribution 
can also be caused by intercostal muscle cramps or by herpes 
zoster. Chest pain symptoms due to herpes zoster may 
occur before skin lesions are apparent.
Costochondral and chondrosternal syndromes are the 
most common causes of anterior chest musculoskeletal 
pain. Only occasionally are physical signs of costo-
chondritis such as swelling, redness, and warmth (Tietze’s 
syndrome) present. The pain of such syndromes is 
usually fleeting and sharp, but some patients experi-
ence a dull ache that lasts for hours. Direct pressure on 
the chondrosternal and costochondral junctions may 
reproduce the pain from these and other musculo-
skeletal syndromes. Arthritis of the shoulder and spine 
and bursitis may also cause chest pain. Some patients 
who have these conditions and myocardial ischemia 
blur and ­confuse symptoms of these syndromes.
Emotional and psychiatric conditions
As many as 10% of patients who present to emergency 
departments with acute chest discomfort have panic 
disorder or other emotional conditions. The symptoms 
in these populations are highly variable, but frequently 
the discomfort is described as visceral tightness or ach-
ing that lasts more than 30 min. Some patients offer 
other atypical descriptions, such as pain that is fleeting, 
sharp, and/or localized to a small region. The ECG in 
patients with emotional conditions may be difficult to 
interpret if hyperventilation causes ST-T-wave abnor-
malities. A careful history may elicit clues of ­depression, 
prior panic attacks, somatization, agoraphobia, or other 
phobias.
SECTION II
Diagnosis of Cardiovascular Disorders
38
APPROACH TO THE
PATIENT 
Chest Discomfort
The evaluation of the patient with chest discomfort must 
accommodate two goals—determining the diagnosis 
and assessing the safety of the immediate manage-
ment plan. The latter issue is often dominant when the 
patient has acute chest discomfort, such as patients seen 
in the emergency department. In such settings, the clini-
cian must focus first on identifying patients who require 
aggressive interventions to diagnose or manage poten-
tially life-threatening conditions, including acute isch-
emic heart disease, acute aortic dissection, pulmonary 
embolism, and tension pneumothorax. If such conditions 
are unlikely, the clinician must address questions such 
as the safety of discharge to home, admission to a non-
coronary care unit facility, or immediate exercise testing. 
Table 4-3 displays a sequence of questions that can be 
used in the evaluation of the patient with chest discom-
fort, with the diagnostic entities that are most important 
for consideration at each stage of the evaluation.
Table 4-3
Considerations in the Assessment of the 
Patient With Chest Discomfort
1. Could the chest discomfort be due to an acute,  
potentially life-threatening condition that warrants  
immediate hospitalization and aggressive evaluation?
  Acute ischemic heart  
disease
Pulmonary embolism
  Aortic dissection
Spontaneous  
pneumothorax
2. If not, could the discomfort be due to a chronic 
condition likely to lead to serious complications?
  Stable angina
  Aortic stenosis
  Pulmonary hypertension
3. If not, could the discomfort be due to an acute condition 
that warrants specific treatment?
  Pericarditis
  Pneumonia/pleuritis
  Herpes zoster
4. If not, could the discomfort be due to another treatable 
chronic condition?
  Esophageal reflux
Cervical disk disease
  Esophageal spasm
Arthritis of the shoulderor 
spine
  Peptic ulcer disease
Costochondritis
  Gallbladder disease
Other musculoskeletal 
disorders
  Other gastrointestinal  
conditions
Anxiety state
Acute Chest Discomfort  In patients with 
acute chest discomfort, the clinician must first assess 
the patient’s respiratory and hemodynamic status. If 
either is compromised, initial management should focus 
on stabilizing the patient before the diagnostic evalua-
tion is pursued. If, however, the patient does not require 
emergent interventions, then a focused history, physi-
cal examination, and laboratory evaluation should be 
performed to assess the patient’s risk of life-threatening 
conditions.
Clinicians who are seeing patients in the office set-
ting should not assume that they do not have acute 
ischemic heart disease, even if the prevalence may 
be lower. Malpractice litigation related to myocardial 
infarctions that were missed during office evaluations 
is becoming increasingly common, and ECGs were not 
performed in many such cases. The prevalence of high-
risk patients seen in office settings may be increasing 
due to congestion in emergency departments.
In either setting, the history should include questions 
about the quality and location of the chest discomfort 
(Table 4-2). The patient should also be asked about the 
nature of onset of the pain and its duration. Myocardial 
ischemia is usually associated with a gradual intensifi-
cation of symptoms over a period of minutes. Pain that 
is fleeting or that lasts hours without being associated 
with electrocardiographic changes is not likely to be 
ischemic in origin. Although the presence of risk fac-
tors for coronary artery disease may heighten concern 
for this diagnosis, the absence of such risk factors does 
not lower the risk for myocardial ischemia enough to be 
used to justify a decision to discharge a patient.
Wide radiation of chest pain increases probability 
that pain is due to myocardial infarction. Radiation of 
chest pain to the left arm is common with acute isch-
emic heart disease, but radiation to the right arm is also 
highly consistent with this diagnosis. Figure 4-1 shows 
estimates derived from several studies of the impact of 
various clinical features from the history on the prob-
ability that a patient has an acute myocardial infarction.
Right shoulder pain is also common with acute cho-
lecystitis, but this syndrome is usually accompanied 
by pain that is located in the abdomen rather than the 
chest. Chest pain that radiates between the scapulae 
raises the question of aortic dissection.
The physical examination should include evaluation 
of blood pressure in both arms and of pulses in both 
legs. Poor perfusion of a limb may be due to an ­aortic 
dissection that has compromised flow to an artery 
branching from the aorta. Chest auscultation may reveal 
diminished breath sounds; a pleural rub; or evidence of 
pneumothorax, pulmonary embolism, pneumonia, or 
pleurisy. Tension pneumothorax may lead to a shift in 
the trachea from the midline, away from the side of the 
pneumothorax. The cardiac examination should seek 
 
CHAPTER 4
Chest Discomfort
39
Figure 4-1
Impact of chest pain characteristics on odds of acute myocardial infarction (AMI). (Figure prepared from data in CJ Swap, JT Nagurney: 
JAMA 294:2623, 2005.)
Radiation to right arm or shoulder
Radiation to both arms or shoulders
Associated with exertion
Radiation to left arm
Associated with diaphoresis
Associated with nausea or vomiting
Described as pressure
Inframammary location
Reproducible with palpation
Described as sharp
Described as positional
Described as pleuritic
Worse than previous angina
or similar to previous MI
Likelihood ratio for AMI
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
INCREASED LIKELIHOOD OF AMI
DECREASED LIKELIHOOD OF AMI
Table 4-4
Prevalence of Acute Ischemic Heart 
Disease Syndromes Among Subsets of 
Emergency Department Patients With  
Chest Pain
Finding
Prevalence 
Myocardial 
Infarction, 
%
Unstable 
Angina, %
ST elevation (≥1 mm) or Q 
waves on ECG not known 
to be old
79
12
Ischemia or strain on ECG 
not known to be old (ST 
depression ≥1 mm or 
ischemic T waves)
20
41
None of the preceding 
ECG changes but a prior 
history of angina or myo-
cardial infarction (history 
of heart attack or nitro-
glycerin use)
4
51
None of the preceding 
ECG changes and no 
prior history of angina 
or myocardial infarction 
(history of heart attack or 
nitroglycerin use)
2
14
Abbreviation: ECG, electrocardiogram.
Source: Unpublished data from Brigham and Women’s Hospital Chest 
Pain Study, 1997–1999.
pericardial rubs, systolic and diastolic murmurs, and 
third or fourth heart sounds. Pressure on the chest wall 
may reproduce symptoms in patients with musculoskel-
etal causes of chest pain; it is important that the clini-
cian ask the patient if the chest pain syndrome is being 
completely reproduced before drawing too much reas-
surance that more serious underlying conditions are not 
present.
An ECG is an essential test for adults with chest 
discomfort that is not due to an obvious traumatic 
cause. In such patients, the presence of electrocardio-
graphic changes consistent with ischemia or infarction 
(Chap.  11) is associated with high risks of acute myo-
cardial infarction or unstable angina (Table 4-4); such 
patients should be admitted to a unit with electrocar-
diographic monitoring and the capacity to respond 
to a cardiac arrest. The absence of such changes does 
not exclude acute ischemic heart disease, but the risk 
of ­life-threatening complications is low for patients 
with normal electrocardiograms or only nonspecific  
ST-T-wave changes. If these patients are not considered 
appropriate for immediate discharge, they are often 
candidates for early or immediate exercise testing.
Markers of myocardial injury are often obtained in 
the emergency department evaluation of acute chest 
discomfort. In recent years, the cardiac troponins (I and 
T) have superceded creatine kinase (CK) and CK-MB as 
the markers of choice for detecting myocardial injury. 
Some data support the use of other markers, such as 
SECTION II
Diagnosis of Cardiovascular Disorders
40
myeloperoxidase and B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP), 
but their roles in routine care have not been established. 
Single values of any of these markers do not have high 
sensitivity for acute myocardial infarction or for predic-
tion of complications. Hence, decisions to discharge 
patients home should not be made on the basis of sin-
gle negative values of these tests, including the cardiac 
troponins.
Provocative tests for coronary artery disease are not 
appropriate for patients with ongoing chest pain. In 
such patients, rest myocardial perfusion scans can be 
considered; a normal scan reduces the likelihood of 
coronary artery disease and can help avoid admission 
of low-risk patients to the hospital. Computerized tomo-
graphic angiography (CTA) is emerging as an alternative 
diagnostic strategy for patients in whom the likelihood 
of coronary disease is not clear.
Clinicians frequently employ therapeutic trials with 
sublingual nitroglycerin or antacids or, in the stable 
patient seen in the office setting, a proton pump inhibi-
tor. A common error is to assume that a response to 
any of these interventions clarifies the diagnosis. While 
such information is often helpful, the patient’s response 
may be due to the placebo effect. Hence, myocardial 
ischemia should never be considered excluded solely 
because of a response to antacid therapy. Similarly, fail-
ure of nitroglycerin to relieve pain does not exclude the 
diagnosis of coronary disease.
If the patient’s history or examination is consistent 
with aortic dissection, imaging studies to evaluate the 
aorta must be pursued promptly because of the high 
risk of catastrophic complications with this condition. 
Appropriate tests include a chest CT scan with contrast, 
MRI, or transesophageal echocardiography. Current data 
indicate that elevated d-dimer levels should raise clini-
cians’ suspicion of aortic dissection.
Acute pulmonary embolism should be considered in 
patients with respiratory symptoms, pleuritic chest pain, 
hemoptysis, or a history of venous thromboembolism or 
coagulation abnormalities. Initial tests usually include 
CT angiography or a lung scan, which are sometimes 
combined with lower extremity venous ultrasound or 
d-dimer testing.
If patients with acute chest discomfort show no 
evidence of life-threatening conditions, the clinician 
should then focus on serious chronic conditions with 
the potential to cause major complications, the most 
common of which is stable angina. Early use of exer-
cise electrocardiography, stress echocardiography, or 
stress perfusion imaging for such patients, whether 
in the office or the emergency department, is now an 
accepted management strategy for low-risk patients. 
Exercise testing is not appropriate, however, for 
patients who (1) report pain that is believed to be isch-
emic occurring at rest or (2) have electrocardiographic 
changes not known to be old that are consistent with 
ischemia.
Patients with sustained chest discomfort who do not 
have evidence for life-threatening conditions should be 
evaluated for evidence of conditions likely to benefit 
from acute treatment (Table 4-3). Pericarditis may be 
suggested by the history, physical examination, and ECG 
(Table 4-2). Clinicians should carefully assess blood pres-
sure patterns and consider echocardiography in such 
patients to detect evidence of impending pericardial 
tamponade. Chest x-rays can be used to evaluate the 
possibility of pulmonary disease.
Guidelines and Critical Pathways 
for Acute Chest Discomfort
Guidelines for the initial evaluation for patients with 
acute chest pain have been developed by the American 
College of Cardiology, American Heart Association, 
and other organizations. These guidelines recommend 
performance of an ECG for virtually all patients with 
chest pain who do not have an obvious noncardiac 
cause of their pain, and performance of a chest x-ray for 
patients with signs or symptoms consistent with con-
gestive heart failure, valvular heart disease, pericardial 
­disease, or aortic dissection or aneurysm.
The American College of Cardiology/American 
Heart Association guidelines on exercise testing ­support 
its use in low-risk patients presenting to the emer-
gency department, as well as in selected intermediate-
risk patients. However, these guidelines emphasize that 
exercise tests should be performed only after patients 
have been screened for high-risk features or other 
­indicators for hospital admission.
Many medical centers have adopted critical path-
ways and other forms of guidelines to increase efficiency 
and to expedite the treatment of patients with high-risk 
acute ischemic heart disease syndromes. These guide-
lines emphasize the following strategies:
•	 Rapid identification and treatment of patients for 
whom emergent reperfusion therapy, either via per-
cutaneous coronary interventions or thrombolytic 
agents, is likely to lead to improved outcomes.
•	 Triage to non-coronary care unit monitored facili-
ties such as intermediate-care units or chest pain 
units of patients with a low risk for complications, 
such as patients without new ischemic changes on 
their ECGs and without ongoing chest pain. Such 
patients can usually be safely observed in non-­
coronary care unit settings, undergo early exercise 
testing, or be discharged home. Risk ­stratification 
can be assisted through use of prospectively validated 
multivariate algorithms that have been published for 
acute ­ischemic heart disease and its ­complications.
 
CHAPTER 4
Chest Discomfort
41
•	 Shortening lengths of stay in the coronary care unit 
and hospital. Recommendations regarding the mini-
mum length of stay in a monitored bed for a patient 
who has no further symptoms have decreased in 
recent years to 12 h or less if exercise testing or other 
risk stratification technologies are available.
Nonacute chest discomfort
The management of patients who do not require admis-
sion to the hospital or who no longer require inpatient 
observation should seek to identify the cause of the 
symptoms and the likelihood of major complications. 
Noninvasive tests for coronary disease serve both to 
diagnose this condition and to identify patients with 
high-risk forms of coronary disease who may benefit 
from revascularization. Gastrointestinal causes of chest 
pain can be evaluated via endoscopy or radiology stud-
ies, or with trials of medical therapy. Emotional and 
psychiatric conditions warrant appropriate evaluation 
and treatment; randomized trial data indicate that cog-
nitive therapy and group interventions lead to decreases 
in symptoms for such patients.
 Richard M. Schwartzstein 
42
 DYSPNEA 
 CHaPTEr 5 
 dySPnEa 
­The­ American­ Thoracic­ Society­ defi­nes­ ­dyspnea­ as­ a­
“subjective­ experience­ of­ breathing­ discomfort­ that­
consists­ of­ qualitatively­ distinct­ sensations­ that­ vary­ in­
intensity.­ The­ experience­ derives­ from­ interactions­
among­ multiple­ physiological,­ psychological,­ social,­
and­ environmental­ factors­ and­ may­ induce­ second-
ary­ physiological­ and­ behavioral­ responses.”­ Dyspnea,­
a­ ­symptom,­ must­ be­ distinguished­ from­ the­ signs­ of­
increased­work­of­breathing.­
 MechAnisMs of DyspneA 
­Respiratory­sensations­are­the­consequence­of­interac-
tions­ between­ the­ ­efferent­,­ or­ outgoing,­ motor­ output­
from­the­brain­to­the­ventilatory­muscles­(feed-forward)­
and­the­­afferent­,­or­incoming,­sensory­input­from­recep-
tors­ throughout­ the­ body­ (feedback),­ as­ well­ as­ the­
integrative­processing­of­this­information­that­we­infer­
must­be­occurring­in­the­brain­­( Fig. 5-1 )­.­In­contrast­
to­painful­sensations,­which­can­often­be­attributed­to­
the­stimulation­of­a­single­nerve­ending,­dyspnea­sensa-
tions­are­more­commonly­viewed­as­holistic,­more­akin­
to­ hunger­ or­ thirst.­ A­ given­ disease­ state­ may­ lead­ to­
dyspnea­ by­ one­ or­ more­ mechanisms,­ some­ of­ which­
may­be­operative­under­some­circumstances,­e.g.,­exer-
cise,­but­not­others,­e.g.,­a­change­in­position.­
 ­
 Motor efferents 
­Disorders­ of­ the­ ventilatory­ pump,­ most­ commonly­
increase­ airway­ resistance­ or­ stiffness­ (decreased­ com-
pliance)­ of­ the­ respiratory­ system,­ are­ associated­ with­
increased­work­of­breathing­or­a­sense­of­an­increased­
effort­ to­ breathe.­ When­ the­ muscles­ are­ weak­ or­
fatigued,­ greater­ effort­ is­ required,­ even­ though­ the­
mechanics­ of­ the­ system­ are­ normal.­ The­ increased­
neural­ output­ from­ the­ motor­ cortex­ is­ sensed­ via­ a­
corollary­ discharge,­ a­ neural­ signal­ that­ is­ sent­ to­ the­
sensory­ cortex­ at­ the­ same­ time­ that­ motor­ output­ is­
directed­to­the­ventilatory­muscles.­
 Sensory afferents 
­Chemoreceptors­ in­ the­ carotid­ bodies­ and­ medulla­
are­ activated­ by­ hypoxemia,­ acute­ hypercapnia,­ and­
­acidemia.­ Stimulation­ of­ these­ receptors,­ as­ well­ as­
 Figure 5-1 
hypothetical model for integration of sensory inputs in 
the production of dyspnea. Afferent information from the 
receptors throughout the respiratory system projects directly 
to the sensory cortex to contribute to primary qualitative 
sensory experiences and provide feedback on the action of 
the ventilatory pump. Afferents also project to the areas of 
the brain responsible for control of ventilation. The motor 
cortex, responding to input from the control centers, sends 
neural messages to the ventilatory muscles and a corollary 
discharge to the sensory cortex (feed-forward with respect to 
the instructions sent to the muscles). If the feed-forward and 
feedback messages do not match, an error signal is gener-
ated and the intensity of dyspnea increases.  (Adapted from 
MA Gillette, RM Schwartzstein: Mechanisms of dyspnea, in 
Supportive Care in Respiratory Disease, SH Ahmedzai and 
MF Muer [eds]. Oxford, UK, Oxford University Press, 2005.) 
ALGORITHM FOR THE INPUTS IN DYSPNEA PRODUCTION
Respiratory centers 
(Respiratory drive)
Sensory cortex
Feedback
Feed-forward
Error signal
Corollary
discharge
Motor
cortex
Ventilatory
muscles
Chemoreceptors
Mechanoreceptors
Metaboreceptors
Dyspnea intensity 
and quality
 
CHAPTER 5
Dyspnea
43
­others that lead to an increase in ventilation, produce a 
sensation of air hunger. Mechanoreceptors in the lungs, 
when stimulated by bronchospasm, lead to a ­sensation 
of chest tightness. J-receptors, sensitive to interstitial 
edema, and pulmonary vascular receptors, activated by 
acute changes in pulmonary artery pressure, appear to 
contribute to air hunger. Hyperinflation is associated 
with the sensation of increased work of breathing and an 
inability to get a deep breath or of an unsatisfying breath. 
Metaboreceptors, located in skeletal muscle, are believed 
to be activated by changes in the local biochemical 
milieu of the tissue active during exercise and, when 
stimulated, contribute to the breathing discomfort.
Integration: Efferent-reafferent mismatch
A discrepancy or mismatch between the feed-forward 
message to the ventilatory muscles and the feedback 
from receptors that monitor the response of the ven-
tilatory pump increases the intensity of dyspnea. This 
is particularly important when there is a mechanical 
derangement of the ventilatory pump, such as in asthma 
or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
Anxiety
Acute anxiety may increase the severity of dyspnea 
either by altering the interpretation of sensory data or 
by leading to patterns of breathing that heighten physio-
logic abnormalities in the respiratory system. In patients 
with expiratory flow limitation, for example, the 
increased respiratory rate that accompanies acute anxi-
ety leads to hyperinflation, increased work and effort of 
breathing, and a sense of an unsatisfying breath.
Assessing Dyspnea
Quality of sensation
As with pain, dyspnea assessment begins with a deter-
mination of the quality of the discomfort (Table 5-1). 
Dyspnea questionnaires, or lists of phrases commonly 
used by patients, assist those who have difficulty describ-
ing their breathing sensations.
Sensory intensity
A modified Borg scale or visual analogue scale can be 
­utilized to measure dyspnea at rest, immediately follow-
ing exercise, or on recall of a reproducible physical task, 
e.g., climbing the stairs at home. An alternative approach 
is to inquire about the activities a patient can do, i.e., 
to gain a sense of the patient’s disability. The Baseline 
­Dyspnea Index and the Chronic Respiratory Disease 
Questionnaire are commonly used tools for this purpose.
Affective dimension
For a sensation to be reported as a symptom, it must 
be perceived as unpleasant and interpreted as abnormal. 
Laboratory studies have demonstrated that air hunger 
evokes a stronger affective response than does increased 
effort or work of breathing. Some therapies for dyspnea, 
such as pulmonary rehabilitation, may reduce breathing 
discomfort, in part, by altering this dimension.
Differential Diagnosis
Dyspnea is the consequence of deviations from nor-
mal function in the cardiopulmonary systems. These 
deviations produce breathlessness as a consequence of 
increased drive to breathe; increased effort or work 
of breathing; and/or stimulation of receptors in the 
heart, lungs, or vascular system. Most diseases of the 
respiratory system are associated with alterations in the 
mechanical properties of the lungs and/or chest wall, 
frequently as a consequence of disease of the airways 
or lung parenchyma. In contrast, disorders of the car-
diovascular system more commonly lead to dyspnea 
by causing gas exchange abnormalities or stimulating 
pulmonary and/or vascular receptors (Table 5-2).
Table 5-1
Association of Qualitative Descriptors and 
Pathophysiologic Mechanisms of Shortness 
of Breath
Descriptor
Pathophysiology
Chest tightness or  
constriction
Bronchoconstriction,  
interstitial edema (asthma, 
myocardial ischemia)
Increased work or effort of 
breathing
Airway obstruction, 
­neuromuscular disease 
(COPD, moderate to severe 
asthma, myopathy,  
kyphoscoliosis)
Air hunger, need to breathe, 
urge to breathe
Increased drive to breathe 
(CHF, pulmonary embo-
lism, moderate to severe 
airflow obstruction)
Cannot get a deep breath, 
unsatisfying breath
Hyperinflation (asthma, 
COPD) and restricted tidal 
volume (pulmonary fibrosis, 
chest wall restriction)
Heavy breathing, rapid 
breathing, breathing more
Deconditioning
Abbreviations: CHF, congestive heart failure; COPD, chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease.
Source: From RM Schwartzstein: The language of dyspnea, in Dys-
pnea: Mechanisms, Measurement, and Management, DA Mahler 
and DE O’Donnell (eds). New York, Marcel Dekker, 2005 and RM 
Schwartzstein, D Feller-Kopman: Shortness of breath, in Primary 
Cardiology, 2nd ed, E Braunwald and L Goldman (eds). Philadelphia, 
WB Saunders, 2003.
SECTION II
Diagnosis of Cardiovascular Disorders
44
Respiratory system dyspnea
Diseases of the airways
Asthma and COPD, the most common obstructive lung 
diseases, are characterized by expiratory airflow obstruc-
tion, which typically leads to dynamic ­hyperinflation 
of the lungs and chest wall. Patients with moderate to 
severe disease have increased resistive and ­elastic loads 
(a term that relates to the stiffness of the system) on 
the ventilatory muscles and increased work of breath-
ing. Patients with acute bronchoconstriction also 
­complain of a sense of tightness, which can exist even 
when lung function is still within the normal range. 
These patients commonly hyperventilate. Both the 
chest tightness and hyperventilation are probably due 
to stimulation of ­pulmonary receptors. Both asthma 
and  COPD may lead to hypoxemia and ­hypercapnia 
from ­ventilation-­perfusion (V 
.
/Q) mismatch (and dif-
fusion limitation during ­exercise with emphysema); 
hypoxemia is much more common than hypercapnia as 
a consequence of the different ways in which oxygen 
and ­carbon dioxide bind to hemoglobin.
Diseases of the chest wall
Conditions that stiffen the chest wall, such as kypho-
scoliosis, or that weaken ventilatory muscles, such as 
myasthenia gravis or the Guillain-Barré syndrome, 
are also associated with an increased effort to breathe. 
Large pleural effusions may contribute to dyspnea, both 
by increasing the work of breathing and by stimulating 
pulmonary receptors if there is associated atelectasis.
Diseases of the lung parenchyma
Interstitial lung diseases, which may arise from infec-
tions, occupational exposures, or autoimmune disorders, 
are associated with increased stiffness (decreased com-
pliance) of the lungs and increased work of breathing. 
In addition, V
./Q mismatch, and destruction and/or 
thickening of the alveolar-capillary interface may lead 
to hypoxemia and an increased drive to breathe. Stim-
ulation of pulmonary receptors may further enhance 
the hyperventilation characteristic of mild to moderate 
interstitial disease.
Cardiovascular system dyspnea
Diseases of the left heart
Diseases of the myocardium resulting from coronary 
artery disease and nonischemic cardiomyopathies result 
in a greater left-ventricular end-diastolic volume and an 
elevation of the left-ventricular end-diastolic, as well as 
pulmonary capillary pressures. These elevated pressures 
lead to interstitial edema and stimulation of pulmonary 
receptors, thereby causing dyspnea; hypoxemia due to 
V
./Q mismatch may also contribute to breathlessness. 
Diastolic dysfunction, characterized by a very stiff left 
ventricle, may lead to severe dyspnea with relatively 
mild degrees of physical activity, particularly if it is asso-
ciated with mitral regurgitation.
Diseases of the pulmonary vasculature
Pulmonary thromboembolic disease and primary dis-
eases of the pulmonary circulation (primary pulmonary 
hypertension, pulmonary vasculitis) cause dyspnea via 
increased pulmonary-artery pressure and stimulation of 
pulmonary receptors. Hyperventilation is common, and 
hypoxemia may be present. However, in most cases, 
use of supplemental oxygen has minimal effect on the 
severity of dyspnea and hyperventilation.
Table 5-2
Mechanisms of Dyspnea in Common Diseases
Disease
↑ Work of 
breathing
↑ Drive to 
breathe
Hypoxemiaa
Acute 
Hypercapniaa
Stimulation 
of 
pulmonary 
receptors
Stimulation 
of vascular 
receptors
Metaboreceptors
COPD
•
•
•
Asthma
•
•
•
•
•
ILD
•
•
•
•
•
PVD
•
•
•
CPE
•
•
•
•
•
•
NCPE
•
•
•
•
Anemia
•
Decond
•
aHypoxemia and hypercapnia are not always present in these conditions. When hypoxemia is present, dyspnea usually persists, albeit at a 
reduced intensity, with correction of hypoxemia by the administration of supplemental oxygen.
Abbreviations: COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; CPE, cardiogenic pulmonary edema; Decond, deconditioning; ILD, interstitial 
lung disease; NCPE, noncardiogenic pulmonary edema; PVD, pulmonary vascular disease.
 
CHAPTER 5
Dyspnea
45
Diseases of the pericardium
Constrictive pericarditis and cardiac tamponade are 
both associated with increased intracardiac and pulmo-
nary vascular pressures, which are the likely cause of 
dyspnea in these conditions. To the extent that cardiac 
output is limited, at rest or with exercise, stimulation of 
metaboreceptors and chemoreceptors (if lactic acidosis 
­develops) contribute as well.
Dyspnea with normal respiratory and 
cardiovascular systems
Mild to moderate anemia is associated with breathing ­
discomfort during exercise. This is thought to be related 
to stimulation of metaboreceptors; oxygen ­saturation 
is normal in patients with anemia. The breathless-
ness ­associated with obesity is probably due to ­multiple 
mechanisms, including high cardiac output and 
impaired ventilatory pump function (decreased compli-
ance of the chest wall). Cardiovascular deconditioning 
(poor fitness) is characterized by the early development 
of anaerobic metabolism and the stimulation of chemo-
receptors and metaboreceptors.
APPROACH TO THE
PATIENT 
Dyspnea
(Fig. 5-2) In obtaining a history, the patient should 
be asked to describe in his/her own words what the 
discomfort feels like, as well as the effect of position, 
infections, and environmental stimuli on the dyspnea. 
Orthopnea is a common indicator of congestive heart 
failure (CHF), mechanical impairment of the diaphragm 
associated with obesity, or asthma triggered by esopha-
geal reflux. Nocturnal dyspnea suggests CHF or asthma. 
Acute, intermittent episodes of dyspnea are more likely 
to reflect episodes of myocardial ischemia, broncho-
spasm, or pulmonary embolism, while chronic persistent 
dyspnea is typical of COPD, interstitial lung disease, and 
chronic thromboembolic disease. Risk factors for occupa-
tional lung disease and for coronary artery disease should 
be elicited. Left atrial myxoma or hepatopulmonary 
syndrome should be considered when the patient com-
plains of platypnea, defined as dyspnea in the upright 
position with relief in the supine position.
The physical examination should begin during the 
interview of the patient. Inability of the patient to speak 
in full sentences before stopping to get a deep breath 
suggests a condition that leads to stimulation of the 
controller or an impairment of the ventilatory pump 
with reduced vital capacity. Evidence for increased work 
of breathing (supraclavicular retractions, use of acces-
sory muscles of ventilation, and the tripod position, 
characterized by sitting with one’s hands braced on 
the knees) is indicative of increased airway resistance 
or stiff lungs and chest wall. When measuring the vital 
signs, one should accurately assess the respiratory rate 
and measure the pulsus paradoxus (Chap. 22); if it is 
>10 mmHg, consider the presence of COPD or acute 
asthma. During the general examination, signs of 
­anemia (pale conjunctivae), cyanosis, and cirrhosis 
­(spider angiomata, gynecomastia) should be sought. 
Examination of the chest should focus on symmetry of 
movement; percussion (dullness indicative of pleural 
effusion, hyperresonance a sign of emphysema); and 
auscultation (wheezes, rales, rhonchi, prolonged expira-
tory phase, diminished breath sounds, which are clues 
to disorders of the airways, and interstitial edema or 
fibrosis). The cardiac examination should focus on signs 
of elevated right heart pressures (jugular venous dis-
tention, edema, accentuated pulmonic component to 
the second heart sound); left ventricular dysfunction 
(S3 and S4 gallops); and valvular disease (murmurs). 
When examining the abdomen with the patient in the 
supine position, it should be noted whether there is 
paradoxical movement of the abdomen (inward motion 
­during inspiration), a sign of diaphragmatic weakness; 
rounding of the abdomen during exhalation is sugges-
tive of pulmonary edema. Clubbing of the digits may 
be an ­indication of interstitial pulmonary fibrosis, and 
the presence of joint swelling or deformation as well 
as changes consistent with Raynaud’s disease may be 
indicative of a collagen-vascular process that can be 
associated with pulmonary disease.
Patients with exertional dyspnea should be asked to 
walk under observation in order to reproduce the symp-
toms. The patient should be examined for new findings 
that were not present at rest and for oxygen saturation.
Following the history and physical examination, a 
chest radiograph should be obtained. The lung volumes 
should be assessed (hyperinflation indicates obstruc-
tive lung disease; low lung volumes suggest intersti-
tial edema or fibrosis, diaphragmatic dysfunction, or 
impaired chest wall motion). The pulmonary paren-
chyma should be examined for evidence of interstitial 
disease and emphysema. Prominent pulmonary vascu-
lature in the upper zones indicates pulmonary venous 
hypertension, while enlarged central pulmonary arteries 
suggest pulmonary artery hypertension. An enlarged 
cardiac silhouette suggests a dilated cardiomyopathy 
or valvular disease. Bilateral pleural effusions are typi-
cal of CHF and some forms of collagen vascular disease. 
­Unilateral effusions raise the specter of carcinoma and 
pulmonary embolism but may also occur in heart failure. 
Computed tomography (CT) of the chest is generally reserved 
for further evaluation of the lung parenchyma (interstitial 
lung disease) and possible pulmonary embolism.
Laboratory studies should include an electrocardiogram to 
look for evidence of ventricular hypertrophy and prior myo-
cardial infarction. Echocardiography is indicated in patients in 
SECTION II
Diagnosis of Cardiovascular Disorders
46
whom systolic dysfunction, pulmonary hypertension, or val-
vular heart disease is suspected. ­Bronchoprovocation testing 
is useful in patients with intermittent symptoms suggestive 
of asthma but normal physical examination and lung func-
tion; up to one-third of patients with the clinical diagnosis of 
asthma do not have reactive airways disease when formally 
tested.
Distinguishing Cardiovascular From 
Respiratory System Dyspnea
If a patient has evidence of both pulmonary and cardiac 
disease, a cardiopulmonary exercise test should be car-
ried out to determine which system is responsible for 
the exercise limitation. If, at peak exercise, the patient 
achieves predicted maximal ventilation, demonstrates an 
increase in dead space or hypoxemia, or develops bron-
chospasm, the respiratory system is probably the cause of 
the problem. Alternatively, if the heart rate is >85% of the 
­predicted maximum, if anaerobic threshold occurs early, if 
the blood pressure becomes excessively high or decreases 
during exercise, if the O2 pulse (O2 consumption/heart 
rate, an indicator of stroke ­volume) falls, or if there are 
ischemic changes on the electrocardiogram, an abnormal-
ity of the cardiovascular ­system is likely the explanation 
for the breathing ­discomfort.
treatment 	
Dyspnea
The first goal is to correct the underlying problem 
responsible for the symptom. If this is not possible, one 
attempts to lessen the intensity of the symptom and 
its effect on the patient’s quality of life. Supplemental 
ALGORITHM FOR THE EVALUATION OF THE PATIENT WITH DYSPNEA
History
Quality of sensation, timing, positional disposition
Persistent vs intermittent
Physical Exam
General appearance: Speak in full sentences? Accessory muscles? Color?
Vital signs: Tachypnea? Pulsus paradoxus? Oximetry-evidence of desaturation?
Chest: Wheezes, rales, rhonchi, diminished breath sounds? Hyperinflated?
Cardiac exam: JVP elevated? Precordial impulse? Gallop? Murmur?
Extremities: Edema? Cyanosis?
At this point, diagnosis may be evident—if not, proceed to further evaluation
Chest radiograph
Assess cardiac size, evidence of CHF
Assess for hyperinflation
Assess for pneumonia, interstitial lung disease, pleural effusions
Suspect low cardiac output, 
myocardial ischemia, or 
pulmonary vascular disease
Suspect respiratory pump or gas 
exchange abnormality
Suspect high 
cardiac output
ECG and echocardiogram to 
assess left ventricular 
function and pulmonary artery 
pressure
Pulmonary function testing—if diffusing 
capacity reduced, consider CT 
angiogram to assess for interstitial lung 
disease and pulmonary embolism
Hematocrit, 
thyroid function 
tests
If diagnosis still uncertain, obtain cardiopulmonary exercise test
Figure 5-2 
An algorithm for the evaluation of the patient with dys-
pnea. JVP, jugular venous pulse; CHF, congestive heart 
­failure; ECG, electrocardiogram; CT, computed tomography. 
(Adapted from RM Schwartzstein: The language of dyspnea, 
in Dyspnea: Mechanisms, Measurement, and Management, 
 
DA Mahler and DE O’Donnell [eds]. New York, Marcel Dekker, 
2005 and RM Schwartzstein, D Feller-Kopman: Shortness of 
breath, in Primary Cardiology, 2nd ed, E Braunwald and L 
Goldman [eds]. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2003.)
 
CHAPTER 5
Dyspnea
47
O2 should be administered if the resting O2 saturation is 
≤89% or if the patient’s saturation drops to these levels 
with activity. For patients with COPD, pulmonary reha-
bilitation programs have demonstrated positive effects 
on dyspnea, exercise capacity, and rates of hospitaliza-
tion. Studies of anxiolytics and antidepressants have 
not demonstrated consistent benefit. ­Experimental 
­interventions—e.g., cold air on the face, chest-wall 
vibration, and inhaled furosemide—to modulate the 
afferent information from receptors throughout the 
respiratory system are being studied.
Pulmonary Edema
Mechanisms of Fluid Accumulation
The extent to which fluid accumulates in the intersti-
tium of the lung depends on the balance of hydrostatic 
and oncotic forces within the pulmonary capillaries and 
in the surrounding tissue. Hydrostatic pressure favors 
movement of fluid from the capillary into the intersti-
tium. The oncotic pressure, which is determined by the 
protein concentration in the blood, favors movement of 
fluid into the vessel. Albumin, the primary protein in 
the plasma, may be low in conditions such as cirrho-
sis and nephrotic syndrome. While hypoalbuminemia 
favors movement of fluid into the tissue for any given 
hydrostatic pressure in the capillary, it is usually not suf-
ficient by itself to cause interstitial edema. In a healthy 
individual, the tight junctions of the capillary endothe-
lium are impermeable to proteins, and the lymphatics in 
the tissue carry away the small amounts of protein that 
may leak out; together, these factors result in an oncotic 
force that maintains fluid in the capillary. Disruption 
of the endothelial barrier, however, allows protein to 
escape the capillary bed and enhances the movement of 
fluid into the tissue of the lung.
Cardiogenic pulmonary edema
(See also Chap. 28) Cardiac abnormalities that lead to 
an increase in pulmonary venous pressure shift the bal-
ance of forces between the capillary and the interstitium. 
­Hydrostatic pressure is increased and fluid exits the cap-
illary at an increased rate, resulting in interstitial and, in 
more severe cases, alveolar edema. The development 
of pleural effusions may further compromise respiratory 
­system function and contribute to breathing discomfort.
Early signs of pulmonary edema include exertional 
dyspnea and orthopnea. Chest radiographs show peri-
bronchial thickening, prominent vascular markings in 
the upper lung zones, and Kerley B lines. As the pul-
monary edema worsens, alveoli fill with fluid; the chest 
radiograph shows patchy alveolar filling, typically in a 
perihilar distribution, which then progresses to diffuse 
alveolar infiltrates. Increasing airway edema is associated 
with rhonchi and wheezes.
Noncardiogenic pulmonary edema
In noncardiogenic pulmonary edema, lung water increases 
due to damage of the pulmonary capillary ­lining with 
leakage of proteins and other macromolecules into the 
tissue; fluid follows the protein as oncotic forces are 
shifted from the vessel to the surrounding lung tissue. 
This process is associated with dysfunction of the sur-
factant lining the alveoli, increased surface forces, and 
a propensity for the alveoli to collapse at low lung vol-
umes. Physiologically, noncardiogenic pulmonary edema 
is characterized by intrapulmonary shunt with hypox-
emia and decreased pulmonary compliance. Pathologi-
cally, hyaline membranes are evident in the alveoli, and 
inflammation leading to pulmonary fibrosis may be 
seen. Clinically, the picture ranges from mild dyspnea 
to respiratory failure. Auscultation of the lungs may be 
relatively normal despite chest radiographs that show 
diffuse alveolar infiltrates. CT scans demonstrate that 
the distribution of alveolar edema is more heteroge-
neous than was once thought. Although normal intra-
cardiac pressures are considered by many to be part of 
the definition of noncardiogenic pulmonary edema, 
the pathology of the process, as described earlier, is 
distinctly different, and one can observe a combination 
of cardiogenic and noncardiogenic pulmonary edema in 
some patients.
It is useful to categorize the causes of noncardiogenic 
pulmonary edema in terms of whether the injury to the 
lung is likely to result from direct, indirect, or pulmo-
nary vascular causes (Table 5-3). Direct injuries are 
mediated via the airways (e.g., aspiration) or as the con-
sequence of blunt chest trauma. Indirect injury is the 
consequence of mediators that reach the lung via the 
bloodstream. The third category includes conditions 
that may be the consequence of acute changes in pul-
monary vascular pressures, possibly the result of sudden 
autonomic discharge in the case of neurogenic and high-
altitude pulmonary edema, or sudden swings of pleural 
pressure, as well as transient damage to the pulmonary 
capillaries in the case of reexpansion pulmonary edema.
Distinguishing cardiogenic from 
noncardiogenic pulmonary edema
The history is essential for assessing the likelihood of 
underlying cardiac disease as well as for identification 
of one of the conditions associated with ­noncardiogenic 
pulmonary edema. The physical examination in car-
diogenic pulmonary edema is notable for evidence of 
SECTION II
Diagnosis of Cardiovascular Disorders
48
increased intracardiac pressures (S3 gallop, elevated 
jugular venous pulse, peripheral edema), and rales ­
and/or wheezes on auscultation of the chest. In 
­contrast, the physical examination in noncardiogenic 
pulmonary edema is dominated by the findings of the 
precipitating condition; pulmonary findings may be 
relatively normal in the early stages. The chest radio-
graph in cardiogenic pulmonary edema typically shows 
an enlarged cardiac silhouette, vascular redistribution, 
interstitial thickening, and perihilar alveolar infiltrates; 
pleural effusions are common. In noncardiogenic pul-
monary edema, heart size is normal, alveolar infiltrates 
are distributed more uniformly throughout the lungs, 
and pleural effusions are uncommon. Finally, the hypox-
emia of cardiogenic pulmonary edema is due largely 
to V/Q
.
 mismatch and responds to the administration 
of supplemental oxygen. In contrast, hypoxemia in 
­noncardiogenic pulmonary edema is due primarily to 
intrapulmonary shunting and typically persists despite 
high concentrations of inhaled O2.
Table 5-3
Common Causes of Noncardiogenic 
Pulmonary Edema
Direct Injury to Lung
Chest trauma, pulmonary contusion
Aspiration
Smoke inhalation
Pneumonia
Oxygen toxicity
Pulmonary embolism, reperfusion
Hematogenous Injury to Lung
Sepsis
Pancreatitis
Nonthoracic trauma
Leukoagglutination reactions
Multiple transfusions
Intravenous drug use, e.g., heroin
Cardiopulmonary bypass
Possible Lung Injury Plus Elevated Hydrostatic 
­Pressures
High-altitude pulmonary edema
Neurogenic pulmonary edema
Reexpansion pulmonary edema
 Joseph Loscalzo 
49
 HyPoXia 
 The fundamental purpose of the cardiorespiratory 
system is to deliver O 2 and nutrients to cells and to 
remove CO 2 and other metabolic products from them. 
Proper maintenance of this function depends not only on 
intact cardiovascular and respiratory systems but also on 
an adequate number of red blood cells and hemoglobin 
and a supply of inspired gas containing adequate O 2 . 
 responses to HypoxiA 
 Decreased O 2 availability to cells results in an inhibi-
tion of oxidative phosphorylation and increased anaer-
obic glycolysis. This switch from aerobic to anaerobic 
metabolism, the Pasteur effect, maintains some, albeit 
reduced, adenosine 5’-triphosphate (ATP) production. 
In severe hypoxia, when ATP production is inadequate 
to meet the energy requirements of ionic and osmotic 
equilibrium, cell membrane depolarization leads to 
uncontrolled Ca 2+ infl ux and activation of Ca 2+ -dependent 
phospholipases and proteases. These events, in turn, 
cause cell swelling and, ultimately, cell death. 
 The adaptations to hypoxia are mediated, in part, by 
the upregulation of genes encoding a variety of proteins, 
including glycolytic enzymes such as phosphoglycerate 
kinase and phosphofructokinase, as well as the glucose 
transporters Glut-1 and Glut-2; and by growth factors, 
such as vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and 
erythropoietin, which enhance erythrocyte production. 
The hypoxia-induced increase in expression of these 
key proteins is governed by the hypoxia-sensitive tran-
scription factor, hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1). 
 During hypoxia, systemic arterioles dilate, at least in 
part, by opening of K ATP channels in vascular smooth-
muscle cells due to the hypoxia-induced reduction in 
ATP concentration. By contrast, in pulmonary vascular 
smooth-muscle cells, inhibition of K + channels causes 
depolarization which, in turn, activates voltage-gated 
 HYPOXIA AND CYANOSIS 
 CHaPTER 6  
Ca 2+ channels raising the cytosolic [Ca 2+ ] and causing 
smooth-muscle cell contraction. Hypoxia-induced pul-
monary arterial constriction shunts blood away from 
poorly ventilated portions toward better ventilated por-
tions of the lung; however, it also increases pulmonary 
vascular resistance and right ventricular afterload. 
 Effects on the central nervous system 
 Changes in the central nervous system (CNS), particu-
larly the higher centers, are especially important con-
sequences of hypoxia. Acute hypoxia causes impaired 
judgment, motor incoordination, and a clinical picture 
resembling acute alcohol intoxication. High-altitude 
illness is characterized by headache secondary to cere-
bral vasodilation, gastrointestinal symptoms, dizziness, 
insomnia, fatigue, or somnolence. Pulmonary  arterial 
and sometimes venous constriction cause capillary 
leakage and high-altitude pulmonary edema (HAPE) 
 ( Chap. 5 ) , which intensifi es hypoxia, further promoting 
vasoconstriction. Rarely, high-altitude cerebral edema 
(HACE) develops, which is manifest by severe head-
ache and papilledema and can cause coma. As hypoxia 
becomes more severe, the regulatory centers of the 
brainstem are affected, and death usually results from 
respiratory failure. 
 CAuses of HypoxiA 
 Respiratory hypoxia 
 When hypoxia occurs from respiratory failure, Pa o2
declines, and when respiratory failure is persistent, 
the hemoglobin-oxygen (Hb-O 2 ) dissociation curve 
is displaced to the right, with greater quantities of O 2
released at any level of tissue P o2 . Arterial hypox-
emia, i.e., a reduction of O 2 saturation of arterial blood 
(Sa o2 ), and consequent cyanosis are likely to be more 
marked when such depression of Pa o2 results from pul-
monary disease than when the depression occurs as the 
Section II
Diagnosis of Cardiovascular Disorders
50
result of a decline in the ­fraction of oxygen in inspired 
air (Fio2). In this latter situation, Paco2 falls second-
ary to anoxia-induced hyperventilation and the Hb-O2 
dissociation curve is ­displaced to the left, limiting the 
decline in Sao2 at any level of Pao2.
The most common cause of respiratory hypoxia is 
ventilation-perfusion mismatch resulting from perfusion of 
poorly ventilated alveoli. Respiratory hypoxemia may 
also be caused by hypoventilation, in which case it is 
then associated with an elevation of Paco2. These two 
forms of respiratory hypoxia are usually correctable by 
inspiring 100% O2 for several minutes. A third cause of 
respiratory hypoxia is shunting of blood across the lung 
from the pulmonary arterial to the venous bed (intra-
pulmonary right-to-left shunting) by perfusion of nonven-
tilated portions of the lung, as in pulmonary atelectasis 
or through pulmonary arteriovenous connections. The 
low Pao2 in this situation is only partially corrected by 
an Fio2 of 100%.
Hypoxia secondary to high altitude
As one ascends rapidly to 3000 m (∼10,000 ft), the 
reduction of the O2 content of inspired air (Fio2) 
leads to a decrease in alveolar Po2 to approximately 
60 mmHg, and a condition termed high-altitude illness 
develops (see earlier). At higher altitudes, arterial satu-
ration declines rapidly and symptoms become more 
serious; and at 5000 m, unacclimated individuals usu-
ally cease to be able to function normally owing to the 
changes in CNS function described earlier.
Hypoxia secondary to right-to-left 
extrapulmonary shunting
From a physiologic viewpoint, this cause of hypoxia 
resembles intrapulmonary right-to-left shunting but 
is caused by congenital cardiac malformations, such as 
tetralogy of Fallot, transposition of the great arteries, and 
Eisenmenger’s syndrome (Chap. 19). As in pulmonary 
right-to-left shunting, the Pao2 cannot be restored to 
normal with inspiration of 100% O2.
Anemic hypoxia
A reduction in hemoglobin concentration of the blood 
is accompanied by a corresponding decline in the O2-
carrying capacity of the blood. Although the Pao2 is 
normal in anemic hypoxia, the absolute quantity of O2 
transported per unit volume of blood is diminished. 
As the anemic blood passes through the capillaries and 
the usual quantity of O2 is removed from it, the Po2 
and saturation in the venous blood decline to a greater 
extent than normal.
Carbon monoxide (CO) intoxication
Hemoglobin that binds with CO (carboxyhemoglobin, 
COHb) is unavailable for O2 transport. In addition, the 
presence of COHb shifts the Hb-O2 dissociation curve 
to the left so that O2 is unloaded only at lower tensions, 
contributing ­further to tissue hypoxia.
Circulatory hypoxia
As in anemic hypoxia, the Pao2 is usually normal, but 
venous and tissue Po2 values are reduced as a conse-
quence of reduced tissue perfusion and greater tissue O2 
extraction. This pathophysiology leads to an increased 
arterial-mixed venous O2 difference (a-v-O2 difference), 
or gradient. Generalized circulatory hypoxia occurs in 
heart failure (Chap. 17) and in most forms of shock.
Specific organ hypoxia
Localized circulatory hypoxia may occur as a result 
of decreased perfusion secondary to arterial obstruc-
tion, as in localized atherosclerosis in any vascular bed, 
or as a consequence of vasoconstriction, as observed in 
­Raynaud’s phenomenon (Chap. 39). Localized hypoxia 
may also result from venous obstruction and the resul-
tant expansion of interstitial fluid causing arteriolar 
compression and, thereby, reduction of arterial inflow. 
Edema, which increases the distance through which 
O2 must diffuse before it reaches cells, can also cause 
­localized hypoxia. In an attempt to maintain adequate 
perfusion to more vital organs in patients with reduced 
cardiac output secondary to heart failure or hypovolemic 
shock, vasoconstriction may reduce perfusion in the limbs 
and skin, causing hypoxia of these regions.
Increased O2 requirements
If the O2 consumption of tissues is elevated without a 
corresponding increase in perfusion, tissue hypoxia 
ensues and the Po2 in venous blood declines. Ordinarily, 
the clinical picture of patients with hypoxia due to an 
elevated metabolic rate, as in fever or thyrotoxicosis, is 
quite different from that in other types of hypoxia: the 
skin is warm and flushed owing to increased cutaneous 
blood flow that dissipates the excessive heat produced, 
and cyanosis is usually absent.
Exercise is a classic example of increased tissue O2 
requirements. These increased demands are normally 
met by several mechanisms operating simultaneously: 
(1) increase in the cardiac output and ventilation and, 
thus, O2 delivery to the tissues; (2) a preferential shift 
in blood flow to the exercising muscles by changing 
vascular resistances in the circulatory beds of exercising 
 
CHAPTER 6 
Hypoxia and Cyanosis
51
tissues, directly and/or reflexly; (3) an increase in O2 
extraction from the delivered blood and a widening of 
the arteriovenous O2 difference; and (4) a reduction in 
the pH of the tissues and capillary blood, shifting the 
Hb-O2 curve to the right, and unloading more O2 
from hemoglobin. If the capacity of these mechanisms 
is exceeded, then hypoxia, especially of the exercising 
muscles, will result.
Improper oxygen utilization
Cyanide and several other similarly acting poisons cause 
cellular hypoxia. The tissues are unable to utilize O2, 
and, as a consequence, the venous blood tends to have a 
high O2 tension. This condition has been termed histo-
toxic hypoxia.
Adaptation to Hypoxia
An important component of the respiratory response to 
hypoxia originates in special chemosensitive cells in the 
carotid and aortic bodies and in the respiratory center in 
the brainstem. The stimulation of these cells by hypoxia 
increases ventilation, with a loss of CO2, and can lead 
to respiratory alkalosis. When combined with the meta-
bolic acidosis resulting from the production of lactic 
acid, the serum bicarbonate level declines.
With the reduction of Pao2, cerebrovascular resis-
tance decreases and cerebral blood flow increases in an 
attempt to maintain O2 delivery to the brain. However, 
when the reduction of Pao2 is accompanied by hyper-
ventilation and a reduction of Paco2, cerebrovascular 
resistance rises, cerebral blood flow falls, and tissue 
hypoxia intensifies.
The diffuse, systemic vasodilation that occurs in 
generalized hypoxia increases the cardiac output. In 
patients with underlying heart disease, the requirements 
of peripheral tissues for an increase of cardiac output 
with hypoxia may precipitate congestive heart failure. 
In patients with ischemic heart disease, a reduced Pao2 
may intensify myocardial ischemia and further impair 
left ventricular function.
One of the important compensatory mechanisms for 
chronic hypoxia is an increase in the hemoglobin con-
centration and in the number of red blood cells in the 
circulating blood, i.e., the development of polycythemia 
secondary to erythropoietin production. In persons with 
chronic hypoxemia secondary to prolonged residence 
at a high altitude (>13,000 ft, 4200 m), a condition 
termed chronic mountain sickness develops. This disorder 
is characterized by a blunted respiratory drive, reduced 
ventilation, erythrocytosis, cyanosis, weakness, right 
ventricular enlargement secondary to pulmonary hyper-
tension, and even stupor.
Cyanosis
Cyanosis refers to a bluish color of the skin and mucous 
membranes resulting from an increased quantity of 
reduced hemoglobin (i.e., deoxygenated hemoglobin) 
or of hemoglobin derivatives (e.g., methemoglobin or 
sulfhemoglobin) in the small blood vessels of those tis-
sues. It is usually most marked in the lips, nail beds, ears, 
and malar eminences. Cyanosis, especially if developed 
recently, is more commonly detected by a family mem-
ber than the patient. The florid skin characteristic of 
polycythemia vera must be distinguished from the true 
cyanosis discussed here. A cherry-colored flush, rather 
than cyanosis, is caused by COHb.
The degree of cyanosis is modified by the color of 
the cutaneous pigment and the thickness of the skin, 
as well as by the state of the cutaneous capillaries. The 
accurate clinical detection of the presence and degree of 
cyanosis is difficult, as proved by oximetric studies. In 
some instances, central cyanosis can be detected reliably 
when the Sao2 has fallen to 85%; in others, particularly 
in dark-skinned persons, it may not be detected until it 
has declined to 75%. In the latter case, examination of 
the mucous membranes in the oral cavity and the con-
junctivae rather than examination of the skin is more 
helpful in the detection of cyanosis.
The increase in the quantity of reduced hemoglobin 
in the mucocutaneous vessels that produces cyanosis may 
be brought about either by an increase in the quantity 
of venous blood as a result of dilation of the venules and 
venous ends of the capillaries or by a reduction in the 
Sao2 in the capillary blood. In general, cyanosis becomes 
apparent when the concentration of reduced hemoglo-
bin in capillary blood exceeds 40 g/L (4 g/dL).
It is the absolute, rather than the relative, quantity of 
reduced hemoglobin that is important in producing 
cyanosis. Thus, in a patient with severe anemia, the 
relative quantity of reduced hemoglobin in the venous 
blood may be very large when considered in relation to 
the total quantity of hemoglobin in the blood. How-
ever, since the concentration of the latter is markedly 
reduced, the absolute quantity of reduced hemoglobin 
may still be small, and, therefore, patients with severe 
anemia and even marked arterial desaturation may not 
display cyanosis. Conversely, the higher the total hemo-
globin content, the greater the tendency toward cya-
nosis; thus, patients with marked polycythemia tend to 
be cyanotic at higher levels of Sao2 than patients with 
normal hematocrit values. Likewise, local passive con-
gestion, which causes an increase in the total quantity 
of reduced hemoglobin in the vessels in a given area, 
may cause cyanosis. Cyanosis is also observed when 
nonfunctional hemoglobin, such as methemoglobin or 
sulfhemoglobin, is present in blood.
Section II
Diagnosis of Cardiovascular Disorders
52
Cyanosis may be subdivided into central and periph-
eral types. In central cyanosis, the Sao2 is reduced or 
an abnormal hemoglobin derivative is present, and the 
mucous membranes and skin are both affected. Peripheral 
cyanosis is due to a slowing of blood flow and abnor-
mally great extraction of O2 from normally saturated 
arterial blood; it results from vasoconstriction and 
diminished peripheral blood flow, such as occurs in 
cold exposure, shock, congestive failure, and peripheral 
vascular disease. Often in these conditions, the mucous 
membranes of the oral cavity or those beneath the 
tongue may be spared. Clinical differentiation between 
central and peripheral cyanosis may not always be sim-
ple, and in conditions such as cardiogenic shock with 
pulmonary edema there may be a mixture of both types.
Differential Diagnosis
Central cyanosis
(Table 6-1) Decreased Sao2 results from a marked 
reduction in the Pao2. This reduction may be brought 
about by a decline in the Fio2 without sufficient com-
pensatory alveolar hyperventilation to maintain alveolar 
Po2. Cyanosis usually becomes manifest in an ascent to 
an altitude of 4000 m (13,000 ft).
Seriously impaired pulmonary function, through perfu-
sion of unventilated or poorly ventilated areas of the 
lung or alveolar hypoventilation, is a common cause of 
central cyanosis. This condition may occur acutely, as in 
Table 6-1 
Causes of Cyanosis
Central Cyanosis
Decreased arterial oxygen saturation
  Decreased atmospheric pressure—high altitude
  Impaired pulmonary function
    Alveolar hypoventilation
    Uneven relationships between pulmonary ventilation 
  and perfusion (perfusion of hypoventilated alveoli)
    Impaired oxygen diffusion
  Anatomic shunts
    Certain types of congenital heart disease
    Pulmonary arteriovenous fistulas
    Multiple small intrapulmonary shunts
  Hemoglobin with low affinity for oxygen
Hemoglobin abnormalities
  Methemoglobinemia—hereditary, acquired
  Sulfhemoglobinema—acquired
  Carboxyhemoglobinemia (not true cyanosis)
Peripheral Cyanosis
Reduced cardiac output
Cold exposure
Redistribution of blood flow from extremities
Arterial obstruction
Venous obstruction
extensive pneumonia or pulmonary edema, or chronically, 
with chronic pulmonary diseases (e.g., emphysema). In 
the latter situation, secondary polycythemia is gener-
ally present and clubbing of the fingers (see later) may 
occur. Another cause of reduced Sao2 is shunting of sys-
temic venous blood into the arterial circuit. ­Certain forms of 
congenital heart disease are associated with cyanosis on 
this basis (see earlier and Chap. 19).
Pulmonary arteriovenous fistulae may be congenital 
or acquired, solitary or multiple, microscopic or massive. 
The severity of cyanosis produced by these fistulae 
depends on their size and number. They occur with 
some frequency in hereditary hemorrhagic telangiecta-
sia. Sao2 reduction and cyanosis may also occur in some 
patients with cirrhosis, presumably as a consequence of 
pulmonary arteriovenous fistulae or portal vein–pulmonary 
vein anastomoses.
In patients with cardiac or pulmonary right-to-left 
shunts, the presence and severity of cyanosis depend on 
the size of the shunt relative to the systemic flow as well 
as on the Hb-O2 saturation of the venous blood. With 
increased extraction of O2 from the blood by the exer-
cising muscles, the venous blood returning to the right 
side of the heart is more unsaturated than at rest, and 
shunting of this blood intensifies the cyanosis. Second-
ary polycythemia occurs frequently in patients in this 
setting and contributes to the cyanosis.
Cyanosis can be caused by small quantities of circu-
lating methemoglobin (Hb Fe3+) and by even smaller 
quantities of sulfhemoglobin; both of these hemoglo-
bin derivatives are unable to bind oxygen. Although 
they are uncommon causes of cyanosis, these abnormal 
hemoglobin species should be sought by spectroscopy 
when cyanosis is not readily explained by malfunction 
of the circulatory or respiratory systems. Generally, digital 
clubbing does not occur with them.
Peripheral cyanosis
Probably the most common cause of peripheral cyanosis 
is the normal vasoconstriction resulting from exposure 
to cold air or water. When cardiac output is reduced, 
cutaneous vasoconstriction occurs as a compensatory 
mechanism so that blood is diverted from the skin to 
more vital areas such as the CNS and heart, and cyano-
sis of the extremities may result even though the arterial 
blood is normally saturated.
Arterial obstruction to an extremity, as with an 
embolus, or arteriolar constriction, as in cold-induced 
vasospasm (Raynaud’s phenomenon) (Chap. 39), gen-
erally results in pallor and coldness, and there may be 
associated cyanosis. Venous obstruction, as in throm-
bophlebitis or deep venous thrombosis, dilates the 
subpapillary venous plexuses and thereby intensifies 
cyanosis.
 
CHAPTER 6 
Hypoxia and Cyanosis
53
APPROACH TO THE
PATIENT	
Cyanosis
Certain features are important in arriving at the cause of 
cyanosis:
1.  It is important to ascertain the time of onset of 
­cyanosis. Cyanosis present since birth or infancy is 
usually due to congenital heart disease.
2.  Central and peripheral cyanosis must be differentiated. 
Evidence of disorders of the respiratory or cardiovas-
cular systems are helpful. Massage or gentle warming 
of a cyanotic extremity will increase peripheral blood 
flow and abolish peripheral, but not central, cyanosis.
3.  The presence or absence of clubbing of the digits (see 
next section) should be ascertained. The combination 
of cyanosis and clubbing is frequent in patients with 
congenital heart disease and right-to-left shunting and 
is seen occasionally in patients with pulmonary disease, 
such as lung abscess or pulmonary arteriovenous fistulae. 
In contrast, peripheral cyanosis or acutely developing 
central cyanosis is not associated with clubbed digits.
4.  Pao2 and Sao2 should be determined, and, in patients 
with cyanosis in whom the mechanism is obscure, 
spectroscopic examination of the blood performed 
to look for abnormal types of hemoglobin (critical in 
the differential diagnosis of cyanosis).
Clubbing
The selective bulbous enlargement of the distal seg-
ments of the fingers and toes due to proliferation of 
connective tissue, particularly on the dorsal surface, is 
termed clubbing; there is also increased sponginess of 
the soft tissue at the base of the clubbed nail. Club-
bing may be hereditary, idiopathic, or acquired and 
associated with a variety of disorders, including cya-
notic congenital heart disease (see earlier), infective 
endocarditis, and a variety of pulmonary conditions 
(among them primary and metastatic lung cancer, 
bronchiectasis, asbestosis, sarcoidosis, lung abscess, 
cystic fibrosis, tuberculosis, and mesothelioma), as 
well as with some gastrointestinal diseases (including 
inflammatory bowel disease and hepatic cirrhosis). In 
some instances, it is occupational, e.g., in jackhammer 
operators.
Clubbing in patients with primary and metastatic 
lung cancer, mesothelioma, bronchiectasis, or hepatic 
cirrhosis may be associated with hypertrophic osteoar-
thropathy. In this condition, the subperiosteal formation 
of new bone in the distal diaphyses of the long bones 
of the extremities causes pain and symmetric arthritis-
like changes in the shoulders, knees, ankles, wrists, 
and elbows. The diagnosis of hypertrophic osteoar-
thropathy may be confirmed by bone radiograph or 
MRI. Although the mechanism of clubbing is unclear, 
it appears to be secondary to humoral substances that 
cause dilation of the vessels of the distal digits as well 
as growth factors released from unfragmented platelet 
­precursors in the digital circulation.
Acknowledgment
Dr. Eugene Braunwald authored this chapter in the previous 
edition of Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine. Some of 
the material from the 17th edition has been carried forward.
 Eugene Braunwald   I   Joseph Loscalzo 
54
 Edema is defi ned as a clinically apparent increase in the 
interstitial fl uid volume, which may expand by several 
liters before the abnormality is evident. Therefore, a 
weight gain of several kilograms usually precedes overt 
manifestations of edema, and a similar weight loss from 
diuresis can be induced in a slightly edematous patient 
before “dry weight” is achieved.  Anasarca refers to gross, 
generalized edema.  Ascites and  hydrothorax refer to accu-
mulation of excess fl uid in the peritoneal and pleural 
cavities, respectively, and are considered special forms of 
edema. 
 Depending on its cause and mechanism, edema may 
be localized or have a generalized distribution. Edema 
is recognized in its generalized form by puffi ness of the 
face, which is most readily apparent in the periorbital 
areas, and by the persistence of an indentation of the 
skin after pressure; this is known as “pitting” edema. In 
its more subtle form, edema may be detected by not-
ing that after the stethoscope is removed from the chest 
wall, the rim of the bell leaves an indentation on the 
skin of the chest for a few minutes. When the ring on 
a fi nger fi ts more snugly than in the past or when a 
patient complains of diffi culty putting on shoes, particu-
larly in the evening, edema may be present. 
 Pathogenesis 
 About one-third of total-body water is confi ned to the 
extracellular space. Approximately 75% of the latter 
is interstitial fl uid, and the remainder is in the plasma 
compartment. 
 Starling forces 
 The forces that regulate the disposition of fl uid between 
these two components of the extracellular compart-
ment frequently are referred to as the  Starling forces . The 
hydrostatic pressure within the vascular system and the 
colloid oncotic pressure in the interstitial fl uid tend to 
promote movement of fl uid from the vascular to the 
extravascular space. By contrast, the colloid oncotic 
pressure contributed by plasma proteins and the hydro-
static pressure within the interstitial fl uid promote the 
movement of fl uid into the vascular compartment. 
 As a consequence of these forces, there is movement 
of water and diffusible solutes from the vascular space 
at the arteriolar end of the capillaries. Fluid is returned 
from the interstitial space into the vascular system at the 
venous end of the capillaries and by way of the lym-
phatics. Unless these channels are obstructed, lymph 
fl ow rises with increases in net movement of fl uid from 
the vascular compartment to the interstitium. These 
fl ows are usually balanced so that there is a steady state 
in the sizes of the intravascular and interstitial com-
partments, yet a large exchange between them occurs. 
However, if either the hydrostatic or the oncotic 
 pressure gradient is altered signifi cantly, a further net 
movement of fl uid between the two components of the 
extracellular space will take place. The development of 
edema then depends on one or more alterations in the 
Starling forces so that there is increased fl ow of fl uid 
from the vascular system into the interstitium or into a 
body cavity. 
 Edema due to an increase in capillary pressure may 
result from an elevation of venous pressure caused by 
obstruction to venous and/or lymphatic drainage. An 
increase in capillary pressure may be generalized, as 
occurs in congestive heart failure (see later). The 
 Starling forces also may be imbalanced when the colloid 
oncotic pressure of the plasma is reduced owing to any 
factor that may induce hypoalbuminemia, such as severe 
malnutrition, liver disease, loss of protein into the urine 
or into the gastrointestinal tract, or a severe catabolic 
state. Edema may be localized to one extremity when 
venous pressure is elevated due to unilateral thrombo-
phlebitis (see later). 
 EDEMA 
 CHaPter 7 
 
CHAPTER 7
Edema
55
Capillary damage
Edema may also result from damage to the capillary 
endothelium, which increases its permeability and 
­permits the transfer of proteins into the interstitial com-
partment. Injury to the capillary wall can result from 
drugs, viral or bacterial agents, and thermal or mechani-
cal trauma. Increased capillary permeability also may 
be a consequence of a hypersensitivity reaction and is 
characteristic of immune injury. Damage to the capil-
lary endothelium is presumably responsible for inflam-
matory edema, which is usually nonpitting, localized, 
and accompanied by other signs of inflammation—i.e., 
erythema, heat, and tenderness.
Reduction of effective arterial volume
In many forms of edema, the effective arterial blood 
volume, a parameter that represents the filling of the 
arterial tree, is reduced. Underfilling of the arterial tree 
may be caused by a reduction of cardiac output and/
or systemic vascular resistance. As a consequence of 
underfilling, a series of physiologic responses designed 
to restore the effective arterial volume to normal are 
set into motion. A key element of these responses is 
the retention of salt and, therefore, of water, ultimately 
leading to edema.
Renal factors and the renin-angiotensin-
aldosterone (RAA) system
In the final analysis, renal retention of Na+ is central 
to the development of generalized edema (Fig. 7-1). 
The diminished renal blood flow characteristic of 
states in which the effective arterial blood ­volume is 
reduced is translated by the renal juxtaglomerular cells 
(specialized myoepithelial cells surrounding the affer-
ent arteriole) into a signal for increased renin release. 
Renin is an enzyme with a molecular mass of about 
40,000 Da that acts on its substrate, angiotensinogen, an 
α2-globulin synthesized by the liver, to release angio-
tensin I, a decapeptide, which in turn is converted to 
angiotensin II (AII), an octapeptide. AII has generalized 
vasoconstrictor properties; it is especially active on the 
renal efferent arterioles. This action reduces the hydro-
static pressure in the peritubular capillaries, whereas the 
increased filtration fraction raises the colloid osmotic 
pressure in these vessels, thereby enhancing salt and 
water reabsorption in the proximal tubule as well as in 
the ascending limb of the loop of Henle.
The renin-angiotensin-aldosterone (RAA) system has 
long been recognized as a hormonal system; however, it 
also operates locally. Intrarenally produced AII contrib-
utes to glomerular efferent arteriolar constriction, and 
this “tubuloglomerular feedback” causes salt and water 
retention and thereby contributes to the formation of 
edema.
AII that enters the systemic circulation stimulates 
the production of aldosterone by the zona glomeru-
losa of the adrenal cortex. Aldosterone in turn enhances 
Na+ reabsorption (and K+ excretion) by the collecting 
tubule. In patients with heart failure, not only is aldo-
sterone secretion elevated but the biologic half-life of 
aldosterone is prolonged, which increases further the 
plasma level of the hormone. A depression of hepatic 
blood flow, especially during exercise, is responsible for 
reduced hepatic catabolism of aldosterone.
Increased quantities of aldosterone are secreted in 
heart failure and in other edematous states, and blockade 
of the action of aldosterone by spironolactone or 
eplerenone (aldosterone antagonists) or by amiloride 
(a blocker of epithelial Na+ channels) often induces a 
moderate diuresis in edematous states. Yet persistently 
augmented levels of aldosterone (or other mineralo-
corticoids) alone do not always promote accumulation 
of edema, as witnessed by the lack of significant fluid 
retention in most instances of primary aldosteronism. 
Furthermore, although normal individuals retain some 
NaCl and water with the administration of potent min-
eralocorticoids, such as deoxycorticosterone acetate 
and fludrocortisone, this accumulation is self-limiting 
despite continued exposure to the steroid, a phenom-
enon known as mineralocorticoid escape. The failure of 
normal individuals who receive large doses of mineralo-
corticoids to accumulate large quantities of extracellular 
fluid and develop edema is probably a consequence of 
an increase in glomerular filtration rate (pressure natri-
uresis) and the action of natriuretic substance(s) (see 
later). The continued secretion of aldosterone may be 
more important in the accumulation of fluid in edema-
tous states because patients with edema secondary to 
heart failure, nephrotic syndrome, and hepatic cirrhosis 
are generally unable to repair the deficit in effective 
arterial blood volume. As a consequence, they do not 
develop pressure natriuresis.
Arginine vasopressin (AVP)
The secretion of AVP occurs in response to increased 
intracellular osmolar concentration, and, by stimu-
lating V2 receptors, AVP increases the reabsorption 
of free water in the renal distal tubule and collecting 
duct, thereby increasing total-body water. Circulating 
AVP is elevated in many patients with heart failure 
secondary to a nonosmotic stimulus associated with 
decreased effective arterial volume. Such patients fail 
to show the normal reduction of AVP with a reduc-
tion of osmolality, contributing to edema formation 
and hyponatremia.
Section II
56
Diagnosis of Cardiovascular Disorders
Endothelin
This potent peptide vasoconstrictor is released by endo-
thelial cells. Its concentration is elevated in heart failure 
and contributes to renal vasoconstriction, Na+ retention, 
and edema in heart failure.
Natriuretic peptides
Atrial distention and/or a Na+ load cause release into 
the circulation of atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP), 
Figure 7-1
Clinical conditions in which a decrease in 
cardiac output (A) and systemic arterial 
vasodilation (B) cause arterial underfilling 
with resulting neurohumoral activation and 
renal sodium and water retention. In addition 
to activating the neurohumoral axis, adrener-
gic stimulation causes renal vasoconstriction 
and enhances sodium and fluid transport by 
the proximal tubule epithelium. SNS, sympa-
thetic nervous system; RAAS, renin-angiotensin 
aldosterone system. (Reprinted from RW 
Schrier: Ann Intern Med 113:155, 1990.)
Low output cardiac failure, 
Pericardial tamponade,
Constrictive pericarditis
Activation of ventricular
and arterial receptors
Stimulation of sympathetic
nervous system
↑ SYSTEMIC AND RENAL
ARTERIAL VASCULAR
RESISTANCE
MAINTENANCE OF
ARTERIAL CIRCULATORY
INTEGRITY
↓ CARDIAC OUTPUT
↓ Oncotic pressure
and/or
↑ Capillary permeability
Activation of the 
Renin-angiolensin-
aldosterone system
RENAL SODIUM
RETENTION
↓ Extracellular
fluid volume
Non-osmotic
vasopression
stimulation
RENAL
WATER
RETENTION
A
SYSTEMIC ARTERIAL VASODILATION
Activation of arterial
baroreceptors
Non-osmotic
AVP stimulation
MAINTENANCE OF ARTERIAL
CIRCULATORY INTEGRITY
↑ CARDIAC
OUTPUT
WATER
RETENTION
SODIUM
RETENTION
↑ SYSTEMIC ARTERIAL
VASCULAR AND
RENAL RESISTANCE
Activation
of RAAS
SNS
stimulation
High-output
cardiac failure
Sepsis
Cirrhosis
Pregnancy
Arteriovenous
fistula
Arterial
vasodilators
B
a polypeptide; a high-molecular-weight precursor of 
ANP is stored in secretory granules within atrial myo-
cytes. Release of ANP causes (1) excretion of sodium and 
water by augmenting glomerular filtration rate, inhibiting 
sodium reabsorption in the proximal tubule, and inhib-
iting release of renin and aldosterone and (2) ­arteriolar 
and venous dilation by antagonizing the vasoconstrictor 
actions of AII, AVP, and sympathetic stimulation. Thus, 
ANP has the capacity to oppose Na+ retention and ­arterial 
pressure elevation in hypervolemic states.
 
CHAPTER 7
Edema
57
The closely related brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) 
is stored primarily in ventricular myocardium and is 
released when ventricular diastolic pressure rises. Its 
actions are similar to those of ANP, and both BNP and 
ANP bind to the natriuretic receptor-A, which is found 
in the myocardium. Yet another natriuretic peptide, 
C-type (CNP), is of endothelial and renal origin. CNP 
binds preferentially to the natriuretic peptide receptor-B, 
which is expressed principally in veins. Circulating lev-
els of ANP and BNP are elevated in congestive heart 
failure and in cirrhosis with ascites, but obviously not 
sufficiently to prevent edema formation. In addition, 
in edematous states there is abnormal resistance to the 
actions of natriuretic peptides.
Clinical Causes of Edema
Obstruction of venous (and lymphatic) 
drainage of a limb
In this condition, the hydrostatic pressure in the capil-
lary bed upstream (proximal) to the obstruction increases 
so that an abnormal quantity of fluid is transferred from 
the vascular to the interstitial space. Since the alterna-
tive route (i.e., the lymphatic channels) also may be 
obstructed or maximally filled, an increased volume 
of interstitial fluid in the limb develops (i.e., there is 
trapping of fluid in the interstitium of the extremity). 
The displacement of fluid into a limb may occur at 
the  expense of the blood volume in the remainder of 
the body, thereby reducing effective arterial blood volume 
and leading to the retention of NaCl and H2O until the 
­deficit in plasma volume has been corrected.
Congestive heart failure
(See also Chap. 17) In this disorder the impaired 
­systolic emptying of the ventricle(s) and/or the impair-
ment of ventricular relaxation promotes an accumula-
tion of blood in the venous circulation at the expense 
of the effective arterial volume, and the aforementioned 
sequence of events (Fig. 7-1) is initiated. In mild heart 
failure, a small increment of total blood volume may 
repair the deficit of arterial volume and establish a new 
steady state. Through the operation of Starling’s law of 
the heart, an increase in ventricular diastolic volume 
promotes a more forceful contraction and may thereby 
maintain the cardiac output. However, if the cardiac 
disorder is more severe, fluid retention continues, and 
the increment in blood volume accumulates in the 
venous circulation, raising venous pressure and causing 
edema.
Incomplete ventricular emptying (systolic heart fail-
ure) and/or inadequate ventricular relaxation (diastolic 
heart failure) both lead to an elevation of ventricular 
diastolic pressure. If the impairment of cardiac function 
primarily involves the right ventricle, pressures in the 
systemic veins and capillaries rise, augmenting the tran-
sudation of fluid into the interstitial space and enhanc-
ing the likelihood of peripheral edema. The elevated 
systemic venous pressure is transmitted to the thoracic 
duct with consequent reduction of lymph drainage, 
further increasing the accumulation of edema. If the 
impairment of cardiac function involves the left ven-
tricle primarily, pulmonary venous and capillary pres-
sures rise. Pulmonary artery pressure rises, and this in 
turn interferes with the emptying of the right ventri-
cle, leading to an elevation of right ventricular diastolic 
and central and systemic venous pressures, enhancing 
the likelihood of the formation of peripheral edema. 
The  elevation of pulmonary capillary pressure may 
cause pulmonary edema, which impairs gas exchange. 
The resulting hypoxemia may impair cardiac function 
further, sometimes causing a vicious circle.
Nephrotic syndrome and other 
hypoalbuminemic states
The primary alteration in this disorder is a diminished 
colloid oncotic pressure due to losses of large quanti-
ties of protein into the urine. With severe hypoalbu-
minemia and the consequent reduced colloid osmotic 
pressure, the NaCl and H2O that are retained cannot 
be restrained within the vascular compartment, and 
total and effective arterial blood volumes decline. This 
process initiates the edema-forming sequence of events 
described earlier, including activation of the RAA sys-
tem. Impaired renal function contributes further to 
the formation of edema. A similar sequence of events 
occurs in other conditions that lead to severe hypoal-
buminemia, including (1) severe nutritional deficiency 
states, (2) severe, chronic liver disease (see later), and (3) 
­protein-losing enteropathy.
Cirrhosis
This condition is characterized in part by hepatic 
venous outflow blockade, which in turn expands the 
splanchnic blood volume and increases hepatic lymph 
formation. Intrahepatic hypertension acts as a stimu-
lus for renal Na+ retention and a reduction of effec-
tive arterial blood volume. These alterations frequently 
are complicated by hypoalbuminemia secondary to 
reduced hepatic synthesis, as well as systemic vasodila-
tion. These effects reduce the effective arterial blood 
volume further, leading to activation of the RAA sys-
tem, renal sympathetic nerves, and other NaCl- and 
H2O-retaining mechanisms. The concentration of 
circulating aldosterone often is elevated by the failure 
of the liver to metabolize this hormone. Initially, the 
excess interstitial fluid is localized preferentially proxi-
mal (upstream) to the congested ­portal venous ­system 
Section II
58
Diagnosis of Cardiovascular Disorders
and obstructed hepatic lymphatics, i.e., in the perito-
neal cavity (ascites). In later stages, ­particularly when 
there is severe hypoalbuminemia, peripheral edema 
may develop. The excess production of prostaglan-
dins (PGE2 and PGI2) in cirrhosis attenuates renal Na+ 
retention. When the synthesis of these substances is 
inhibited by nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs 
(NSAIDs), renal function deteriorates and Na+ reten-
tion increases.
Drug-induced edema
A large number of widely used drugs can cause edema 
(Table 7-1). Mechanisms include renal vasocon-
striction (NSAIDs and cyclosporine), arteriolar dila-
tion (vasodilators), augmented renal Na+ reabsorption 
­(steroid hormones), and capillary damage (interleukin 2).
Differential Diagnosis
Localized edema
(See also Chap. 39) Localized edema due to venous or 
lymphatic obstruction may be caused by thrombophle-
bitis, chronic lymphangitis, resection of regional lymph 
nodes, filariasis, etc. Lymphedema is particularly intrac-
table because restriction of lymphatic flow results in 
increased protein concentration in the interstitial fluid, a 
circumstance that aggravates retention of fluid.
Table 7-1
Drugs Associated With Edema Formation
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
Antihypertensive agents
  Direct arterial/arteriolar vasodilators
    Hydralazine
    Clonidine
    Methyldopa
    Guanethidine
    Minoxidil
  Calcium channel antagonists
  α-Adrenergic antagonists
  Thiazolidinediones
Steroid hormones
  Glucocorticoids
  Anabolic steroids
  Estrogens
  Progestins
Cyclosporine
Growth hormone
Immunotherapies
  Interleukin 2
  OKT3 monoclonal antibody
Source: From GM Chertow: Approach to the patient with edema, in 
Primary Cardiology, 2nd ed, E Braunwald, L Goldman (eds). Philadel-
phia, Saunders 2003.
Generalized Edema
The differences among the major causes of generalized 
edema are shown in Table 7-2.
A majority of patients with generalized edema 
develop cardiac, renal, hepatic, or nutritional disorders. 
Consequently, the differential diagnosis of generalized 
edema should be directed toward identifying or exclud-
ing these several conditions.
Edema of heart failure
(See also Chap. 17) The presence of heart disease, as 
manifested by cardiac enlargement and a gallop rhythm, 
together with evidence of cardiac failure, such as dys-
pnea, basilar rales, venous distention, and hepatomegaly, 
usually indicates that edema results from heart failure. 
Noninvasive tests such as echocardiography may be 
helpful in establishing the diagnosis of heart disease. The 
edema of heart failure typically occurs in the dependent 
portions of the body.
Edema of acute glomerulonephritis and other 
forms of renal failure
The edema that occurs during the acute phases of glo-
merulonephritis is characteristically associated with 
hematuria, proteinuria, and hypertension. Although 
some evidence supports the view that the fluid reten-
tion is due to increased capillary permeability, in most 
instances, the edema results from primary retention of 
NaCl and H2O by the kidneys owing to renal insuf-
ficiency. This state differs from congestive heart failure 
in that it is characterized by a normal (or sometimes 
even increased) cardiac output and a normal arterial–
mixed venous oxygen difference. Patients with edema 
due to renal failure commonly have evidence of arterial 
hypertension as well as pulmonary congestion on chest 
roentgenogram even without cardiac enlargement, but 
they may not develop orthopnea. Patients with chronic 
renal failure may also develop edema due to primary 
renal retention of NaCl and H2O.
Edema of the nephrotic syndrome
Marked proteinuria (>3.5 g/d), hypoalbuminemia 
(<35 g/L), and, in some instances, hypercholesterol-
emia are present. This syndrome may occur during the 
course of a variety of kidney diseases, which include 
glomerulonephritis, diabetic glomerulosclerosis, and 
hypersensitivity reactions. A history of previous renal 
disease may or may not be elicited.
Edema of cirrhosis
Ascites and biochemical and clinical evidence of hepatic 
disease (collateral venous channels, jaundice, and spider 
 
CHAPTER 7
Edema
59
Table 7-2
Principal Causes of Generalized Edema: History, Physical Examination, and Laboratory Findings
Organ System
History
Physical Examination
Laboratory Findings
Cardiac
Dyspnea with exertion promi-
nent—often associated with 
orthopnea—or paroxysmal 
nocturnal dyspnea
Elevated jugular venous pressure, 
ventricular (S3) gallop; occasion-
ally with displaced or dyskinetic 
apical pulse; peripheral cyanosis, 
cool extremities, small pulse 
pressure when severe
Elevated urea nitrogen-to-creati-
nine ratio common; elevated uric 
acid; serum sodium often dimin-
ished; liver enzymes occasionally 
elevated with hepatic congestion
Hepatic
Dyspnea uncommon, except 
if associated with significant 
degree of ascites; most often 
a history of ethanol abuse
Frequently associated with asci-
tes; jugular venous pressure nor-
mal or low; blood pressure lower 
than in renal or cardiac disease; 
one or more additional signs of 
chronic liver disease (jaundice, 
palmar erythema, Dupuytren’s 
contracture, spider angiomata, 
male gynecomastia; asterixis and 
other signs of encephalopathy) 
may be present
If severe, reductions in serum albu-
min, cholesterol, other hepatic 
proteins (transferrin, fibrinogen); 
liver enzymes elevated, depend-
ing on the cause and acuity of 
liver injury; tendency toward 
hypokalemia, respiratory alka-
losis; macrocytosis from folate 
deficiency
Renal (CRF)
Usually chronic: may be asso-
ciated with uremic signs 
and symptoms, including 
decreased appetite, altered 
(metallic or fishy) taste, 
altered sleep pattern, difficulty 
concentrating, restless legs 
or myoclonus; dyspnea can 
be present, but generally less 
prominent than in heart failure
Elevated blood pressure; hyper-
tensive retinopathy; nitrogenous 
fetor; pericardial friction rub in 
advanced cases with uremia
Albuminuria, hypoalbuminemia; 
sometimes, elevation of serum 
creatinine and urea nitrogen; 
hyperkalemia, metabolic acidosis, 
hyperphosphatemia, hypocalce-
mia, anemia (usually normocytic)
Renal (NS)
Childhood diabetes mellitus; 
plasma cell dyscrasias
Periorbital edema; hypertension
Proteinuria (3.5 g/d); hypoalbu-
minemia; hypercholesterolemia; 
microscopic hematuria
Abbreviations: CRF, chronic renal failure; NS, nephrotic syndrome.
Source: Modified from GM Chertow: Approach to the patient with edema, in Primary Cardiology, 2nd ed, E Braunwald, L Goldman (eds). 
Philadelphia, Saunders 2003.
angiomata) characterize edema of hepatic origin. The 
ascites is ­frequently refractory to treatment because it 
collects as a result of a combination of obstruction of 
hepatic lymphatic drainage, portal hypertension, and 
hypoalbuminemia. A sizable accumulation of ascitic 
fluid may increase intraabdominal pressure and impede 
venous return from the lower extremities; hence, it 
tends to promote accumulation of edema in this region 
as well.
Edema of nutritional origin
A diet grossly deficient in protein over a prolonged 
period may produce hypoproteinemia and edema. 
The latter may be intensified by the development 
of beriberi heart disease, which also is of nutritional 
origin, in which multiple peripheral arteriovenous 
fistulas result in reduced effective systemic perfusion 
and effective arterial blood volume, thereby enhanc-
ing edema formation. Edema may actually become 
intensified when famished subjects are first provided 
with an adequate diet. The ingestion of more food 
may increase the quantity of NaCl ingested, which 
is then retained along with H2O. So-called refeed-
ing edema also may be linked to increased release of 
insulin, which directly increases tubular Na+ reabsorp-
tion. In addition to hypoalbuminemia, hypokalemia 
and caloric deficits may be involved in the edema of 
starvation.
Other causes of edema
These causes include hypothyroidism (myxedema) and 
hyperthyroidism (pretibial myxedema secondary to 
Graves’ disease), the edema in which is typically non-
pitting and due to deposition of hyaluronic acid and, in 
Graves’ disease, lymphocytic infiltration and inflamma-
tion; exogenous hyperadrenocortism; pregnancy; and 
administration of estrogens and vasodilators, particularly 
dihydropyridines such as nifedipine.
Section II
60
Diagnosis of Cardiovascular Disorders
Distribution of Edema
The distribution of edema is an important guide to its 
cause. Thus, edema limited to one leg or to one or both 
arms is usually the result of venous and/or lymphatic 
obstruction. Edema resulting from hypoproteinemia 
characteristically is generalized, but it is especially evi-
dent in the very soft tissues of the eyelids and face and 
tends to be most pronounced in the morning because of 
the recumbent posture assumed during the night. Less 
common causes of facial edema include trichinosis, aller-
gic reactions, and myxedema. Edema associated with 
heart failure, by contrast, tends to be more extensive in 
the legs and to be accentuated in the evening, a feature 
also determined largely by posture. When patients with 
heart failure have been confined to bed, edema may be 
most prominent in the presacral region. Paralysis reduces 
lymphatic and venous drainage on the affected side and 
may be responsible for unilateral edema.
Additional Factors in Diagnosis
The color, thickness, and sensitivity of the skin are sig-
nificant. Local tenderness and warmth suggest inflam-
mation. Local cyanosis may signify venous obstruction. 
In individuals who have had repeated episodes of pro-
longed edema, the skin over the involved areas may be 
thickened, indurated, and often red.
Estimation of the venous pressure is of impor-
tance in evaluating edema. Ordinarily, a significant 
generalized increase in venous pressure can be rec-
ognized by the level at which cervical veins collapse 
(Chap. 9). In patients with obstruction of the supe-
rior vena cava, edema is confined to the face, neck, 
and upper extremities, in which the venous pressure is 
elevated compared with that in the lower extremities. 
Severe heart failure may cause ascites that may be distin-
guished from the ascites caused by hepatic cirrhosis by 
the jugular venous pressure, which is usually elevated in 
heart failure and normal in cirrhosis.
Determination of the concentration of serum albu-
min aids importantly in identifying those patients in 
whom edema is due, at least in part, to diminished 
intravascular colloid oncotic pressure. The presence 
of proteinuria also affords useful clues. The absence of 
proteinuria excludes nephrotic syndrome but cannot 
exclude nonproteinuric causes of renal failure. Slight to 
moderate proteinuria is the rule in patients with heart 
failure.
APPROACH TO THE
PATIENT	
Edema
An important first question is whether the edema 
is localized or generalized. If it is localized, the local 
phenomena that may be responsible should be con-
sidered. If the edema is generalized, one should first 
determine if there is serious hypoalbuminemia, e.g., 
serum albumin <25 g/L. If so, the history, physical 
examination, urinalysis, and other laboratory data will 
help evaluate the question of cirrhosis, severe mal-
nutrition, or the nephrotic syndrome as the underly-
ing disorder. If hypoalbuminemia is not present, one 
should determine if there is evidence of congestive 
heart failure severe enough to promote generalized 
edema. Finally, one should determine whether the 
patient has an adequate urine output or if there is  
significant oliguria or anuria.
 Joseph Loscalzo 
61
 Palpitations are extremely common among patients 
who present to their internist and can best be deﬁ ned 
as an intermittent “thumping,” “pounding,” or “ﬂ utter-
ing” sensation in the chest. This sensation can be either 
intermittent or sustained and either regular or irregular. 
Most patients interpret palpitations as an unusual aware-
ness of the heartbeat, and become especially concerned 
when they sense that they have had “skipped” or “miss-
ing” heartbeats. Palpitations are often noted when the 
patient is quietly resting, during which time other stimuli 
are minimal. Palpitations that are positional generally 
reﬂ ect a structural process within (e.g., atrial myxoma) 
or adjacent to (e.g., mediastinal mass) the heart. 
 Palpitations are brought about by cardiac (43%), 
psychiatric (31%), miscellaneous (10%), and unknown 
(16%) causes, according to one large series. Among 
the cardiovascular causes are premature atrial and ven-
tricular contractions, supraventricular and ventricular 
arrhythmias, mitral valve prolapse (with or without asso-
ciated arrhythmias), aortic insufﬁ ciency, atrial myxoma, 
and pulmonary embolism. Intermittent palpitations 
are commonly caused by premature atrial or ventricular 
contractions: the postextrasystolic beat is sensed by the 
patient owing to the increase in ventricular end-diastolic 
dimension following the pause in the cardiac cycle and 
the increased strength of contraction (postextrasystolic 
potentiation) of that beat. Regular, sustained palpita-
tions can be caused by regular supraventricular and ven-
tricular tachycardias. Irregular, sustained palpitations can 
be caused by atrial ﬁ brillation. It is important to note 
that most arrhythmias are not associated with palpita-
tions. In those that are, it is often useful either to ask 
the patient to “tap out” the rhythm of the palpitations 
or to take his/her pulse while experiencing palpitations. 
In general, hyperdynamic cardiovascular states caused 
by catecholaminergic stimulation from exercise, stress, 
or pheochromocytoma can lead to palpitations. Pal-
pitations are  common among athletes, especially older 
endurance athletes. In addition, the enlarged ventricle 
 PALPITATIONS 
 CHAPTER 8 
of aortic regurgitation and accompanying hyperdy-
namic precordium frequently lead to the sensation of 
palpitations. Other factors that enhance the strength 
of myocardial contraction, including tobacco, caf-
feine, aminophylline, atropine, thyroxine, cocaine, and 
amphetamines, can cause palpitations. 
 Psychiatric causes of palpitations include panic attacks 
or disorders, anxiety states, and somatization, alone or in 
combination. Patients with psychiatric causes for palpi-
tations more commonly report a longer duration of the 
sensation (>15 min) and other accompanying symptoms 
than do patients with other causes. Among the miscel-
laneous causes of palpitations included are thyrotoxico-
sis, drugs (see earlier) and ethanol, spontaneous skeletal 
muscle contractions of the chest wall, pheochromocy-
toma, and systemic mastocytosis. 
APPROACH TO THE
PATIENT 
 Palpitations 
 The principal goal in assessing patients with  palpitations 
is to determine if the symptom is caused by a life-threat-
ening arrhythmia. Patients with preexisting coronary 
artery disease (CAD) or risk factors for CAD are at great-
est risk for ventricular arrhythmias as a cause for palpi-
tations. In addition, the association of palpitations with 
other symptoms suggesting hemodynamic compro-
mise, including syncope or lightheadedness, supports 
this diagnosis. Palpitations caused by sustained tachyar-
rhythmias in patients with CAD can be accompanied by 
angina pectoris or dyspnea, and in patients with ven-
tricular dysfunction (systolic or diastolic), aortic stenosis, 
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, or mitral stenosis, with 
or without CAD, can be accompanied by dyspnea from 
increased left atrial and pulmonary venous  pressure. 
 Key features of the physical examination that will 
help confi rm or refute the presence of an arrhythmia as a 
cause for the palpitations and its adverse hemodynamic 
Section II
62
Diagnosis of Cardiovascular Disorders
consequences include measurement of the vital signs,  
assessment of the jugular venous pressure and pulse, 
and auscultation of the chest and precordium. A resting  
electrocardiogram can be used to document the 
arrhythmia. If exertion is known to induce the arrhythmia 
and accompanying palpitations, exercise electrocardiog-
raphy can be used to make the diagnosis. If the arrhyth-
mia is sufficiently infrequent, other methods must 
be used, including continuous ­electrocardiographic 
(Holter) monitoring; telephonic monitoring, through 
which the patient can transmit an electrocardiographic 
tracing during a sensed episode; loop recordings 
(external or implantable), which can capture the elec-
trocardiographic event for later review; and mobile 
cardiac outpatient telemetry. Recent data suggest that 
Holter monitoring is of limited clinical ­utility, while the 
implantable loop recorder and mobile cardiac outpa-
tient telemetry are safe and possibly more cost-effective 
in the assessment of patients with ­recurrent, unex-
plained palpitations.
Most patients with palpitations do not have seri-
ous arrhythmias or underlying structural heart disease. 
Occasional benign atrial or ventricular premature con-
tractions can often be managed with beta-blocker 
therapy if sufficiently troubling to the patient. ­Palpitations 
incited by alcohol, tobacco, or illicit drugs need to be 
managed by abstention, while those caused by phar-
macologic agents should be addressed by consider-
ing alternate therapies when appropriate or possible. 
Psychiatric causes of palpitations may benefit from 
cognitive or pharmacotherapies. The physician should 
note that palpitations are at the very least bothersome 
and, on occasion, frightening to the patient. Once seri-
ous causes for the symptom have been excluded, the 
patient should be reassured that the palpitations will 
not adversely affect prognosis.
 Patrick T. O’Gara 
I  Joseph Loscalzo 
63
 The approach to a patient with known or suspected 
cardiovascular disease begins with the time-honored 
traditions of a directed history and a targeted physical 
examination. The scope of these activities depends on 
the clinical context at the time of presentation, rang-
ing from an elective ambulatory follow-up visit to 
a more focused emergency department encounter. 
There has been a gradual decline in physical exami-
nation skills over the last two decades at every level, 
from student to faculty specialist, a development of 
great concern to both clinicians and medical educators. 
 Classic cardiac fi ndings are recognized by only a minor-
ity of internal medicine and family practice residents. 
Despite  popular perceptions, clinical performance does 
not improve  predictably as a function of experience; 
instead, the acquisition of new examination skills may 
become more diffi cult for a busy individual  practitioner. 
Less time is now devoted to mentored cardiovascu-
lar  examinations during the training of students and 
residents. One widely recognized outcome of these 
trends is the progressive overutilization of noninvasive 
imaging studies to establish the presence and severity 
of  cardiovascular disease even when the examination 
fi ndings imply a low pretest probability of signifi cant 
pathology. Educational techniques to improve bed-
side skills include repetition, patient-centered teaching 
conferences, and visual display feedback of auscultatory 
events with Doppler echocardiographic imaging. 
 The evidence base that links the fi ndings from the 
history and physical examination to the presence, sever-
ity, and prognosis of cardiovascular disease has been 
established most rigorously for coronary artery disease, 
heart failure, and valvular heart disease. For example, 
observations regarding heart rate, blood pressure, signs 
of pulmonary congestion, and the presence of mitral 
regurgitation (MR) contribute importantly to bedside 
risk assessment in patients with acute coronary syn-
dromes. Observations from the physical examination in 
this setting can inform clinical decision making before 
the results of cardiac biomarkers testing are known. 
The prognosis of patients with systolic heart failure can 
be predicted on the basis of the jugular venous pres-
sure ( JVP) and the presence or absence of a third heart 
sound (S 3 ). Accurate characterization of cardiac mur-
murs provides important insight into the natural history 
of many valvular and congenital heart lesions. Finally, 
the important role played by the physical examination 
in enhancing the clinician-patient relationship cannot 
be overestimated. 
 tHE gEnEral PHysiCal Examination 
 Any examination begins with an assessment of the gen-
eral appearance of the patient, with notation of age, pos-
ture, demeanor, and overall health status. Is the patient in 
pain or resting quietly, dyspneic or diaphoretic? Does the 
patient choose to avoid certain body positions to reduce 
or eliminate pain, as might be the case with suspected 
acute pericarditis? Are there clues indicating that dys-
pnea may have a pulmonary cause, such as a barrel chest 
deformity with an increased anterior-posterior diameter, 
tachypnea, and pursed-lip breathing? Skin pallor, cyano-
sis, and jaundice can be appreciated readily and provide 
additional clues. A chronically ill-appearing emaciated 
patient may suggest the presence of long-standing heart 
failure or another systemic disorder, such as a malignancy. 
Various genetic syndromes, often with cardiovascular 
involvement, can also be recognized easily, such as tri-
somy 21, Marfan syndrome, and Holt-Oram syndrome. 
Height and weight should be measured routinely, and 
both body mass index and body surface area should be 
calculated. Knowledge of the waist circumference and 
 PHYSICAL EXAMINATION OF THE 
CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM 
 CHAPTER 9 
Section II
64
Diagnosis of Cardiovascular Disorders
the waist-to-hip ratio can be used to predict long-term 
cardiovascular risk. Mental status, level of alertness, and 
mood should be assessed continuously during the inter-
view and examination.
Skin
Central cyanosis occurs with significant right-to-left 
shunting at the level of the heart or lungs, allowing 
deoxygenated blood to reach the systemic circulation. 
Peripheral cyanosis or acrocyanosis, in contrast, is usu-
ally related to reduced extremity blood flow due to 
small vessel constriction, as seen in patients with severe 
heart failure, shock, or peripheral vascular disease; it can 
be aggravated by the use of β-adrenergic blockers with 
unopposed α-mediated constriction. Differential cyanosis 
refers to isolated cyanosis affecting the lower but not the 
upper extremities in a patient with a large patent ­ductus 
arteriosus (PDA) and secondary pulmonary hyper-
tension with right-to-left shunting at the great ­vessel 
level. Hereditary telangiectasias on the lips, tongue, 
and mucous membranes, as part of the Osler-Weber- 
Rendu syndrome (hereditary hemorrhagic telangi-
ectasia), resemble spider nevi and can be a source of 
­right-to-left shunting when also present in the lung. 
Malar telangiectasias also are seen in patients with 
advanced mitral stenosis and scleroderma. An unusu-
ally tan or bronze discoloration of the skin may suggest 
hemochromatosis as the cause of the associated sys-
tolic heart failure. ­Jaundice, which may be ­visible first 
in the sclerae, has a broad differential diagnosis but in 
the appropriate setting can be consistent with advanced 
right heart failure and congestive hepatomegaly or late-
term “cardiac cirrhosis.” Cutaneous ecchymoses are seen 
frequently among patients taking ­vitamin K ­antagonists 
or antiplatelet agents such as aspirin and ­thienopyridines. 
­Various lipid disorders sometimes are associated with 
subcutaneous xanthomas, particularly along the tendon 
sheaths or over the extensor surfaces of the extremi-
ties. Severe hypertriglyceridemia can be associated with 
eruptive xanthomatosis and lipemia retinalis. ­Palmar 
crease xanthomas are specific for type III hyperlipopro-
teinemia. Pseudoxanthoma ­elasticum, a disease asso-
ciated with premature atherosclerosis, is manifested 
by a leathery, cobblestoned appearance of the skin 
in the axilla and neck creases and by angioid streaks 
on ­funduscopic examination. Extensive lentiginoses 
have been described in a variety of development delay–­
cardiovascular syndromes, including ­Carney syndrome, 
which includes multiple atrial myxomas. ­Cutaneous 
manifestations of sarcoidosis such as lupus pernio and 
erythema ­nodosum may ­suggest this disease as a cause 
of an associated dilated cardiomyopathy, especially 
with heart block, intraventricular conduction delay, or 
­ventricular tachycardia.
Head and neck
Dentition and oral hygiene should be assessed in every 
patient both as a source of potential infection and as 
an index of general health. A high-arched palate is a 
feature of Marfan syndrome and other connective tis-
sue disease syndromes. Bifid uvula has been described 
in patients with Loeys-Dietz syndrome, and orange 
tonsils are characteristic of Tangier disease. The ocu-
lar manifestations of hyperthyroidism have been well 
described. Many patients with congenital heart dis-
ease have associated hypertelorism, low-set ears, or 
micrognathia. Blue sclerae are a feature of osteogen-
esis imperfecta. An arcus senilis pattern lacks speci-
ficity as an index of coronary heart disease risk. The 
funduscopic examination is an often underutilized 
method by which to assess the microvasculature, espe-
cially among patients with established atherosclerosis, 
hypertension, or diabetes mellitus. A mydriatic agent 
may be necessary for optimal visualization. A fundu-
scopic examination should be performed routinely 
in the assessment of patients with suspected endocar-
ditis and those with a history of acute visual change. 
Branch retinal artery occlusion or visualization of a 
­Hollenhorst plaque can narrow the differential diagno-
sis rapidly in the appropriate setting. Relapsing poly-
chondritis may manifest as an inflamed pinna or, in 
its later stages, as a saddle-nose deformity because of 
destruction of nasal cartilage; Wegener’s granulomatosis 
can also lead to a saddle-nose deformity.
Chest
Midline sternotomy, left posterolateral thoracotomy, or 
infraclavicular scars at the site of pacemaker/defibrilla-
tor generator implantation should not be overlooked 
and may provide the first clue regarding an underlying 
cardiovascular disorder in patients unable to provide a 
relevant history. A prominent venous collateral pattern 
may suggest subclavian or vena caval obstruction. If the 
head and neck appear dusky and slightly cyanotic and 
the venous pressure is grossly elevated without visible 
pulsations, a diagnosis of superior vena cava syndrome 
should be entertained. Thoracic cage abnormalities have 
been well described among patients with connective tis-
sue disease syndromes. They include pectus carinatum 
(“pigeon chest”) and pectus excavatum (“funnel chest”). 
Obstructive lung disease is suggested by a barrel chest 
deformity, especially with tachypnea, pursed-lip breath-
ing, and use of accessory muscles. The characteristically 
severe kyphosis and compensatory lumbar, pelvic, and 
knee flexion of ankylosing spondylitis should prompt 
careful auscultation for a murmur of aortic regurgita-
tion (AR). Straight back syndrome refers to the loss of 
the normal kyphosis of the thoracic spine and has been 
described in patients with mitral valve prolapse (MVP) 
 
CHAPTER 9
Physical Examination of the Cardiovascular System
65
and its variants. In some patients with cyanotic congeni-
tal heart disease, the chest wall appears to be asymmet-
ric, with anterior displacement of the left hemithorax. 
The respiratory rate and pattern should be noted dur-
ing spontaneous breathing, with additional attention to 
depth, audible wheezing, and stridor. Lung examination 
can reveal adventitious sounds indicative of pulmonary 
edema, pneumonia, or pleuritis.
Abdomen
In some patients with advanced obstructive lung dis-
ease, the point of maximal cardiac impulse may be in 
the epigastrium. The liver is frequently enlarged and 
­tender in patients with chronic heart failure. Systolic 
pulsations over the liver signify severe tricuspid regur-
gitation (TR). Splenomegaly may be a feature of infec-
tive endocarditis, particularly when symptoms have 
persisted for weeks or months. Ascites is a nonspecific 
finding but may be present with advanced chronic right 
heart failure, constrictive pericarditis, hepatic cirrhosis, 
or an intraperitoneal malignancy. The finding of an ele-
vated JVP implies a cardiovascular etiology. In nonobese 
patients, the aorta typically is palpated between the epigas-
trium and the umbilicus. The sensitivity of palpation for 
the detection of an abdominal aortic aneurysm ­(pulsatile 
and expansile mass) decreases as a function of body size. 
Because palpation alone is not sufficiently accurate to 
establish this diagnosis, a screening ­ultrasound exami-
nation is advised. The presence of an arterial bruit over 
the abdomen suggests high-grade atherosclerotic disease, 
though precise localization is difficult.
Extremities
The temperature and color of the extremities, the pres-
ence of clubbing, arachnodactyly, and pertinent nail 
findings can be surmised quickly during the examina-
tion. Clubbing implies the presence of central right-
to-left shunting, although it has also been described 
in patients with endocarditis. Its appearance can range 
from cyanosis and softening of the root of the nail bed, 
to the classic loss of the normal angle between the base 
of the nail and the skin, to the skeletal and periosteal 
bony changes of hypertrophic osteoarthropathy, which 
is seen rarely in patients with advanced lung or liver dis-
ease. Patients with the Holt-Oram syndrome have an 
unopposable, “fingerized” thumb, whereas patients with 
Marfan syndrome may have arachnodactyly and a posi-
tive “wrist” (overlapping of the thumb and fifth finger 
around the wrist) or “thumb” (protrusion of the thumb 
beyond the ulnar aspect of the hand when the fin-
gers are clenched over the thumb in a fist) sign. The 
­Janeway lesions of endocarditis are nontender, slightly 
raised hemorrhages on the palms and soles, whereas 
Osler’s nodes are tender, raised nodules on the pads of 
the fingers or toes. Splinter hemorrhages are classically 
identified as linear petechiae in the midposition of the 
nail bed and should be distinguished from the more 
common traumatic petechiae, which are seen closer to 
the distal edge.
Lower extremity or presacral edema in the setting of 
an elevated JVP defines volume overload and may be a 
feature of chronic heart failure or constrictive pericar-
ditis. Lower extremity edema in the absence of jugu-
lar venous hypertension may be due to lymphatic or 
venous obstruction or, more commonly, to venous 
insufficiency, as further suggested by the appearance of 
varicosities, venous ulcers (typically medial in location), 
and brownish cutaneous discoloration from hemosiderin 
deposition (eburnation). Pitting edema can also be seen 
in patients who use dihydropyridine calcium channel 
blockers. A Homan’s sign (posterior calf pain on active 
dorsiflexion of the foot against resistance) is neither spe-
cific nor sensitive for deep venous thrombosis. ­Muscular 
atrophy or the absence of hair along an extremity is 
consistent with severe arterial insufficiency or a primary 
neuromuscular disorder.
Cardiovascular Examination
Jugular venous pressure and waveform
Jugular venous pressure is the single most impor-
tant bedside measurement from which to estimate the 
volume status. The internal jugular vein is preferred 
because the external jugular vein is valved and not 
directly in line with the superior vena cava and right 
atrium. Nevertheless, the external jugular vein has 
been used to discriminate between high and low cen-
tral venous pressure (CVP) when tested among medi-
cal students, residents, and attending physicians. Precise 
estimation of the central venous or right atrial pressure 
from bedside assessment of the jugular venous wave-
form has proved difficult. Venous pressure tradition-
ally has been measured as the vertical distance between 
the top of the jugular venous pulsation and the sternal 
inflection point (angle of Louis). A distance >4.5 cm 
at 30° elevation is considered abnormal. However, the 
actual distance between the mid-right atrium and the 
angle of Louis varies considerably as a function of both 
body size and the patient angle at which the assessment 
is made (30°, 45°, or 60°). The use of the sternal angle 
as a reference point leads to systematic underestima-
tion of CVP, and this method should be used less for 
semiquantification than to distinguish a normal from an 
abnormally elevated CVP. The use of the clavicle may 
provide an easier reference for standardization. Venous 
pulsations above this level in the sitting position are 
clearly abnormal, as the distance between the clavi-
cle and the right atrium is at least 10 cm. The patient 
should always be placed in the sitting position, with the 
Section II
66
Diagnosis of Cardiovascular Disorders
legs dangling below the bedside, when an elevated pres-
sure is suspected in the semisupine position. It should 
also be noted that bedside estimates of CVP are made 
in centimeters of water but must be converted to milli-
meters of mercury to provide correlation with accepted 
hemodynamic norms (1.36 cmH2O = 1.0 mmHg).
The venous waveform sometimes can be difficult 
to distinguish from the carotid pulse, especially ­during 
casual inspection. Nevertheless, the venous wave-
form has several characteristic features, and its indi-
vidual components can be appreciated in most patients 
(Fig. 9-1). In patients in sinus rhythm, the venous 
waveform is typically biphasic, whereas the carotid 
upstroke is monophasic.
The venous waveform is divided into several distinct 
peaks. The a wave reflects right atrial presystolic con-
traction and occurs just after the electrocardiographic 
P wave, preceding the first heart sound (S1). A promi-
nent a wave is seen in patients with reduced right 
­ventricular compliance; a cannon a wave occurs with 
atrioventricular (AV) dissociation and right atrial con-
traction against a closed tricuspid valve. In a patient 
with a wide complex tachycardia, the appreciation of 
cannon a waves in the jugular venous waveform identi-
fies the rhythm as ventricular in origin. The a wave is 
not present with atrial fibrillation. The x descent defines 
the fall in right atrial pressure after inscription of the a 
wave. The c wave interrupts this x descent and is fol-
lowed by a further descent. The v wave represents atrial 
filling (atrial diastole) and occurs during ventricular sys-
tole. The height of the v wave is determined by right 
atrial compliance as well as the volume of blood return-
ing to the right atrium either antegrade from the cavae 
or retrograde through an incompetent tricuspid valve. 
In patients with TR, the v wave is accentuated and the 
subsequent fall in pressure (y descent) is rapid. With 
progressive degrees of TR, the v wave merges with 
the c wave, and the right atrial and jugular vein wave-
forms become “ventricularized.” The y descent, which 
follows the peak of the v wave, can become prolonged 
or blunted with obstruction to right ventricular inflow, 
as may occur with tricuspid stenosis (TS) or pericardial 
tamponade. Normally, the venous pressure should fall 
by at least 3 mmHg with inspiration. Kussmaul’s sign is 
defined by either a rise or a lack of fall of the JVP with 
inspiration and is classically associated with constrictive 
pericarditis, although it has been reported in patients 
with restrictive cardiomyopathy, massive pulmonary 
embolism, right ventricular infarction, and advanced left 
ventricular systolic heart failure.
Venous hypertension sometimes can be elicited by 
performance of the abdominojugular reflex or with 
passive leg elevation. When these signs are positive, a 
volume-overloaded state with limited compliance of an 
overly distended or constricted venous system is pres-
ent. The abdominojugular reflex is elicited with firm 
Figure 9-1
A. Jugular venous pulse wave tracing (top) with heart 
sounds (bottom). The A wave represents right atrial presys-
tolic contraction and occurs just after the electrocardio-
graphic P wave and just before the first heart sound (I). In this 
example, the A wave is accentuated and larger than normal 
due to decreased right ventricular compliance, as also sug-
gested by the right-sided S4 (IV). The C wave may reflect the 
carotid pulsation in the neck and/or an early systolic increase 
in right atrial pressure as the right ventricle pushes the closed 
tricuspid valve into the right atrium. The x descent follows the 
A wave just as atrial pressure continues to fall. The V wave 
represents atrial filling during ventricular systole and peaks 
at the second heart sound (II). The y descent corresponds to 
the fall in right atrial pressure after tricuspid valve opening. 
B. Jugular venous waveforms in mild (middle) and severe 
(top) tricuspid regurgitation, compared with normal, with pho-
nocardiographic representation of the corresponding heart 
sounds below. With increasing degrees of tricuspid regurgita-
tion, the waveform becomes “ventricularized.” C. ECG (top), 
jugular venous waveform (middle), and heart sounds (bottom) 
in pericardial constriction. Note the prominent and rapid y 
descent, corresponding in timing to the pericardial knock (K). 
(From J Abrams: Synopsis of Cardiac Physical Diagnosis, 2nd ed. 
Boston, Butterworth Heinemann, 2001, pp 25–35.)
A
B
C
Severe
ECG
JVP
Mild
Normal
A
A
A
A
A
IV
II
I
II III
I
II
K
I
C
C
C
V
V
V
P
V
V
V
X
X
X
X
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
 
CHAPTER 9
Physical Examination of the Cardiovascular System
67
and consistent pressure over the upper portion of the 
abdomen, preferably over the right upper quadrant, 
for at least 10 s. A positive response is defined by a sus-
tained rise of more than 3 cm in JVP for at least 15 s 
after release of the hand. Patients must be coached to 
refrain from breath holding or a Valsalva-like maneuver 
during the procedure. The abdominojugular reflex is 
useful in predicting a pulmonary artery wedge pressure 
in excess of 15 mmHg in patients with heart failure.
Although the JVP estimates right ventricular fill-
ing pressure, it has a predictable relationship with the 
pulmonary artery wedge pressure. In a large study of 
patients with advanced heart failure, the presence of a 
right atrial pressure >10 mmHg (as predicted on bed-
side examination) had a positive value of 88% for the 
prediction of a pulmonary artery wedge pressure of 
>22 mmHg. In addition, an elevated JVP has prognos-
tic ­significance in patients with both symptomatic heart 
failure and asymptomatic left ventricular systolic dys-
function. The presence of an elevated JVP is associated 
with a higher risk of subsequent hospitalization for heart 
failure, death from heart failure, or both.
Assessment of blood pressure
Measurement of blood pressure usually is delegated to 
a medical assistant but should be repeated by the clini-
cian. Accurate measurement depends on body position, 
arm size, time of measurement, place of measurement, 
device, device size, technique, and examiner. In gen-
eral, physician-recorded blood pressures are higher than 
nurse-recorded pressures. Blood pressure is best mea-
sured in the seated position with the arm at the level of 
the heart, using an appropriately sized cuff, after 5–10 min 
of relaxation. When it is measured in the supine posi-
tion, the arm should be raised to bring it to the level 
of the mid-right atrium. The length and width of the 
blood pressure cuff bladder should be 80% and 40% 
of the arm’s circumference, respectively. A common 
source of error in practice is to use an inappropriately 
small cuff, resulting in marked overestimation of true 
blood pressure, or an inappropriately large cuff, result-
ing in underestimation of true blood pressure. The cuff 
should be inflated to 30 mmHg above the expected sys-
tolic pressure and the pressure released at a rate of 2–3 
mmHg/s. Systolic and diastolic pressures are defined by 
the first and fifth Korotkoff sounds, respectively. Very 
low (even 0 mmHg) diastolic blood pressures may be 
recorded in patients with chronic, severe AR or a large 
arteriovenous fistula because of enhanced diastolic “run-
off.” In these instances, both the phase IV and phase V 
Korotkoff sounds should be recorded. Blood pressure is 
best assessed at the brachial artery level, though it can 
be measured at the radial, popliteal, or pedal pulse level. 
In general, systolic pressure increases and diastolic pres-
sure decreases when measured in more distal arteries. 
Blood pressure should be measured in both arms, and 
the difference should be less than 10 mmHg. A blood 
pressure differential that exceeds this threshold may be 
associated with atherosclerotic or inflammatory subcla-
vian artery disease, supravalvular aortic stenosis, aortic 
coarctation, or aortic dissection. Systolic leg pressures 
are usually as much as 20 mmHg higher than systolic 
arm pressures. Greater leg–arm pressure differences are 
seen in patients with chronic severe AR as well as patients 
with extensive and calcified lower extremity periph-
eral arterial disease. The ankle-brachial index (lower 
pressure in the dorsalis pedis or posterior tibial artery 
divided by the higher of the two brachial artery pres-
sures) is a powerful predictor of long-term cardiovascular 
mortality.
The blood pressure measured in an office or hos-
pital setting may not accurately reflect the pressure in 
other venues. “White coat hypertension” is defined 
by at  least three separate clinic-based measurements 
>140/90 mmHg and at least two non-clinic-based mea-
surements <140/90 mmHg in the absence of any evi-
dence of target organ damage. Individuals with white 
coat hypertension may not benefit from drug therapy, 
although they may be more likely to develop sustained 
hypertension over time. Masked hypertension should 
be suspected when normal or even low blood ­pressures 
are recorded in patients with advanced atheroscle-
rotic ­disease, especially when evidence of target organ 
­damage is present or bruits are audible.
Orthostatic hypotension is defined by a fall in sys-
tolic pressure >20 mmHg or in diastolic pressure >10 
mmHg in response to assumption of the upright posture 
from a supine position within 3 min. There may also 
be a lack of a compensatory tachycardia, an abnormal 
response that suggests autonomic insufficiency, as may 
be seen in patients with diabetes or Parkinson’s disease. 
Orthostatic hypotension is a common cause of postural 
lightheadedness/syncope and should be assessed rou-
tinely in patients for whom this diagnosis might pertain. 
It can be exacerbated by advanced age, dehydration, 
certain medications, food, deconditioning, and ambient 
temperature.
Arterial pulse
The carotid artery pulse occurs just after the ascend-
ing aortic pulse. The aortic pulse is best appreciated in 
the epigastrium, just above the level of the umbilicus. 
Peripheral arterial pulses that should be assessed rou-
tinely include the subclavian, brachial, radial, ulnar, 
femoral, popliteal, dorsalis pedis, and posterior tibial. In 
patients in whom the diagnosis of either temporal arte-
ritis or polymyalgia rheumatica is suspected, the tempo-
ral arteries also should be examined. Although one of 
the two pedal pulses may not be palpable in up to 10% 
of normal subjects, the pair should be symmetric. The 
Section II
68
Diagnosis of Cardiovascular Disorders
integrity of the arcuate system of the hand is assessed 
by Allen’s test, which is performed routinely before 
instrumentation of the radial artery. The pulses should 
be examined for their symmetry, volume, timing, con-
tour, amplitude, and duration. If necessary, simultane-
ous auscultation of the heart can help identify a delay in 
the arrival of an arterial pulse. Simultaneous palpation 
of the radial and femoral pulses may reveal a femoral 
delay in a patient with hypertension and suspected aor-
tic coarctation. The carotid upstrokes should never be 
examined simultaneously or before listening for a bruit. 
Light pressure should always be used to avoid precipita-
tion of carotid hypersensitivity syndrome and syncope 
in a susceptible elderly individual. The arterial pulse 
usually becomes more rapid and spiking as a function of 
its distance from the heart, a phenomenon that reflects 
the muscular status of the more peripheral arteries and 
the summation of the incident and reflected waves. In 
general, the character and contour of the arterial pulse 
depend on the stroke volume, ejection velocity, vas-
cular compliance, and systemic vascular resistance. The 
pulse examination can be misleading in patients with 
reduced cardiac output and in those with stiffened arter-
ies from aging, chronic hypertension, or peripheral 
­arterial disease.
The character of the pulse is best appreciated at the 
carotid level (Fig. 9-2). A weak and delayed pulse 
(pulsus parvus et tardus) defines severe aortic steno-
sis (AS). Some patients with AS may also have a slow, 
notched, or interrupted upstroke (anacrotic pulse) with 
a thrill or shudder. With chronic severe AR, by con-
trast, the carotid upstroke has a sharp rise and rapid fall-
off ­(Corrigan’s or water-hammer pulse). Some patients 
with advanced AR may have a bifid or bisferiens pulse, 
in which two systolic peaks can be appreciated. A bifid 
pulse is also described in patients with hypertrophic 
obstructive cardiomyopathy (HOCM), with inscrip-
tion of percussion and tidal waves. A bifid pulse is easily 
appreciated in patients on intraaortic balloon counter-
pulsation (IABP), in whom the second pulse is diastolic 
in timing.
Pulsus paradoxus refers to a fall in systolic pressure 
>10 mmHg with inspiration that is seen in patients 
with pericardial tamponade but also is described in those 
with massive pulmonary embolism, hemorrhagic shock, 
severe obstructive lung disease, and tension pneumo-
thorax. Pulsus paradoxus is measured by noting the 
difference between the systolic pressure at which the 
Korotkoff sounds are first heard (during expiration) and 
the systolic pressure at which the Korotkoff sounds are 
heard with each heartbeat, independent of the respira-
tory phase. Between these two pressures, the Korotkoff 
sounds are heard only intermittently and during expi-
ration. The cuff pressure must be decreased slowly to 
appreciate the finding. It can be difficult to measure 
pulsus paradoxus in patients with tachycardia, atrial 
fibrillation, or tachypnea. A pulsus paradoxus may be 
palpable at the brachial artery or femoral artery level 
when the pressure difference exceeds 15 mmHg. This 
inspiratory fall in systolic pressure is an exaggerated con-
sequence of interventricular dependence.
Pulsus alternans, in contrast, is defined by beat-to-beat 
variability of pulse amplitude. It is present only when 
every other phase I Korotkoff sound is audible as the 
cuff pressure is lowered slowly, typically in a patient 
with a regular heart rhythm and independent of the 
respiratory cycle. Pulsus alternans is seen in patients 
with severe left ventricular systolic heart failure and is 
thought to be due to cyclic changes in intracellular cal-
cium and action potential duration. Interestingly, when 
Figure 9-2
Schematic diagrams of the configurational changes 
in carotid pulse and their differential diagnoses. Heart 
sounds are also illustrated. A. Normal. S4, fourth heart 
sound; S1, first heart sound; A2 aortic component of sec-
ond  heart sound; P2 pulmonic component of second heart 
sound. B. Aortic stenosis. Anacrotic pulse with slow upstroke 
to a reduced peak. C. Bisferiens pulse with two peaks in sys-
tole. This pulse is rarely appreciated in patients with severe 
aortic regurgitation. D. Bisferiens pulse in hypertrophic 
obstructive cardiomyopathy. There is a rapid upstroke to the 
first peak (percussion wave) and a slower rise to the second 
peak (tidal wave). E. Dicrotic pulse with peaks in systole and 
diastole. This waveform may be seen in patients with sepsis 
or during intraaortic balloon counterpulsation with inflation 
just after the dicrotic notch. (From K Chatterjee, W Parmley 
[eds]: Cardiology: An Illustrated Text/Reference. Philadelphia, 
JB Lippincott, 1991.)
S4
S4
S4
S4
S1
S1
S4
S1
S1
S1
A2
A2
A2
A2
P2
P2
A2
P2
P2
P2
Dicrotic notch
A
Dicrotic notch
C
Dicrotic notch
D
Dicrotic notch
E
Dicrotic notch
B
 
CHAPTER 9
Physical Examination of the Cardiovascular System
69
pulsus alternans is associated with electrocardiographic 
T-wave alternans, the risk for an arrhythmic event 
appears to be increased.
Ascending aortic aneurysms can rarely be appreciated 
as a pulsatile mass in the right parasternal. Appreciation 
of a prominent abdominal aortic pulse should prompt 
noninvasive imaging for better characterization. Femoral 
and/or popliteal artery aneurysms should be sought in 
patients with abdominal aortic aneurysm disease.
The level of a claudication-producing arterial 
obstruction can often be identified on physical exami-
nation (Fig. 9-3). For example, in a patient with calf 
claudication, a decrease in pulse amplitude between 
the common femoral and popliteal arteries will local-
ize the obstruction to the level of the superficial femoral 
artery, although inflow obstruction above the level of 
the common femoral artery may coexist. Auscultation 
for carotid, subclavian, abdominal aortic, and femoral 
artery bruits should be routine. However, the correla-
tion between the presence of a bruit and the degree of 
vascular obstruction is poor. A cervical bruit is a weak 
indicator of the degree of carotid artery stenosis; the 
absence of a bruit does not exclude the presence of sig-
nificant luminal obstruction. If a bruit extends into dias-
tole or if a thrill is present, the obstruction is generally 
severe. Other causes of arterial bruits include an arterio-
venous fistula with enhanced flow.
The likelihood of significant lower extremity periph-
eral arterial disease increases with typical symptoms of 
claudication, cool skin, abnormalities on pulse examina-
tion, or the presence of a vascular bruit. Abnormal pulse 
oximetry (a >2% difference between finger and toe 
oxygen saturation) can be used to detect lower extrem-
ity peripheral arterial disease and is comparable in its 
performance characteristics to the ankle-brachial index.
Inspection and palpation of the heart
The left ventricular apex beat may be visible in the 
midclavicular line at the fifth intercostal space in thin-
chested adults. Visible pulsations anywhere other than 
this expected location are abnormal. The left anterior 
Figure 9-3
A. Anatomy of the major arteries of the leg. B. Measurement of the ankle systolic pressure. (From NA Khan et al: JAMA 295:
536–546, 2006.)
External iliac a.
Anterior superior
iliac spine
Inguinal ligament
Symphysis pubis
Major arteries of the lower limb
Measurement of ankle systolic pressure
Deep femoral a.
Femoral a.
Femoral a.
Popliteal a.
Popliteal a.
Palpatation of
popliteal artery pulse
Doppler
Doppler
Extensor tendon
Posterior
tibial a.
Posterior tibial a.
Posterior tibial artery pressure
Dorsalis pedis artery pressure
Blood pressure
cuff
Anterior tibial a.
Anterior tibial a.
Dorsalis pedis a.
Dorsalis pedis a.
A
B
Section II
70
Diagnosis of Cardiovascular Disorders
chest wall may heave in patients with an enlarged or 
hyperdynamic left or right ventricle. As noted previ-
ously, a visible right upper parasternal pulsation may be 
suggestive of ascending aortic aneurysm disease. In thin, 
tall patients and patients with advanced obstructive lung 
disease and flattened diaphragms, the cardiac impulse 
may be visible in the epigastrium and should be distin-
guished from a pulsatile liver edge.
Palpation of the heart begins with the patient in the 
supine position at 30° and can be enhanced by plac-
ing the patient in the left lateral decubitus position. 
The normal left ventricular impulse is less than 2 cm in 
diameter and moves quickly away from the fingers; it 
is better appreciated at end expiration, with the heart 
closer to the anterior chest wall. Characteristics such as 
size, amplitude, and rate of force development should 
be noted.
Enlargement of the left ventricular cavity is mani-
fested by a leftward and downward displacement of an 
enlarged apex beat. A sustained apex beat is a sign of 
pressure overload, such as that which may be present 
in patients with AS or chronic hypertension. A palpa-
ble presystolic impulse corresponds to the fourth heart 
sound (S4) and is indicative of reduced left ventricular 
compliance and the forceful contribution of atrial con-
traction to ventricular filling. A palpable third sound 
(S3), which is indicative of a rapid early filling wave in 
patients with heart failure, may be present even when 
the gallop itself is not audible. A large left ventricu-
lar aneurysm may sometimes be palpable as an ecto-
pic impulse, discrete from the apex beat. Hypertrophic 
obstructive cardiomyopathy may very rarely cause a 
triple cadence beat at the apex with contributions from 
a palpable S4 and the two components of the bisferiens 
systolic pulse.
Right ventricular pressure or volume overload may 
create a sternal lift. Signs of either TR (cv waves in the 
jugular venous pulse) and/or pulmonary arterial hyper-
tension (a loud single or palpable P2) would be confir-
matory. The right ventricle can enlarge to the extent 
that left-sided events cannot be appreciated. A zone 
of retraction between the right and left ventricular 
impulses sometimes can be appreciated in patients with 
right ventricle pressure or volume overload when they 
are placed in the left lateral decubitus position. Systolic 
and diastolic thrills signify turbulent and high-velocity 
blood flow. Their locations help identify the origin of 
heart murmurs.
Cardiac Auscultation
Heart sounds
Ventricular systole is defined by the interval between 
the first (S1) and second (S2) heart sounds (Fig. 9-4). 
The first heart sound (S1) includes mitral and tricuspid 
Figure 9-4
Heart sounds. A. Normal. S1, first heart sound; S2, sec-
ond heart sound; A2, aortic component of the second 
heart sound; P2, pulmonic component of the second heart 
sound. B. Atrial septal defect with fixed splitting of S2. 
C. ­Physiologic but wide splitting of S2 with right bundle 
branch block. D. Reversed or paradoxical splitting of S2 with 
left bundle branch block. E. Narrow splitting of S2 with pul-
monary hypertension. (From NO Fowler: Diagnosis of Heart 
Disease. New York, Springer-Verlag, 1991, p 31.)
A Normal
EXPIRATION
INSPIRATION
S1
S2
A2 P2
B Atrial septal
defect
C Expiratory splitting
with inspiratory
increase (RBBB,
idiopathic dilatation PA)
D Reversed splitting
(LBBB, aortic
stenosis)
E Close fixed
splitting
(pulmonary
hypertension)
S1
S2
A2 P2
S1
S2
A2 P2
S1
S2
A2 P2
S1
S2
A2 P2
S1
S2
A2 P2
S1
S2
A2
P2
S1
S2
A2
P2
S1
S2
A2
P2
S1
S2
A2 P2
valve closure. Normal splitting can be appreciated 
in young patients and those with right bundle branch 
block, in whom tricuspid valve closure is relatively 
delayed. The intensity of S1 is determined by the dis-
tance over which the anterior leaflet of the mitral valve 
must travel to return to its annular plane, leaflet mobil-
ity, left ventricular contractility, and the PR interval. S1 
is classically loud in the early phases of rheumatic mitral 
stenosis (MS) and in patients with hyperkinetic circula-
tory states or short PR intervals. S1 becomes softer in 
the later stages of MS when the leaflets are rigid and 
calcified, after exposure to β-adrenergic receptor block-
ers, with long PR intervals, and with left ventricu-
lar contractile dysfunction. The intensity of any heart 
sound, however, can be reduced by any process that 
increases the distance between the stethoscope and the 
responsible cardiac event, including mechanical ventila-
tion, obstructive lung disease, obesity, pneumothorax, 
and a pericardial effusion.
Aortic and pulmonic valve closure constitutes the 
second heart sound (S2). With normal or physiologic 
splitting, the A2–P2 interval increases with inspiration 
and narrows during expiration. This physiologic interval 
 
CHAPTER 9
Physical Examination of the Cardiovascular System
71
will widen with right bundle branch block because 
of the further delay in pulmonic valve closure and in 
patients with severe MR because of the premature clo-
sure of the aortic valve. An unusually narrowly split 
or even a singular S2 is a feature of pulmonary arterial 
hypertension. Fixed splitting of S2, in which the A2–P2 
interval is wide and does not change during the respi-
ratory cycle, occurs in patients with a secundum atrial 
septal defect. Reversed or paradoxical splitting refers to 
a pathologic delay in aortic valve closure, such as that 
which occurs in patients with left bundle branch block, 
right ventricular apical pacing, severe AS, HOCM, and 
acute myocardial ischemia. With reversed or paradoxi-
cal splitting, the individual components of S2 are audible 
at end expiration, and their interval narrows with inspi-
ration, the opposite of what would be expected under 
normal physiologic conditions. P2 is considered loud 
when its intensity exceeds that of A2 at the base, when 
it can be palpated in the area of the proximal pulmo-
nary artery (second left interspace), or when both com-
ponents of S2 can be appreciated at the lower left ­sternal 
border or apex. The intensity of A2 and P2 decreases 
with aortic and pulmonic stenosis, respectively. In these 
conditions, a single S2 may result.
Systolic sounds
An ejection sound is a high-pitched early systolic sound 
that corresponds in timing to the upstroke of the carotid 
pulse. It usually is associated with congenital bicus-
pid aortic or pulmonic valve disease; however, ejec-
tion sounds are also sometimes audible in patients with 
isolated aortic or pulmonary root dilation and normal 
semilunar valves. The ejection sound that accompanies 
bicuspid aortic valve disease becomes softer and then 
inaudible as the valve calcifies and becomes more rigid. 
The ejection sound that accompanies pulmonic stenosis 
(PS) moves closer to the first heart sound as the severity 
of the stenosis increases. In addition, the pulmonic ejec-
tion sound is the only right-sided acoustic event that 
decreases in intensity with inspiration. ­Ejection sounds 
are often heard more easily at the lower left sternal bor-
der than they are at the base. Nonejection sounds (clicks), 
which occur after the onset of the carotid upstroke, 
are related to mitral valve prolapse and may be single 
or multiple. The nonejection click may introduce a 
murmur. This click-murmur complex will move away 
from the first heart sound with maneuvers that increase 
ventricular preload, such as squatting. On standing, the 
click and murmur move closer to S1.
Diastolic sounds
The high-pitched opening snap (OS) of MS occurs after 
a very short interval after the second heart sound. The 
A2–OS interval is inversely proportional to the height of 
the left atrial–left ventricular diastolic pressure gradient. 
The intensity of both S1 and the OS of MS decreases 
with progressive calcification and rigidity of the ante-
rior mitral leaflets. The pericardial knock (PK) is also 
high pitched and occurs slightly later than the opening 
snap, corresponding in timing to the abrupt cessation of 
ventricular expansion after tricuspid valve opening and 
to an exaggerated y descent seen in the jugular venous 
waveform in patients with constrictive pericarditis. A 
tumor plop is a lower-pitched sound that rarely can be 
heard in patients with atrial myxoma. It may be appre-
ciated only in certain positions and arises from the dia-
stolic prolapse of the tumor across the mitral valve.
The third heart sound (S3) occurs during the rapid 
filling phase of ventricular diastole. It can be a normal 
finding in children, adolescents, and young adults; how-
ever, in older patients it signifies heart failure. A left-
sided S3 is a low-pitched sound best heard over the left 
ventricular (LV) apex. A right-sided S3 is usually better 
heard over the lower left sternal border and becomes 
louder with inspiration. A left-sided S3 in patients with 
chronic heart failure is predictive of cardiovascular mor-
bidity and mortality. Interestingly, an S3 is equally prev-
alent among heart failure patients with and without LV 
systolic dysfunction.
The fourth heart sound (S4) occurs during the atrial 
filling phase of ventricular diastole and indicates left ven-
tricular presystolic expansion. An S4 is more common 
among patients who derive significant benefit from the 
atrial contribution to ventricular filling, such as those with 
chronic left ventricular hypertrophy or active myocardial 
ischemia. An S4 is not present with atrial fibrillation.
Cardiac murmurs
Heart murmurs result from audible vibrations that are 
caused by increased turbulence and are defined by their 
timing within the cardiac cycle. Not all murmurs are 
indicative of structural heart disease, and the accurate 
identification of a benign or functional systolic mur-
mur often can obviate the need for additional testing 
in healthy subjects. The duration, frequency, configu-
ration, and intensity of a heart murmur are dictated by 
the magnitude, variability, and duration of the respon-
sible pressure difference between two cardiac chambers, 
the two ventricles, or the ventricles and their respective 
great arteries. The intensity of a heart murmur is graded 
on a scale of 1 to 6; a thrill is present with murmurs 
of grade 4 or greater intensity. Other attributes of the 
murmur that aid in its accurate identification include 
its location, radiation, and response to bedside maneu-
vers. Although clinicians can detect and correctly iden-
tify heart murmurs with only fair reliability, a careful 
and complete bedside examination usually can identify 
individuals with valvular heart disease for whom trans-
thoracic echocardiography and clinical follow-up are 
Section II
72
Diagnosis of Cardiovascular Disorders
indicated and exclude subjects for whom no further 
evaluation is necessary.
Systolic murmurs can be early, mid-, late, or holosys-
tolic in timing (Fig. 9-5). Acute severe MR results in 
a decrescendo early systolic murmur, the characteristics 
of which are related to the progressive attenuation of 
the left ventricular to left atrial pressure ­gradient during 
systole because of the steep and rapid rise in left atrial 
pressure in this clinical context. Severe MR associated 
with posterior leaflet prolapse or flail radiates anteriorly 
and to the base, where it can be confused with the mur-
mur of aortic stenosis. MR that is due to anterior leaflet 
involvement radiates posteriorly and to the axilla. With 
acute TR in patients with normal pulmonary arterty 
(PA) pressures, an early systolic murmur that may 
increase in intensity with inspiration may be heard at 
the left lower sternal border, with regurgitant cv waves 
visible in the jugular venous pulse.
A midsystolic murmur begins after S1 and ends 
before S2; it is typically crescendo-decrescendo in con-
figuration. Aortic stenosis is the most common cause 
of a midsystolic murmur in an adult. It is often diffi-
cult to estimate the severity of the valve lesion on the 
basis of the physical examination findings, especially 
in older hypertensive patients with stiffened carotid 
arteries or patients with low cardiac output in whom 
the intensity of the systolic heart murmur is mislead-
ingly soft. Examination findings consistent with severe 
AS would include parvus et tardus carotid upstrokes, a 
late-peaking grade 3 or greater midsystolic murmur, a 
soft A2, a sustained LV apical impulse, and an S4. It is 
sometimes difficult to distinguish aortic sclerosis from 
more advanced degrees of valve stenosis. The former is 
defined by focal thickening and calcification of the aor-
tic valve leaflets that is not severe enough to result in 
obstruction. These valve changes are associated with a 
Doppler jet velocity across the aortic valve of 2.5 m/s 
or less. Patients with aortic sclerosis can have grade 2 or 
3 midsystolic murmurs identical in their acoustic char-
acteristics to the murmurs heard in patients with more 
advanced degrees of AS. Other causes of a midsystolic 
heart murmur include pulmonic valve stenosis (with 
or without an ejection sound), HOCM, increased pul-
monary blood flow in patients with a large atrial sep-
tal defect and left-to-right shunting, and several states 
associated with accelerated blood flow in the absence 
of structural heart disease, such as fever, thyrotoxicosis, 
pregnancy, anemia, and normal adolescence.
The murmur of hypertrophic obstructive cardiomy-
opathy has features of both obstruction to left ventricular 
outflow and MR, as would be expected from knowledge 
of the pathophysiology of this condition. The systolic 
murmur of HOCM usually can be distinguished from 
other causes on the basis of its response to bedside maneu-
vers, including Valsalva, passive leg raising, and standing/
squatting. In general, maneuvers that decrease left ven-
tricular preload (or increase left ventricular contractility) 
will cause the murmur to intensify, whereas maneuvers 
that increase left ventricular preload or afterload will cause 
a decrease in the intensity of the murmur. Accordingly, 
the systolic murmur of HOCM becomes louder dur-
ing the strain phase of the Valsalva maneuver and after 
standing quickly from a squatting position. The murmur 
becomes softer with passive leg raising and when squat-
ting. The murmur of AS is typically loudest in the second 
right interspace with radiation into the carotids, whereas 
the murmur of HOCM is best heard between the lower 
left sternal border and the apex. The murmur of PS is best 
heard in the second left interspace. The midsystolic mur-
mur associated with enhanced pulmonic blood flow in the 
setting of a large atrial septal defect (ASD) is usually loud-
est at the mid-left sternal border.
Figure 9-5
A. Top. Graphic representation of the systolic pressure dif-
ference (green shaded area) between left ventricle and left 
atrium with phonocardiographic recording of a holosystolic 
murmur (HSM) indicative of mitral regurgitation. ECG, elec-
trocardiogram; LVP, left ventricular pressure; LAP, left atrial 
pressure; S1, first heart sound; S2 second heart sound. 
­Bottom. Graphic representation of the systolic pressure gra-
dient (green shaded area) between left ventricle and aorta in 
patient with aortic stenosis. A mid-systolic murmur (MSM) 
with a crescendo-decrescendo configuration is recorded. 
AOP, aortic pressure. B. Top. Graphic representation of the 
diastolic pressure difference between the aorta and left 
ventricle (blue shaded area) in a patient with aortic regurgi-
tation, resulting in a decrescendo, early diastolic murmur 
(EDM) beginning with A2. Bottom. Graphic representation of 
the diastolic left atrial–left ventricular gradient (blue areas) 
in a patient with mitral stenosis with a mid-diastolic murmur 
(MDM) and late presystolic murmurs (PSM).
ECG
LVP
LAP
HSM
S1
S2
ECG
LVP
AOP
MSM
S1
A2
ECG
ECG
LVP
AOP
EDM
S1
A2
S1
S2
LVP
LAP
PSM
MDM
A
B
 
CHAPTER 9
Physical Examination of the Cardiovascular System
73
A late systolic murmur, heard best at the apex, indi-
cates MVP. As previously noted, the murmur may or 
may not be introduced by a nonejection click. Differ-
ential radiation of the murmur, as previously described, 
may help identify the specific leaflet involved by 
the myxomatous process. The click-murmur com-
plex behaves in a manner directionally similar to that 
demonstrated by the murmur of HOCM during the 
­Valsalva and stand/squat maneuvers (Fig. 9-6). The 
murmur of MVP can be identified by the accompanying 
nonejection click.
Holosystolic murmurs are plateau in configuration 
and reflect a continuous and wide pressure gradient 
between the left ventricle and left atrium with chronic 
MR, the left ventricle and right ventricle with a ven-
tricular septal defect (VSD), and the right ventricle and 
right atrium with TR. In contrast to acute MR, in 
chronic MR the left atrium is enlarged and its compli-
ance is normal or increased to the extent that there is 
little if any further increase in left atrial pressure from 
any increase in regurgitant volume. The murmur of 
MR is best heard over the cardiac apex. The intensity 
of the murmur increases with maneuvers that increase 
left ventricular afterload, such as sustained hand grip. 
The murmur of a VSD (without significant pulmo-
nary hypertension) is holosystolic and loudest at the 
mid-left sternal border, where a thrill is usually present. 
The murmur of TR is loudest at the lower left sternal 
border, increases in intensity with inspiration (Carval-
lo’s sign), and is accompanied by visible cv waves in the 
jugular venous waveform and, on occasion, by pulsatile 
hepatomegaly.
Diastolic murmurs
In contrast to some systolic murmurs, diastolic heart mur-
murs always signify structural heart disease (Fig. 9-5). 
The murmur associated with acute, severe AR is rela-
tively soft and of short duration because of the rapid rise 
in left ventricular diastolic pressure and the progressive 
diminution of the aortic-left ventricular diastolic pres-
sure gradient. In contrast, the murmur of chronic severe 
AR is classically heard as a decrescendo, blowing dia-
stolic murmur along the left sternal border in patients 
with primary valve pathology and sometimes along 
the right sternal border in patients with primary aortic 
root pathology. With chronic AR, the pulse pressure is 
wide and the arterial pulses are bounding in character. 
These signs of significant diastolic run-off are absent in 
the acute phase. The murmur of pulmonic regurgita-
tion (PR) is also heard along the left sternal border. It 
is most commonly due to pulmonary hypertension and 
enlargement of the annulus of the pulmonic valve. S2 
is single and loud and may be palpable. There is a right 
Figure 9-6 
Behavior of the click (C) and murmur (M) of mitral valve prolapse with changes in loading (volume, impedance) and 
­contractility. S1, first heart sound; S2, second heart sound. With standing (left side of figure), volume and impedance decrease, 
as a result of which the click and murmur move closer to S1. With squatting (right), the click and murmur move away from S1 
owing to the increases in left ventricular volume and impedance (afterload). (Adapted from RA O’Rourke, MH Crawford: Curr 
Prob Cardiol 1:9, 1976.)
Impedance
Ao
LV
S1
S1
C
C
M
M
S2
S2
Contractility
Volume
Section II
74
Diagnosis of Cardiovascular Disorders
Table 9-1
Effects of Physiologic and Pharmacologic 
Interventions on the Intensity of Heart 
Murmurs and Sounds
Respiration  Right-sided murmurs and sounds generally 
increase with inspiration, except for the PES. Left-sided 
murmurs and sounds are usually louder during expiration.
Valsalva maneuver  Most murmurs decrease in length 
and intensity. Two exceptions are the systolic murmur of 
HOCM, which usually becomes much louder, and that 
of MVP, which becomes longer and often louder. After 
release of the Valsalva maneuver, right-sided murmurs 
tend to return to control intensity earlier than do left-sided 
murmurs.
After VPB or AF  Murmurs originating at normal or ste-
notic semilunar valves increase in the cardiac cycle after 
a VPB or in the cycle after a long-cycle length in AF. By 
contrast, systolic murmurs due to AV valve regurgitation 
do not change, diminish (papillary muscle dysfunction), or 
become shorter (MVP).
Positional changes  With standing, most murmurs dimin-
ish, with two exceptions being the murmur of HOCM, 
which becomes louder, and that of MVP, which lengthens 
and often is intensified. With squatting, most murmurs 
become louder, but those of HOCM and MVP usually 
soften and may disappear. Passive leg raising usually pro-
duces the same results.
Exercise  Murmurs due to blood flow across normal or 
obstructed valves (e.g., PS, MS) become louder with 
both isotonic and submaximal isometric (hand grip) 
exercise. Murmurs of MR, VSD, and AR also increase 
with hand grip exercise. However, the murmur of HOCM 
often decreases with nearly maximum hand grip exercise. 
­Left-sided S4 and S3 sounds are often accentuated by 
exercise, particularly when due to ischemic heart disease.
Abbreviations: AF, atrial fibrillation; AR, aortic regurgitation; HOCM, 
hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy; MR, mitral regurgitation; 
MS, mitral stenosis; MVP, mitral valve prolapse; PES, pulmonic ejec-
tion sound; PR, pulmonic regurgitation; PS, pulmonic stenosis; TR, 
tricuspid regurgitation; TS, tricuspid stenosis; VPB, ventricular pre-
mature beat; VSD, ventricular septal defect.
ventricular/parasternal lift that is indicative of chronic 
right ventricular pressure overload. A less impressive 
murmur of PR is present after repair of tetralogy of 
­Fallot or pulmonic valve atresia. In this postoperative 
setting, the murmur is softer and lower pitched and the 
severity of the accompanying pulmonic regurgitation 
can be underestimated significantly.
Mitral stenosis is the classic cause of a mid- to late 
diastolic murmur, which is best heard over the apex in 
the left lateral decubitus position and is low-pitched or 
rumbling and is introduced by an OS in the early stages 
of the rheumatic disease process. Presystolic accentua-
tion refers to an increase in the intensity of the mur-
mur just before the first heart sound and occurs in 
patients with sinus rhythm. It is absent in patients with 
atrial fibrillation. The auscultatory findings in patients 
with rheumatic tricuspid stenosis typically are obscured 
by left-sided events, though they are similar in nature 
to those described in patients with MS. “Functional” 
mitral or tricuspid stenosis refers to the generation of 
mid-diastolic murmurs that are created by increased 
and accelerated transvalvular diastolic flow, even in the 
absence of valvular obstruction, in the setting of severe 
MR, severe TR, or a large ASD with left-to-right 
shunting. The Austin Flint murmur of chronic severe 
AR is a low-pitched mid- to late apical diastolic mur-
mur that sometimes can be confused with MS. The 
Austin Flint murmur typically decreases in intensity 
after exposure to vasodilators, whereas the murmur of 
MS may be accompanied by an opening snap and also 
may increase in intensity after vasodilators because of 
the associated increase in cardiac output. Unusual causes 
of a mid-diastolic murmur include atrial myxoma, com-
plete heart block, and acute rheumatic mitral valvulitis.
Continuous murmur
A continuous murmur is predicated on a pressure 
­gradient that persists between two cardiac chambers or 
blood vessels across systole and diastole. The murmurs 
typically begin in systole, envelop the second heart 
sound (S2), and continue through some portion of dias-
tole. They can often be difficult to distinguish from 
individual systolic and diastolic murmurs in patients 
with mixed valvular heart disease. The classic example 
of a continuous murmur is that associated with a patent 
ductus arteriosus, which usually is heard in the second 
or third interspace at a slight distance from the sternal 
border. Other causes of a continuous murmur include a 
ruptured sinus of Valsalva aneurysm with creation of an 
aortic–right atrial or right ventricular fistula, a coronary 
or great vessel arteriovenous fistula, and an arteriove-
nous fistula constructed to provide dialysis access. There 
are two types of benign continuous murmurs. The cer-
vical venous hum is heard in children or ­adolescents 
in the supraclavicular fossa. It can be obliterated with 
firm pressure applied to the diaphragm of the stetho-
scope, especially when the subject turns his or her head 
toward the examiner. The mammary souffle of preg-
nancy relates to enhanced arterial blood flow through 
engorged breasts. The diastolic component of the mur-
mur can be obliterated with firm pressure over the 
stethoscope.
Dynamic auscultation
Diagnostic accuracy can be enhanced by the performance 
of simple bedside maneuvers to identify heart murmurs 
and characterize their significance (Table 9-1). Except 
for the pulmonic ejection sound, right-sided events 
increase in intensity with inspiration and decrease with 
expiration; left-sided events behave oppositely (100% sen-
sitivity, 88% specificity). As previously noted, the intensity 
 
CHAPTER 9
Physical Examination of the Cardiovascular System
75
of the murmurs associated with MR, VSD, and AR will 
increase in response to maneuvers that increase LV after-
load, such as hand grip and vasopressors. The intensity of 
these murmurs will decrease after exposure to vasodilat-
ing agents. Squatting is associated with an abrupt increase 
in LV preload and afterload, whereas rapid standing results 
in a sudden decrease in preload. In patients with MVP, 
the click and murmur move away from the first heart 
sound with squatting because of the delay in onset of 
leaflet prolapse at higher ventricular volumes. With rapid 
standing, however, the click and murmur move closer to 
the first heart sound as prolapse occurs earlier in systole 
at a smaller chamber dimension. The murmur of HOCM 
behaves similarly, becoming softer and shorter with squat-
ting (95% sensitivity, 85% specificity) and longer and 
louder on rapid standing (95% sensitivity, 84% specific-
ity). A change in the intensity of a systolic murmur in the 
first beat after a premature beat or in the beat after a long 
cycle length in patients with atrial fibrillation suggests val-
vular AS rather than MR, particularly in an older patient 
in whom the murmur of the AS may be well transmit-
ted to the apex (Gallavardin effect). Of note, however, the 
systolic murmur of HOCM also increases in intensity in 
the beat after a premature beat. This increase in intensity 
of any LV outflow murmur in the beat after a premature 
beat relates to the combined effects of enhanced LV fill-
ing (from the longer diastolic period) and postextrasystolic 
potentiation of LV contractile function. In either instance, 
forward flow will accelerate, causing an increase in the 
gradient across the LV outflow tract (dynamic or fixed) 
and a louder systolic murmur. In contrast, the intensity of 
the murmur of MR does not change in a postpremature 
beat, as there is relatively little change in the nearly con-
stant LV to left atrial pressure gradient or further altera-
tion in mitral valve flow. Bedside exercise can sometimes 
be performed to increase cardiac output and, secondarily, 
the intensity of both systolic and diastolic heart murmurs. 
Most left-sided heart murmurs decrease in intensity and 
duration during the strain phase of the Valsalva maneuver. 
The murmurs associated with MVP and HOCM are the 
two notable exceptions. The Valsalva maneuver also can 
be used to assess the integrity of the heart and vasculature 
in the setting of advanced heart failure.
Prosthetic heart valves
The first clue that prosthetic valve dysfunction may 
contribute to recurrent symptoms is frequently a change 
in the quality of the heart sounds or the appearance 
of a new murmur. The heart sounds with a biopros-
thetic valve resemble those generated by native valves. 
A mitral bioprosthesis usually is associated with a grade 
2 or 3 mid-systolic murmur along the left sternal ­border 
(created by turbulence across the valve struts as they 
project into the LV outflow tract) as well as by a soft 
mid-diastolic murmur that occurs with normal LV fill-
ing. This diastolic murmur often can be heard only in 
the left lateral decubitus position and after exercise. A 
high-pitched or holosystolic apical murmur is indicative 
of paravalvular leak or bioprosthetic regurgitation, for 
which additional imaging is indicated. Clinical deterio-
ration can occur rapidly after the first expression of bio-
prosthetic failure. A tissue valve in the aortic position is 
always associated with a grade 2 to 3 mid-systolic mur-
mur at the base or just below the suprasternal notch. A 
diastolic murmur of AR is abnormal in any circumstances. 
Mechanical valve dysfunction may first be suggested by a 
decrease in the intensity of either the opening or the clos-
ing sound. A high-pitched apical systolic murmur in 
patients with a mechanical mitral prosthesis and a dia-
stolic decrescendo murmur in patients with a mechani-
cal aortic prosthesis indicate paravalvular regurgitation. 
Patients with prosthetic valve thrombosis may present 
clinically with signs of shock, muffled heart sounds, and 
soft murmurs.
Pericardial disease
A pericardial friction rub is nearly 100% specific for 
the diagnosis of acute pericarditis, though the sensitiv-
ity of this finding is not nearly as high, as the rub may 
come and go over the course of an acute illness or be 
very difficult to elicit. The rub is heard as a leathery or 
scratchy three-component or two-component sound, 
though it may be monophasic. Classically, the three 
components are ventricular systole, rapid early diastolic 
filling, and late presystolic filling after atrial contraction 
in patients in sinus rhythm. It is necessary to listen to 
the heart in several positions. Additional clues may be 
present from the history and 12-lead electrocardiogram. 
The rub typically disappears as the volume of any peri-
cardial effusion increases. Pericardial tamponade can be 
diagnosed with a sensitivity of 98%, a specificity of 83%, 
and a positive likelihood ratio of 5.9 (95% confidence 
intervals 2.4 to 14) by a pulsus paradoxus that exceeds 
12 mmHg in a patient with a large pericardial effusion.
The findings on physical examination are integrated 
with the symptoms previously elicited with a careful 
history to construct an appropriate differential diagno-
sis and proceed with indicated imaging and laboratory 
assessment. The physical examination is an irreplaceable 
component of the diagnostic algorithm and in selected 
patients can inform prognosis. Educational efforts to 
improve clinician competence eventually may result in 
cost saving, particularly if the indications for imaging 
can be influenced by the examination findings.
 Patrick T. O’Gara 
I  Joseph Loscalzo 
76
 introDuction 
 The differential diagnosis of a heart murmur begins 
with a careful assessment of its major attributes and 
responses to bedside maneuvers. The history, clinical 
context, and associated physical examination fi ndings 
provide additional clues by which the signifi cance of a 
heart murmur is established. Accurate bedside identifi -
cation of a heart murmur can inform decisions regard-
ing the indications for noninvasive testing and the need 
for referral to a cardiovascular specialist. Preliminary dis-
cussions can be held with the patient regarding antibi-
otic or rheumatic fever prophylaxis, the need to restrict 
various forms of physical activity, and the potential role 
for family screening. 
 Heart murmurs are caused by audible vibrations that 
are due to increased turbulence from accelerated blood 
fl ow through normal or abnormal orifi ces, fl ow through 
a narrowed or irregular orifi ce into a dilated vessel or 
chamber, or backward fl ow through an incompe-
tent valve, ventricular septal defect, or patent ductus 
arteriosus. They traditionally are defi ned in terms of 
their timing within the cardiac cycle  ( Fig. 10-1 ) .  Sys-
tolic murmurs begin with or after the fi rst heart sound 
(S 1 ) and terminate at or before the component (A 2 or 
P 2 ) of the second heart sound (S 2 ) that corresponds to 
their site of origin (left or right, respectively).  Diastolic 
murmurs begin with or after the associated component 
of S 2 and end at or before the subsequent S 1 .  Continu-
ous murmurs are not confi ned to either phase of the car-
diac cycle but instead begin in early systole and proceed 
through S 2 into all or part of diastole. The accurate tim-
ing of heart murmurs is the fi rst step in their identifi ca-
tion. The distinction between S 1 and S 2 and, therefore, 
systole and diastole is usually a straightforward process 
but can be diffi cult in the setting of a tachyarrhythmia, 
in which case the heart sounds can be distinguished by 
 APPROACH TO THE PATIENT 
WITH A HEART MURMUR 
 CHAPTER 10 
simultaneous palpation of the carotid upstroke, which 
should closely follow S 1 . 
 Duration 
 The duration of a heart murmur depends on the length 
of time over which a pressure difference exists between 
two cardiac chambers, the left ventricle and the aorta, 
the right ventricle and the pulmonary artery, or the 
great vessels. The magnitude and variability of this pres-
sure difference, coupled with the geometry and com-
pliance of the involved chambers or vessels, dictate 
the velocity of fl ow; the degree of turbulence; and the 
resulting frequency, confi guration, and intensity of 
the murmur. The diastolic murmur of chronic aortic 
regurgitation (AR) is a blowing, high-frequency event, 
whereas the murmur of mitral stenosis (MS), indica-
tive of the left atrial–left ventricular diastolic pressure 
gradient, is a low-frequency event, heard as a rum-
bling sound with the bell of the stethoscope. The fre-
quency components of a heart murmur may vary at 
different sites of auscultation. The coarse systolic mur-
mur of aortic stenosis (AS) may sound higher pitched 
and more acoustically pure at the apex, a phenomenon 
eponymously referred to as the  Gallavardin effect . Some 
murmurs may have a distinct or unusual quality, such as 
the “honking” sound appreciated in some patients with 
mitral regurgitation (MR) due to mitral valve prolapse 
(MVP). 
 The confi guration of a heart murmur may be described 
as crescendo, decrescendo, crescendo-decrescendo, or pla-
teau. The decrescendo confi guration of the murmur of 
chronic AR  ( Fig. 10-1 E ) can be understood in terms of 
the progressive decline in the diastolic pressure gradient 
between the aorta and the left ventricle. The crescendo-
decrescendo confi guration of the murmur of AS refl ects 
the changes in the systolic pressure gradient between the 
 
CHAPTER 10
Approach to the Patient with a Heart Murmur
77
left ventricle and the aorta as ejection occurs, whereas 
the plateau configuration of the murmur of chronic MR 
(Fig. 10-1B) is consistent with the large and nearly con-
stant pressure difference between the left ventricle and the 
left atrium.
Intensity
The intensity of a heart murmur is graded on a scale of 
1–6 (or I–VI). A grade 1 murmur is very soft and is heard 
only with great effort. A grade 2 murmur is easily heard 
but not particularly loud. A grade 3 murmur is loud but 
is not accompanied by a palpable thrill over the site of 
maximal intensity. A grade 4 murmur is very loud and is 
accompanied by a thrill. A grade 5 murmur is loud enough 
to be heard with only the edge of the stethoscope touch-
ing the chest, whereas a grade 6 murmur is loud enough to 
be heard with the stethoscope slightly off the chest. Mur-
murs of grade 3 or greater intensity usually signify impor-
tant structural heart disease and indicate high blood flow 
velocity at the site of murmur production. Small ventricu-
lar septal defects (VSDs), for example, are accompanied by 
loud, usually grade 4 or greater, systolic murmurs as blood 
is ejected at high velocity from the left ventricle to the 
right ventricle. Low-velocity events, such as left-to-right 
shunting across an atrial septal defect (ASD), are usually 
silent. The intensity of a heart murmur also may be dimin-
ished by any process that increases the distance between 
the intracardiac source and the stethoscope on the chest 
wall, such as obesity, obstructive lung disease, and a large 
pericardial effusion. The intensity of a murmur also may 
be misleadingly soft when cardiac output is reduced signifi-
cantly or when the pressure gradient between the involved 
cardiac structures is low.
Location and radiation
Recognition of the location and radiation of the mur-
mur helps facilitate its accurate identification (Fig. 10-2). 
Adventitious sounds, such as a systolic click or diastolic 
snap, or abnormalities of S1 or S2 may provide additional 
clues. Careful attention to the characteristics of the mur-
mur and other heart sounds during the respiratory cycle 
and the performance of simple bedside maneuvers com-
plete the auscultatory examination. These features, along 
with recommendations for further testing, are discussed 
later in the context of specific systolic, diastolic, and con-
tinuous heart murmurs (Table 10-1).
S1
S2
A2
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
P2
S3
OS
Figure 10-1
Diagram depicting principal heart murmurs. A. Presys-
tolic murmur of mitral or tricuspid stenosis. B. Holosystolic 
(pansystolic) murmur of mitral or tricuspid regurgitation or of 
ventricular septal defect. C. Aortic ejection murmur begin-
ning with an ejection click and fading before the second 
heart sound. D. Systolic murmur in pulmonic stenosis spill-
ing through the aortic second sound, pulmonic valve clo-
sure being delayed. E. Aortic or pulmonary diastolic murmur. 
F.  Long diastolic murmur of mitral stenosis after the open-
ing snap (OS). G. Short mid-diastolic inflow murmur after a 
third heart sound. H. Continuous murmur of patent ductus 
arteriosus. (Adapted from P Wood, Diseases of the Heart and 
Circulation, London, Eyre & Spottiswood, 1968. Permission 
granted courtesy of Antony and Julie Wood.)
Aortic
Pulm
VSD
MR
HOCM
Vibratory
Figure 10-2 
Maximal intensity and radiation of six isolated systolic 
murmurs. HOCM, hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy; 
MR, mitral regurgitation; Pulm, pulmonary stenosis; Aortic, 
aortic stenosis; VSD, ventricular septal defect. (From JB 
Barlow, Perspectives on the Mitral Valve. Philadelphia, FA 
Davis, 1987, p 140.)
SECTION II
Diagnosis of Cardiovascular Disorders
78
Table 10-1
Principal Causes of Heart Murmurs
Systolic Murmurs
Early systolic
  Mitral
    Acute MR
  VSD
    Muscular
    Nonrestrictive with pulmonary hypertension
  Tricuspid
    TR with normal pulmonary artery pressure 
Mid-systolic
  Aortic
    Obstructive
      Supravalvular—supravalvular aortic stenosis, coarctation of the aorta
      Valvular—AS and aortic sclerosis
      Subvalvular—discrete, tunnel or HOCM
    Increased flow, hyperkinetic states, AR, complete heart block
    Dilation of ascending aorta, atheroma, aortitis
  Pulmonary
    Obstructive
      Supravalvular—pulmonary artery stenosis
      Valvular–pulmonic valve stenosis
      Subvalvular–infundibular stenosis (dynamic)
    Increased flow, hyperkinetic states, left-to-right shunt (e.g., ASD)
    Dilation of pulmonary artery 
Late systolic
  Mitral
    MVP, acute myocardial ischemia
  Tricuspid
    TVP
Holosystolic
  Atrioventricular valve regurgitation (MR, TR)
  Left-to-right shunt at ventricular level (VSD)
Early Diastolic Murmurs
Aortic regurgitation
  Valvular: congenital (bicuspid valve), rheumatic deformity, endocarditis, prolapse, trauma, post-valvulotomy
  Dilation of valve ring: aortic dissection, annulo-aortic ectasia, cystic medial degeneration, hypertension, ankylosing spondylitis
  Widening of commissures: syphilis 
Pulmonic regurgitation
  Valvular: post-valvulotomy, endocarditis, rheumatic fever, carcinoid
  Dilation of valve ring: pulmonary hypertension; Marfan syndrome
  Congenital: isolated or associated with tetralogy of Fallot, VSD, pulmonic stenosis
Mid-Diastolic Murmurs
Mitral
  Mitral stenosis
  Carey-Coombs murmur (mid-diastolic apical murmur in acute rheumatic fever)
  Increased flow across nonstenotic mitral valve (e.g., MR, VSD, PDA, high-output states, and complete heart block) 
Tricuspid
  Tricuspid stenosis
  Increased flow across nonstenotic tricuspid valve (e.g., TR, ASD, and anomalous pulmonary venous return)
Left and right atrial tumors (myxoma)
Severe AR (Austin Flint murmur)
Continuous Murmurs
Patent ductus arteriosus
Coronary AV fistula
Ruptured sinus of Valsalva aneurysm
Aortic septal defect
Cervical venous hum
Anomalous left coronary artery
Proximal coronary artery stenosis
Mammary souffle of pregnancy
Pulmonary artery branch stenosis
Bronchial collateral circulation
Small (restrictive) ASD with MS
Intercostal AV fistula
Abbreviations: AR, aortic regurgitation; AS, aortic stenosis; ASD, atrial septal defect; AV, arteriovenous; HOCM, hypertrophic obstructive car-
diomyopathy; MR, mitral regurgitation; MS, mitral stenosis; MVP, mitral valve prolapse; PDA, patent ductus arteriosus; TR, tricuspid regurgita-
tion; TVP, tricuspid valve prolapse; VSD, ventricular septal defect.
Source: E Braunwald, JK Perloff, in D Zipes et al (eds): Braunwald’s Heart Disease, 7th ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2005; PJ Norton, RA 
O’Rourke, in E Braunwald, L Goldman (eds): Primary Cardiology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2003.
 
CHAPTER 10
Approach to the Patient with a Heart Murmur
79
Systolic Heart Murmurs
Early systolic murmurs
Early systolic murmurs begin with S1 and extend for a 
variable period, ending well before S2. Their causes are 
relatively few in number. Acute, severe MR into a normal-
sized, relatively noncompliant left atrium results in an 
early, decrescendo systolic murmur best heard at or just 
medial to the apical impulse. These characteristics reflect 
the progressive attenuation of the pressure gradient 
between the left ventricle and the left atrium during sys-
tole owing to the rapid rise in left atrial ­pressure caused 
by the sudden volume load into an unprepared cham-
ber and contrast sharply with the auscultatory features of 
chronic MR. Clinical settings in which acute, severe MR 
occur include (1) papillary muscle rupture complicating 
acute myocardial infarction (MI) (Chap. 35), (2) rupture 
of chordae tendineae in the setting of myxomatous mitral 
valve disease (MVP, Chap. 20), (3) infective endocarditis 
(Chap. 25), and (4) blunt chest wall trauma.
Acute, severe MR from papillary muscle rupture usu-
ally accompanies an inferior, posterior, or lateral MI and 
occurs 2–7 days after presentation. It often is signaled by 
chest pain, hypotension, and pulmonary edema, but a 
murmur may be absent in up to 50% of cases. The pos-
teromedial papillary muscle is involved 6 to 10 times 
more frequently than the anterolateral papillary muscle. 
The murmur is to be distinguished from that associ-
ated with post-MI ventricular septal rupture, which is 
accompanied by a systolic thrill at the left sternal border 
in nearly all patients and is holosystolic in duration. A 
new heart murmur after an MI is an indication for trans-
thoracic echocardiography (TTE) (Chap. 12), which 
allows bedside delineation of its etiology and patho-
physiologic significance. The distinction between acute 
MR and ventricular septal rupture also can be achieved 
with right heart catheterization, sequential determina-
tion of oxygen saturations, and analysis of the pressure 
waveforms (tall v wave in the pulmonary artery wedge 
pressure in MR). Post-MI mechanical complications of 
this nature mandate aggressive medical stabilization and 
prompt referral for surgical repair.
Spontaneous chordal rupture can complicate the 
course of myxomatous mitral valve disease (MVP) 
and result in new-onset or “acute on chronic” severe 
MR. MVP may occur as an isolated phenomenon, or 
the lesion may be part of a more generalized connec-
tive tissue disorder as seen, for example, in patients 
with Marfan syndrome. Acute, severe MR as a conse-
quence of infective endocarditis results from destruction 
of leaflet tissue, chordal rupture, or both. Blunt chest 
wall trauma is usually self-evident but may be disarm-
ingly trivial; it can result in papillary muscle contusion 
and rupture, chordal detachment, or leaflet avulsion. 
TTE is indicated in all cases of suspected acute, severe 
MR to define its mechanism and severity, delineate left 
ventricular size and systolic function, and provide an 
assessment of suitability for primary valve repair.
A congenital, small muscular VSD (Chap. 19) may 
be associated with an early systolic murmur. The defect 
closes progressively during septal contraction, and thus, 
the murmur is confined to early systole. It is localized to 
the left sternal border (Fig. 10-2) and is usually of grade 
4 or 5 intensity. Signs of pulmonary hypertension or left 
ventricular volume overload are absent. Anatomically 
large and uncorrected VSDs, which usually involve the 
membranous portion of the septum, may lead to pul-
monary hypertension. The murmur associated with the 
left-to-right shunt, which earlier may have been holo-
systolic, becomes limited to the first ­portion of systole 
as the elevated pulmonary vascular resistance leads to an 
abrupt rise in right ventricular pressure and an attenua-
tion of the interventricular pressure gradient during the 
remainder of the cardiac cycle. In such instances, signs 
of pulmonary hypertension (right ventricular lift, loud 
and single or closely split S2) may predominate. The 
murmur is best heard along the left sternal border but is 
softer. Suspicion of a VSD is an indication for TTE.
Tricuspid regurgitation (TR) with normal pulmonary 
artery pressures, as may occur with infective endocardi-
tis, may produce an early systolic murmur. The murmur 
is soft (grade 1 or 2), is best heard at the lower left ster-
nal border, and may increase in intensity with inspira-
tion (Carvallo’s sign). Regurgitant “c-v” waves may be 
visible in the jugular venous pulse. TR in this setting is 
not associated with signs of right heart failure.
Mid-systolic murmurs
Mid-systolic murmurs begin at a short interval after S1, 
end before S2 (Fig. 10-1C), and are usually crescendo-
decrescendo in configuration. Aortic stenosis is the most 
common cause of a mid-systolic murmur in an adult. The 
murmur of AS is usually loudest to the right of the ster-
num in the second intercostal space (aortic area, Fig. 10-2) 
and radiates into the carotids. Transmission of the mid-
systolic murmur to the apex, where it becomes higher 
pitched, is common (Gallavardin effect; see earlier).
Differentiation of this apical systolic murmur from 
MR can be difficult. The murmur of AS will increase 
in intensity, or become louder, in the beat after a pre-
mature beat, whereas the murmur of MR will have 
constant intensity from beat to beat. The intensity of 
the AS murmur also varies directly with the cardiac 
output. With a normal cardiac output, a systolic thrill 
and a grade 4 or higher murmur suggest severe AS. The 
murmur is softer in the setting of heart failure and low 
cardiac output. Other auscultatory findings of severe 
AS include a soft or absent A2, paradoxical splitting of 
S2, an apical S4, and a late-peaking systolic murmur. In 
children, adolescents, and young adults with congeni-
tal valvular AS, an early ejection sound (click) is usually 
SECTION II
Diagnosis of Cardiovascular Disorders
80
audible, more often along the left sternal border than 
at the base. Its presence signifies a flexible, noncalci-
fied bicuspid valve (or one of its variants) and localizes 
the left ventricular outflow obstruction to the valvular 
(rather than sub- or supravalvular) level.
Assessment of the volume and rate of rise of the 
carotid pulse can provide additional information. A 
small and delayed upstroke (parvus et tardus) is consis-
tent with severe AS. The carotid pulse examination is 
less discriminatory, however, in older patients with stiff-
ened arteries. The electrocardiogram (ECG) shows signs 
of left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) as the severity of 
the stenosis increases. TTE is indicated to assess the ana-
tomic features of the aortic valve, the severity of the ste-
nosis, left ventricular size, wall thickness and function, 
and the size and contour of the aortic root and proximal 
ascending aorta.
The obstructive form of hypertrophic cardiomy-
opathy (HOCM) is associated with a mid-systolic mur-
mur that is usually loudest along the left sternal border 
or between the left lower sternal border and the apex 
(Chap. 21, Fig. 10-2). The murmur is produced by 
both dynamic left ventricular outflow tract obstruction 
and MR, and thus, its configuration is a hybrid between 
ejection and regurgitant phenomena. The intensity of 
the murmur may vary from beat to beat and after pro-
vocative maneuvers but usually does not exceed grade 3. 
The murmur classically will increase in intensity with 
maneuvers that result in increasing degrees of out-
flow tract obstruction, such as a reduction in preload 
or afterload (Valsalva, standing, vasodilators), or with 
an augmentation of contractility (inotropic stimula-
tion). Maneuvers that increase preload (squatting, pas-
sive leg raising, volume administration) or afterload 
(squatting, vasopressors) or that reduce contractility 
(β-adrenoreceptor blockers) decrease the intensity of the 
murmur. In rare patients, there may be reversed split-
ting of S2. A sustained left ventricular apical impulse 
and an S4 may be appreciated. In contrast to AS, the 
carotid upstroke is rapid and of normal volume. Rarely, 
it is bisferiens or bifid in contour (see Fig. 9-2D) due to 
mid-systolic closure of the aortic valve. LVH is present 
on the ECG, and the diagnosis is confirmed by TTE. 
Although the systolic murmur associated with MVP 
behaves similarly to that due to HOCM in response 
to the Valsalva maneuver and to standing/squatting 
(Fig. 10-3), these two lesions can be distinguished on 
the basis of their associated findings, such as the presence 
of LVH in HOCM or a nonejection click in MVP.
The 
mid-systolic, 
crescendo-decrescendo 
mur-
mur of congenital pulmonic stenosis (PS, Chap. 19) 
is best appreciated in the second and third left inter-
costal spaces (pulmonic area) (Figs. 10-2 and 10-4). 
The duration of the murmur lengthens and the inten-
sity of P2 diminishes with increasing degrees of valvu-
lar stenosis (Fig. 10-1D). An early ejection sound, the 
intensity of which decreases with inspiration, is heard in 
younger patients. A parasternal lift and ECG evidence 
of right ventricular hypertrophy indicate severe pressure 
overload. If obtained, the chest x-ray may show post-
stenotic dilation of the main pulmonary artery. TTE is 
recommended for complete characterization.
Significant left-to-right intracardiac shunting due 
to an ASD (Chap. 19) leads to an increase in pulmo-
nary blood flow and a grade 2–3 mid-systolic murmur 
at the middle to upper left sternal border attributed to 
increased flow rates across the pulmonic valve with 
fixed splitting of S2. Ostium secundum ASDs are the 
most common cause of these shunts in adults. Features 
suggestive of a primum ASD include the coexistence 
of MR due to a cleft anterior mitral valve leaflet and 
left axis deviation of the QRS complex on the ECG. 
With sinus venosus ASDs, the left-to-right shunt is 
usually not large enough to result in a systolic murmur, 
although the ECG may show abnormalities of sinus 
node function. A grade 2 or 3 mid-systolic murmur 
Supine
Standing
Squatting
S2
S1
C
S2
S1
C
S2
S1
C
Figure 10-3 
A mid-systolic nonejection sound (C) occurs in mitral valve 
prolapse and is followed by a late systolic murmur that cre-
scendos to the second heart sound (S2). Standing decreases 
venous return; the heart becomes smaller; C moves closer to 
the first heart sound (S1), and the mitral regurgitant murmur 
has an earlier onset. With prompt squatting, venous return 
increases; the heart becomes larger; C moves toward S2, 
and the duration of the murmur shortens. (From JA Shaver, 
JJ Leonard, DF Leon, Examination of the Heart, Part IV, Aus-
cultation of the Heart. Dallas, American Heart Association, 
1990, p 13. Copyright, American Heart Association.)
 
CHAPTER 10
Approach to the Patient with a Heart Murmur
81
may also be heard best at the upper left sternal bor-
der in patients with idiopathic dilation of the pulmo-
nary artery; a pulmonary ejection sound is also present 
in these patients. TTE is indicated to evaluate a grade 
2 or 3 mid-systolic murmur when there are other signs 
of cardiac disease.
An isolated grade 1 or 2 mid-systolic murmur, heard 
in the absence of symptoms or signs of heart disease, is 
most often a benign finding for which no further evalu-
ation, including TTE, is necessary. The most common 
example of a murmur of this type in an older adult 
patient is the crescendo-decrescendo murmur of aor-
tic valve sclerosis, heard at the second right interspace 
(Fig.  10-2). Aortic sclerosis is defined as focal thick-
ening and calcification of the aortic valve to a degree 
that does not interfere with leaflet opening. The carotid 
upstrokes are normal, and electrocardiographic LVH is 
not present. A grade 1 or 2 mid-systolic murmur often 
can be heard at the left sternal border with pregnancy, 
hyperthyroidism, or anemia, physiologic states that are 
associated with accelerated blood flow. Still’s murmur 
refers to a benign grade 2, vibratory mid-systolic mur-
mur at the lower left sternal border in normal children 
and adolescents (Fig. 10-2).
Late systolic murmurs
A late systolic murmur that is best heard at the left ven-
tricular apex is usually due to MVP (Chap. 20). Often, 
this murmur is introduced by one or more nonejection 
clicks. The radiation of the murmur can help identify 
the specific mitral leaflet involved in the process of pro-
lapse or flail. The term flail refers to the movement made 
by an unsupported portion of the leaflet after loss of its 
chordal attachment(s). With posterior leaflet prolapse or 
flail, the resultant jet of MR is directed anteriorly and 
medially, as a result of which the murmur radiates to the 
base of the heart and masquerades as AS. Anterior leaf-
let prolapse or flail results in a posteriorly directed MR 
jet that radiates to the axilla or left infrascapular region. 
Leaflet flail is associated with a murmur of grade 3 or 
4 intensity that can be heard throughout the precor-
dium in thin-chested patients. The presence of an S3 or a 
short, rumbling mid-diastolic murmur due to enhanced 
flow signifies severe MR.
Bedside maneuvers that decrease left ventricular pre-
load, such as standing, will cause the click and murmur 
of MVP to move closer to the first heart sound, as leaf-
let prolapse occurs earlier in systole. Standing also causes 
the murmur to become louder and longer. With squat-
ting, left ventricular preload and afterload are increased 
abruptly, leading to an increase in left ventricular vol-
ume, and the click and murmur move away from the 
first heart sound as leaflet prolapse is delayed; the mur-
mur becomes softer and shorter in duration (Fig. 10-3). 
As noted earlier, these responses to standing and squat-
ting are directionally similar to those observed in 
patients with HOCM.
A late, apical systolic murmur indicative of MR may 
be heard transiently in the setting of acute myocardial 
ischemia; it is due to apical tethering and malcoaptation 
of the leaflets in response to structural and functional 
changes of the ventricle and mitral annulus. The inten-
sity of the murmur varies as a function of left ventricular 
afterload and will increase in the setting of hypertension. 
TTE is recommended for assessment of late systolic 
murmurs.
Pulmonic stenosis
Tetralogy of Fallot
S2
S1
S2
S1
S2
P2
P2
S1
S4
S2
A2
P2
S1
S2
A2
A2
A2
P2
A2
A2
S1
S2
S1
P.Ej
P.Ej
P.Ej
A.Ej
P.Ej = Pulmonary ejection (valvular)
A.Ej = Aortic ejection (root)
Figure 10-4 
Left. In valvular pulmonic stenosis with intact ventricular 
septum, right ventricular systolic ejection becomes progres-
sively longer, with increasing obstruction to flow. As a result, 
the murmur becomes longer and louder, enveloping the aor-
tic component of the second heart sound (A2). The pulmonic 
component (P2) occurs later, and splitting becomes wider but 
more difficult to hear because A2 is lost in the murmur and P2 
becomes progressively fainter and lower pitched. As the pul-
monic gradient increases, isometric contraction shortens until 
the pulmonic valve ejection sound fuses with the first heart 
sound (S1). In severe pulmonic stenosis with concentric hyper-
trophy and decreasing right ventricular compliance, a fourth 
heart sound appears. Right. In tetralogy of Fallot with increas-
ing obstruction at the pulmonic infundibular area, an increas-
ing amount of right ventricular blood is shunted across the 
silent ventricular septal defect and flow across the obstructed 
outflow tract decreases. Therefore, with increasing obstruc-
tion the murmur becomes shorter, earlier, and fainter. P2 is 
absent in severe tetralogy of Fallot. A large aortic root receives 
almost all cardiac output from both ventricular chambers, 
and the aorta dilates and is accompanied by a root ejection 
sound that does not vary with respiration. (From JA Shaver, 
JJ Leonard, DF Leon, Examination of the Heart, Part IV, 
Auscultation of the Heart. Dallas, American Heart Association, 
1990, p 45. Copyright, American Heart Association.)
SECTION II
Diagnosis of Cardiovascular Disorders
82
MR will result in further stretching of the annulus and 
more MR; thus, “MR begets MR.” Chronic severe 
MR results in enlargement and leftward displacement 
of the left ventricular apex beat and, in some patients, a 
diastolic filling complex, as described previously.
The holosystolic murmur of chronic TR is gener-
ally softer than that of MR, is loudest at the left lower 
sternal border, and usually increases in intensity with 
inspiration (Carvallo’s sign). Associated signs include c-v 
waves in the jugular venous pulse, an enlarged and pul-
satile liver, ascites, and peripheral edema. The abnormal 
jugular venous waveforms are the predominant find-
ing and are seen very often in the absence of an audible 
murmur despite Doppler echocardiographic verifica-
tion of TR. Causes of primary TR include myxoma-
tous disease (prolapse), endocarditis, rheumatic disease, 
carcinoid, Ebstein’s anomaly, and chordal detachment 
after the performance of right ventricular endomyo-
cardial biopsy. TR is more commonly a passive process 
that results secondarily from chronic elevations of pul-
monary artery and right ventricular pressures, leading to 
right ventricular enlargement, annular dilation, papillary 
muscle displacement, and failure of leaflet coaptation.
The holosystolic murmur of a VSD is loudest at 
the mid- to lower left sternal border (Fig. 10-2) and 
radiates widely. A thrill is present at the site of maxi-
mal intensity in the majority of patients. There is no 
change in the intensity of the murmur with inspiration. 
Holosystolic murmurs
(Figs. 10-1B and 10-5) Holosystolic murmurs begin 
with S1 and continue through systole to S2. They are 
usually indicative of chronic mitral or tricuspid valve 
regurgitation or a VSD and warrant TTE for fur-
ther characterization. The holosystolic murmur of 
chronic MR is best heard at the left ventricular apex and 
radiates to the axilla (Fig. 10-2); it is usually high pitched 
and plateau in configuration because of the wide dif-
ference between left ventricular and left atrial pressure 
throughout systole. In contrast to acute MR, left atrial 
compliance is normal or even increased in chronic MR. 
As a result, there is only a small increase in left atrial 
pressure for any increase in regurgitant volume.
Several conditions are associated with chronic MR 
and an apical holosystolic murmur, including rheu-
matic scarring of the leaflets, mitral annular calcification, 
postinfarction left ventricular remodeling, and severe left 
ventricular chamber enlargement. The circumference of 
the mitral annulus increases as the left ventricle enlarges 
and leads to failure of leaflet coaptation with central MR 
in patients with dilated cardiomyopathy (Chap. 21). 
The severity of the MR is worsened by any contribu-
tion from apical displacement of the papillary muscles 
and leaflet tethering (remodeling). Because the mitral 
annulus is contiguous with the left atrial endocardium, 
gradual enlargement of the left atrium from chronic 
Onset with S1 terminates at or beyond S2
Maximum intensity over 
apex
Radiation to axilla or 
base
A2 not heard over apex
Decreased intensity 
with amyl nitrate
Hyperdynamic left 
ventricular impulse
Wide splitting of S2
Sustained left 
ventricular impulse
Single S2 or narrow 
splitting of S2
Prominent left parasternal 
diastolic impulse
Normal brief left paraster-
nal systolic impulse
Normal P2
Rarely paradoxical S2
Sustained systolic left 
parasternal impulse
Narrow splitting of S2 
with marked increase 
in intensity of P2
Primary mitral 
regurgitation (e.g., 
rheumatic, ruptured 
chordae)
Secondary mitral 
regurgitation (dilated 
cardiomyopathy; papillary 
muscle dysfunction, or 
late stage of primary 
mitral regurgitation)
Primary
Secondary to 
pulmonary 
hypertension
Maximum intensity over left sternal 
border
Radiation to epigastrium and right 
sternal border
Increased intensity during inspiration
Prominent c-v wave with sharp y 
descent in jugular venous pulse
Maximum intensity over 
lower left third and 
fourth interspace
Widespread radiation, 
palpable thrill
Decreased intensity 
with amyl nitrate
No change in intensity 
during inspiration
Wide splitting of S2
Favors ventricular 
septal defect; 
often difficult to 
differentiate from 
mitral regurgitant 
murmur 
Mitral regurgitation
Tricuspid regurgitation
HOLOSYSTOLIC MURMUR DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Figure 10-5 
Differential diagnosis of a holosystolic murmur.
 
CHAPTER 10
Approach to the Patient with a Heart Murmur
83
syndrome with aneurysm formation, annulo-­aortic ecta-
sia, ankylosing spondylitis, and aortic dissection.
Chronic, severe AR also may produce a lower-
pitched mid- to late, grade 1 or 2 diastolic murmur at 
the apex (Austin Flint murmur), which is thought to 
reflect turbulence at the mitral inflow area from the 
admixture of regurgitant (aortic) and forward (mitral) 
blood flow (Fig. 10-1G). This lower-pitched, apical 
diastolic murmur can be distinguished from that due to 
MS by the absence of an opening snap and the response 
of the murmur to a vasodilator challenge. Lowering 
afterload with an agent such as amyl nitrite will decrease 
the duration and magnitude of the aortic–left ventricu-
lar diastolic pressure gradient, and thus, the Austin Flint 
murmur of severe AR will become shorter and softer. 
The intensity of the diastolic murmur of mitral stenosis 
(Fig. 10-6) may either remain constant or increase with 
afterload reduction because of the reflex increase in car-
diac output and mitral valve flow.
Although AS and AR may coexist, a grade 2 or 3 
crescendo-decrescendo mid-systolic murmur frequently 
is heard at the base of the heart in patients with iso-
lated, severe AR and is due to an increased volume and 
rate of systolic flow. Accurate bedside identification of 
coexistent AS can be difficult unless the carotid pulse 
examination is abnormal or the mid-systolic murmur is 
of grade 4 or greater intensity. In the absence of heart 
failure, chronic severe AR is accompanied by several 
peripheral signs of significant diastolic run-off, includ-
ing a wide pulse ­pressure, a “water-hammer” carotid 
upstroke (Corrigan’s pulse), and Quincke’s pulsations of 
The intensity of the murmur varies as a function of the 
anatomic size of the defect. Small, restrictive VSDs, as 
exemplified by the maladie de Roger, create a very loud 
murmur due to the significant and sustained systolic 
pressure gradient between the left and right ventricles. 
With large defects, the ventricular pressures tend to 
equalize, shunt flow is balanced, and a murmur is not 
appreciated. The distinction between post-MI ventricu-
lar septal rupture and MR has been reviewed previously.
Diastolic Heart Murmurs
Early diastolic murmurs
(Fig. 10-1E) Chronic AR results in a high-pitched, 
blowing, decrescendo, early to mid-diastolic mur-
mur that begins after the aortic component of S2 
(A2) and is best heard at the second right interspace 
(Fig. 10-6). The murmur may be soft and difficult to 
hear unless auscultation is performed with the patient 
leaning forward at end expiration. This maneuver 
brings the aortic root closer to the anterior chest wall. 
­Radiation of the murmur may provide a clue to the 
cause of the AR. With primary valve disease, such as that 
due to congenital bicuspid disease, prolapse, or endo-
carditis, the diastolic murmur tends to radiate along the 
left sternal border, where it is often louder than appreci-
ated in the second right interspace. When AR is caused 
by aortic root disease, the diastolic murmur may radi-
ate along the right sternal border. Diseases of the aortic 
root cause dilation or distortion of the aortic annulus 
and failure of leaflet coaptation. Causes include Marfan 
S1
S1
S1
S1
Diastolic Filling Murmur (Rumble)
Mitral Stenosis
S2
A2
A2
P2
P2
A2 P2
P2
A2
S2
S2
S2
Mild
Severe
ECG
O.S.
O.S.
O.S.
O.S.
Figure 10-6 
Diastolic filling murmur (rumble) in mitral stenosis. In mild 
mitral stenosis, the diastolic gradient across the valve is lim-
ited to the phases of rapid ventricular filling in early diastole 
and presystole. The rumble may occur during either or both 
periods. As the stenotic process becomes severe, a large 
pressure gradient exists across the valve during the entire 
diastolic filling period, and the rumble persists throughout 
diastole. As the left atrial pressure becomes greater, the 
interval between A2 (or P2) and the opening snap (O.S.) short-
ens. In severe mitral stenosis, secondary pulmonary hyper-
tension develops and results in a loud P2 and the splitting 
interval usually narrows. ECG, electrocardiogram. (From JA 
Shaver, JJ Leonard, DF Leon, Examination of the Heart, Part IV, 
Auscultation of the Heart. Dallas, American Heart Associa-
tion, 1990, p 55. Copyright, American Heart Association.)
SECTION II
Diagnosis of Cardiovascular Disorders
84
the nail beds. The diastolic murmur of acute, severe AR is 
notably shorter in duration and lower pitched than the 
murmur of chronic AR. It can be very difficult to appre-
ciate in the presence of a rapid heart rate. These attributes 
reflect the abrupt rate of rise of diastolic pressure within 
the unprepared and noncompliant left ventricle and the 
correspondingly rapid decline in the aortic–left ventricular 
diastolic pressure gradient. Left ventricular diastolic pres-
sure may increase sufficiently to result in premature closure 
of the mitral valve and a soft first heart sound. Peripheral 
signs of significant diastolic run-off are not present.
Pulmonic regurgitation (PR) results in a decrescendo, 
early to mid-diastolic murmur (Graham Steell murmur) 
that begins after the pulmonic component of S2 (P2), 
is best heard at the second left interspace, and radiates 
along the left sternal border. The intensity of the murmur 
may increase with inspiration. PR is most commonly 
due to dilation of the valve annulus from chronic eleva-
tion of the pulmonary artery pressure. Signs of pulmo-
nary hypertension, including a right ventricular lift and 
a loud single or narrowly split S2, are present. These 
features also help distinguish PR from AR as the cause 
of a decrescendo diastolic murmur heard along the left 
sternal border. PR in the absence of pulmonary hyper-
tension can occur with endocarditis or a congenitally 
deformed valve. It is usually present after repair of tetral-
ogy of Fallot in childhood. When pulmonary hyperten-
sion is not present, the diastolic murmur is softer and 
lower pitched than the classic Graham Steell murmur, 
and the severity of the PR can be difficult to appreciate.
TTE is indicated for the further evaluation of a 
patient with an early to mid-diastolic murmur. Longi-
tudinal assessment of the severity of the valve lesion and 
ventricular size and systolic function help guide a poten-
tial decision for surgical management. TTE also can 
­provide anatomic information regarding the root and 
proximal ascending aorta, although computed tomo-
graphic or magnetic resonance angiography may be 
indicated for more precise characterization (Chap. 12).
Mid-diastolic murmurs
(Figs. 10-1G and 10-1H) Mid-diastolic murmurs result 
from obstruction and/or augmented flow at the level 
of the mitral or tricuspid valve. Rheumatic fever is the 
most common cause of MS (Fig. 10-6). In younger 
patients with pliable valves, S1 is loud and the mur-
mur begins after an opening snap, which is a high-
pitched sound that occurs shortly after S2. The interval 
between the pulmonic component of the second heart 
sound (P2) and the opening snap is inversely related to 
the magnitude of the left atrial–left ventricular pres-
sure gradient. The murmur of MS is low pitched and 
thus is best heard with the bell of the stethoscope. It is 
loudest at the left ventricular apex and often is appreci-
ated only when the patient is turned in the left lateral 
decubitus position. It is usually of grade 1 or 2 intensity 
but may be absent when the cardiac output is severely 
reduced despite significant obstruction. The intensity of 
the murmur increases during maneuvers that increase 
cardiac output and mitral valve flow, such as exercise. 
The duration of the murmur reflects the length of time 
over which left atrial pressure exceeds left ventricu-
lar diastolic pressure. An increase in the intensity of the 
murmur just before S1, a phenomenon known as presys-
tolic accentuation (Figs. 10-1A and 10-6), occurs in patients 
in sinus rhythm and is due to a late increase in transmi-
tral flow with atrial contraction. Presystolic accentuation 
does not occur in patients with atrial fibrillation.
The mid-diastolic murmur associated with tricus-
pid stenosis is best heard at the lower left sternal border 
and increases in intensity with inspiration. A prolonged 
y descent may be visible in the jugular venous wave-
form. This murmur is very difficult to hear and often is 
obscured by left-sided acoustical events.
There are several other causes of mid-diastolic mur-
murs. Large left atrial myxomas may prolapse across the 
mitral valve and cause variable degrees of obstruction to 
left ventricular inflow (Chap. 23). The murmur associ-
ated with an atrial myxoma may change in duration and 
intensity with changes in body position. An opening 
snap is not present, and there is no presystolic accen-
tuation. Augmented mitral diastolic flow can occur with 
isolated severe MR or with a large left-to-right shunt at 
the ventricular or great vessel level and produce a soft, 
rapid filling sound (S3) followed by a short, low-pitched 
mid-diastolic apical murmur. The Austin Flint murmur 
of severe, chronic AR has already been described.
A short, mid-diastolic murmur is rarely heard dur-
ing an episode of acute rheumatic fever (Carey-Coombs 
murmur) and probably is due to flow through an edem-
atous mitral valve. An opening snap is not present in 
the acute phase, and the murmur dissipates with reso-
lution of the acute attack. Complete heart block with 
dyssynchronous atrial and ventricular activation may be 
associated with intermittent mid- to late diastolic mur-
murs if atrial contraction occurs when the mitral valve 
is partially closed. Mid-diastolic murmurs indicative of 
increased tricuspid valve flow can occur with severe, 
isolated TR and with large ASDs and significant left-
to-right shunting. Other signs of an ASD are present 
(Chap. 19), including fixed splitting of S2 and a mid-
systolic murmur at the mid- to upper left sternal bor-
der. TTE is indicated for evaluation of a patient with a 
mid- to late diastolic murmur. Findings specific to the 
diseases discussed earlier will help guide management.
Continuous Murmurs
(Figs. 10-1H and 10-7) Continuous murmurs begin in 
systole, peak near the second heart sound, and continue 
into all or part of diastole. Their presence throughout 
 
CHAPTER 10
Approach to the Patient with a Heart Murmur
85
Dynamic Auscultation
(Tables 10-2 and 9-1) Careful attention to the behavior 
of heart murmurs during simple maneuvers that alter 
cardiac hemodynamics can provide important clues to 
their cause and significance.
Respiration
Auscultation should be performed during quiet respira-
tion or with a modest increase in inspiratory effort, as 
more forceful movement of the chest tends to obscure 
the heart sounds. Left-sided murmurs may be best heard 
at end expiration, when lung volumes are minimized 
and the heart and great vessels are brought closer to the 
chest wall. This phenomenon is characteristic of the 
murmur of AR. Murmurs of right-sided origin, such as 
tricuspid or pulmonic regurgitation, increase in intensity 
during inspiration. The intensity of left-sided murmurs 
either remains constant or decreases with inspiration.
Bedside assessment also should evaluate the behav-
ior of S2 with respiration and the dynamic relationship 
the cardiac cycle implies a pressure gradient between 
two chambers or vessels during both systole and dias-
tole. The continuous murmur associated with a patent 
ductus arteriosus is best heard at the upper left sternal 
border. Large, uncorrected shunts may lead to pulmo-
nary hypertension, attenuation or obliteration of the 
diastolic component of the murmur, reversal of shunt 
flow, and differential cyanosis of the lower extremities. 
A ruptured sinus of Valsalva aneurysm creates a contin-
uous murmur of abrupt onset at the upper right ster-
nal border. Rupture typically occurs into a right heart 
chamber, and the murmur is indicative of a continu-
ous pressure difference between the aorta and either the 
right ventricle or the right atrium. A continuous mur-
mur also may be audible along the left sternal border 
with a coronary arteriovenous fistula and at the site of 
an arteriovenous fistula used for hemodialysis access. 
Enhanced flow through enlarged intercostal collateral 
arteries in patients with aortic coarctation may produce 
a continuous murmur along the course of one or more 
ribs. A cervical bruit with both systolic and diastolic 
components (a to-fro murmur, Fig. 10-7) usually indi-
cates a high-grade carotid artery stenosis.
Not all continuous murmurs are pathologic. A con-
tinuous venous hum can be heard in healthy children 
and young adults, especially during pregnancy; it is best 
appreciated in the right supraclavicular fossa and can be 
obliterated by pressure over the right internal jugular 
vein or by having the patient turn his or her head toward 
the examiner. The continuous mammary souffle of pre­
gnancy is created by enhanced arterial flow through 
engorged breasts and usually appears during the late third 
trimester or early puerperium. The murmur is louder in 
systole. Firm pressure with the diaphragm of the stetho-
scope can eliminate the diastolic portion of the murmur.
Table 10-2
Dynamic Auscultation: Bedside Maneuvers 
That Can Be Used to Change the Intensity of 
Cardiac Murmurs (See Text)
1. Respiration
2. Isometric exercise (hand grip)
3. Transient arterial occlusion
4. Pharmacologic manipulation of preload and/or afterload
5. Valsalva maneuver
6. Rapid standing/squatting
7. Passive leg raising
8. Post-premature beat
S1
S1
S1
S1
Continuous Murmur vs. To-Fro Murmur
S2
S2
S2
S2
Continuous murmur
To-fro murmur
Figure 10-7 
Comparison of the continuous murmur and the to-fro 
murmur. During abnormal communication between high-
pressure and low-pressure systems, a large pressure gradient 
exists throughout the cardiac cycle, producing a continu-
ous murmur. A classic example is patent ductus arteriosus. 
At times, this type of murmur can be confused with a to-fro 
murmur, which is a combination of systolic ejection murmur 
and a murmur of semilunar valve incompetence. A classic 
example of a to-fro murmur is aortic stenosis and regurgita-
tion. A continuous murmur crescendos to around the second 
heart sound (S2), whereas a to-fro murmur has two compo-
nents. The mid-systolic ejection component decrescen-
dos and disappears as it approaches S2. (From JA Shaver, 
JJ Leonard, DF Leon, Examination of the Heart, Part IV, 
Auscultation of the Heart. Dallas, American Heart Association, 
1990, p 55. Copyright, American Heart Association.)
SECTION II
Diagnosis of Cardiovascular Disorders
86
between 
the 
aortic 
and 
pulmonic 
components 
(Fig.  10-8). Reversed splitting can be a feature of 
severe AS, HOCM, left bundle branch block, right 
ventricular apical pacing, or acute myocardial ischemia. 
Fixed splitting of S2 in the presence of a grade 2 or 3 
mid-systolic murmur at the mid- or upper left sternal 
border indicates an ASD. Physiologic but wide split-
ting during the respiratory cycle implies either prema-
ture aortic valve closure, as can occur with severe MR, 
or delayed pulmonic valve closure due to PS or right 
bundle branch block.
Alterations of systemic vascular resistance
Murmurs can change characteristics after maneuvers 
that alter systemic vascular resistance and left ventricu-
lar afterload. The systolic murmurs of MR and VSD 
S1
Normal Physiologic Splitting
Audible Expiratory Splitting
Expiration
Inspiration
S2
S1
S2
A2
A2
A2
A2
A2
A2
P2
P2
P2
P2
P2
P2
S1
S2
S1
S2
S1
S2
S1
S2
S1
S2
S1
S2
Wide physiologic
splitting
Narrow physiologic
splitting (↑P2)
Reversed splitting
Figure 10-8 
Top. Normal physiologic splitting. During expiration, the aor-
tic (A2) and pulmonic (P2) components of the second heart 
sound are separated by <30 ms and are appreciated as a 
single sound. During inspiration, the splitting interval widens, 
and A2 and P2 are clearly separated into two distinct sounds. 
Bottom. Audible expiratory splitting. Wide physiologic split-
ting is caused by a delay in P2. Reversed splitting is caused 
by a delay in A2, resulting in paradoxical movement; i.e., 
with inspiration P2 moves toward A2, and the splitting inter-
val narrows. Narrow physiologic splitting occurs in pulmonary 
hypertension, and both A2 and P2 are heard during expiration 
at a narrow splitting interval because of the increased inten-
sity and high-frequency composition of P2. (From JA Shaver, 
JJ Leonard, DF Leon, Examination of the Heart, Part IV, 
Auscultation of the Heart. Dallas, American Heart Association, 
1990, p 17. Copyright, American Heart Association.)
become louder during sustained hand grip, simultaneous 
inflation of blood pressure cuffs on both upper extremi-
ties to pressures 20–40 mmHg above systolic pressure 
for 20 s, or infusion of a vasopressor agent. The mur-
murs associated with AS or HOCM will become softer 
or remain unchanged with these maneuvers. The dia-
stolic murmur of AR becomes louder in response to 
interventions that raise systemic vascular resistance.
Opposite changes in systolic and diastolic murmurs 
may occur with the use of pharmacologic agents that 
lower systemic vascular resistance. Inhaled amyl nitrite 
is now rarely used for this purpose but can help distin-
guish the murmur of AS or HOCM from that of either 
MR or VSD, if necessary. The former two murmurs 
increase in intensity, whereas the latter two become 
softer after exposure to amyl nitrite. As noted previ-
ously, the Austin Flint murmur of severe AR becomes 
softer, but the mid-diastolic rumble of MS becomes 
louder, in response to the abrupt lowering of systemic 
vascular resistance with amyl nitrite.
Changes in venous return
The Valsalva maneuver results in an increase in intratho-
racic pressure, followed by a decrease in venous return, 
ventricular filling, and cardiac output. The majority of 
murmurs decrease in intensity during the strain phase 
of the maneuver. Two notable exceptions are the mur-
murs associated with MVP and obstructive HOCM, 
both of which become louder during the Valsalva 
maneuver. The murmur of MVP may also become lon-
ger as leaflet prolapse occurs earlier in systole at smaller 
ventricular volumes. These murmurs behave in a simi-
lar and parallel fashion with standing. Both the click and 
the murmur of MVP move closer in timing to S1 on 
rapid standing from a squatting position (Fig. 10-3). The 
increase in the intensity of the murmur of HOCM is 
predicated on the augmentation of the dynamic left ven-
tricular outflow tract gradient that occurs with reduced 
ventricular filling. Squatting results in abrupt increases in 
both venous return (preload) and left ventricular after-
load that increases ventricular volume, changes that pre-
dictably cause a decrease in the intensity and duration 
of the murmurs associated with MVP and HOCM; the 
click and murmur of MVP move away from S1 with 
squatting. Passive leg raising can be used to increase 
venous return in patients who are unable to squat and 
stand. This maneuver may lead to a decrease in the 
intensity of the murmur associated with HOCM but has 
less effect in patients with MVP.
Post-premature ventricular contraction
A change in the intensity of a systolic murmur in the first 
beat after a premature beat, or in the beat after a long 
cycle length in patients with atrial fibrillation, can help 
 
CHAPTER 10
Approach to the Patient with a Heart Murmur
87
By contrast, an isolated grade 1 or 2 mid-systolic mur-
mur at the left sternal border in a healthy, active, and 
asymptomatic young adult is most likely a benign find-
ing for which no further evaluation is indicated. The 
context in which the murmur is appreciated often dic-
tates the need for further testing.
Echocardiography
(See Fig. 10-9, Chaps. 9 and 12) Echocardiography with 
color flow and spectral Doppler is a valuable tool for the 
assessment of cardiac murmurs. Information regarding 
valve structure and function, chamber size, wall thick-
ness, ventricular function, estimated pulmonary artery 
pressures, intracardiac shunt flow, pulmonary and hepatic 
vein flow, and aortic flow can be ascertained readily. It 
is important to note that Doppler signals of trace or mild 
valvular regurgitation of no clinical consequence can be 
detected with structurally normal tricuspid, pulmonic, 
and mitral valves. Such signals are not likely to generate 
enough turbulence to create an audible murmur.
Echocardiography is indicated for the evaluation 
of patients with early, late, or holosystolic murmurs 
and patients with grade 3 or louder mid-systolic mur-
murs. Patients with grade 1 or 2 mid-systolic murmurs 
but other symptoms or signs of cardiovascular disease, 
including those from ECG or chest x-ray, should also 
undergo echocardiography. Echocardiography is indi-
cated for the evaluation of any patient with a diastolic 
murmur and for patients with continuous mur-
murs not due to a venous hum or mammary souffle. 
distinguish AS from MR, particularly in an older patient 
in whom the murmur of AS is well transmitted to the 
apex. Systolic murmurs due to left ventricular outflow 
obstruction, including that due to AS, increase in inten-
sity in the beat after a premature beat because of the 
combined effects of enhanced left ventricular filling and 
postextrasystolic potentiation of contractile function. 
Forward flow accelerates, causing an increase in the gra-
dient and a louder murmur. The intensity of the mur-
mur of MR does not change in the post-premature beat 
as there is relatively little further increase in mitral valve 
flow or change in the left ventricular–left atrial gradient.
The Clinical Context
Additional clues to the etiology and importance of a 
heart murmur can be gleaned from the history and 
other physical examination findings. Symptoms sugges-
tive of cardiovascular, neurologic, or pulmonary disease 
help focus the differential diagnosis, as do findings rele­
vant to the jugular venous pressure and waveforms, the 
arterial pulses, other heart sounds, the lungs, the abdo-
men, the skin, and the extremities. In many instances, 
laboratory studies, an ECG, and/or a chest x-ray may 
have been obtained earlier and may contain valuable 
information. A patient with suspected infective endo-
carditis, for example, may have a murmur in the setting 
of fever, chills, anorexia, fatigue, dyspnea, splenomeg-
aly, petechiae, and positive blood cultures. A new sys-
tolic murmur in a patient with a marked fall in blood 
pressure after a recent MI suggests myocardial rupture. 
Cardiac murmur
Systolic murmur
Diastolic murmur
Continuous murmur
Midsystolic, grade 
2 or less
• Early systolic
• Midsystolic, grade 
3 or more
• Late systolic
• Holosystolic
Asymptomatic and 
no associated 
findings
Symptomatic or 
other signs of 
cardiac disease*
TEE, cardiac MR, 
catheterization if 
appropriate
• Venous hum
• Mammary souffle
TTE
No further workup
Figure 10-9 
Strategy for evaluating heart murmurs. *If an elec-
trocardiogram or chest x-ray has been obtained and is 
abnormal, echocardiography is indicated. TTE, transthoracic 
echocardiography; TEE, transesophageal echocardiography; 
MR, magnetic resonance. (Adapted from RO Bonow et al: 
J Am Coll Cardiol 32:1486, 1998.)
SECTION II
Diagnosis of Cardiovascular Disorders
88
Echocardiography also should be considered when 
there is a clinical need to verify normal cardiac struc-
ture and function in a patient whose symptoms and 
signs are probably noncardiac in origin. The perfor-
mance of serial echocardiography to follow the course 
of asymptomatic individuals with valvular heart disease 
is a central feature of their longitudinal assessment and 
provides valuable information that may have an impact 
on decisions regarding the timing of surgery. Routine 
echocardiography is not recommended for asymptom-
atic patients with a grade 1 or 2 mid-systolic murmur 
without other signs of heart disease. For this category of 
patients, referral to a cardiovascular specialist should be 
considered if there is doubt about the significance of the 
murmur after the initial examination.
The selective use of echocardiography outlined earlier 
has not been subjected to rigorous analysis of its cost-
effectiveness. At least one study has suggested that ini-
tial referral of pediatric patients with heart murmurs 
to a specialist results in modest cost savings. For some 
clinicians, handheld or miniaturized cardiac ultrasound 
devices have replaced the stethoscope. Although several 
reports attest to the improved sensitivity of such devices 
for the detection of valvular heart disease, accuracy is 
highly operator-dependent, and incremental cost con-
siderations have not been addressed adequately. The use 
of electronic or digital stethoscopes with spectral dis-
play capabilities has also been proposed as a method to 
improve the characterization of heart murmurs and the 
mentored teaching of cardiac auscultation.
Other Cardiac Testing
(Chap. 12, Fig. 10-9) In relatively few patients, clinical 
assessment and TTE do not adequately characterize the 
origin and significance of a heart murmur. Transesopha-
geal echocardiography (TEE) can be considered for fur-
ther evaluation, especially when the TTE windows are 
limited by body size, chest configuration, or intratho-
racic pathology. TEE offers enhanced sensitivity for the 
detection of a wide range of structural cardiac disorders. 
Electrocardiographically gated cardiac magnetic reso-
nance (CMR) imaging, although limited in its ability to 
display valvular morphology, can provide quantitative 
information regarding valvular function, stenosis sever-
ity, regurgitant fraction, regurgitant volume, shunt flow, 
chamber and great vessel size, ventricular function, and 
myocardial perfusion. CMR has greater capability than 
cardiac computed tomography (CCT) in this regard and 
has largely supplanted the need for cardiac catheteriza-
tion and invasive hemodynamic assessment when there 
is a discrepancy between the clinical and echocardio-
graphic findings. Invasive coronary angiography is per-
formed routinely in most adult patients before valve 
surgery, especially when there is a suspicion of coro-
nary artery disease predicated on symptoms, risk factors, 
and/or age. The use of computed tomography coronary 
angiography (CCTA) to exclude coronary artery disease 
in young patients with a low pretest probability of dis-
ease before valve surgery is under active investigation.
Integrated Approach
The accurate identification of a heart murmur begins 
with a systematic approach to cardiac auscultation. 
Characterization of its major attributes, as reviewed 
earlier, allows the examiner to construct a preliminary 
differential diagnosis, which is then refined by integra-
tion of information available from the history, associ-
ated cardiac findings, the general physical examination, 
and the clinical context. The need for and urgency of 
further testing follow sequentially. Correlation of the 
findings on auscultation with the noninvasive data pro-
vides an educational feedback loop and an opportunity 
for improving physical examination skills. Cost con-
straints mandate that noninvasive imaging be justified 
on the basis of its incremental contribution to diagnosis, 
treatment, and outcome. Additional study is required 
to assess the cost-effective application of newer imaging 
technology in patients with heart murmurs.
 Ary L. Goldberger 
89
 An electrocardiogram (ECG or EKG) is a graphic 
recording of electric potentials generated by the heart. 
The signals are detected by means of metal electrodes 
attached to the extremities and chest wall and then 
are amplifi ed and recorded by the electrocardiograph. 
ECG  leads actually display the instantaneous  differences in 
potential between the electrodes. 
 The clinical utility of the ECG derives from its 
immediate availability as a noninvasive, inexpensive, and 
highly versatile test. In addition to its use in detecting 
arrhythmias, conduction disturbances, and myocardial 
ischemia, electrocardiography may reveal other fi ndings 
related to life-threatening metabolic disturbances (e.g., 
hyperkalemia) or increased susceptibility to sudden car-
diac death (e.g., QT prolongation syndromes). 
 ELECtroPHysIoLoGy 
 (See also  Chaps. 15 and  16 ) Depolarization of the heart 
is the initiating event for cardiac contraction. The 
electric currents that spread through the heart are pro-
duced by three components: cardiac pacemaker cells, 
specialized conduction tissue, and the heart muscle 
itself. The ECG, however, records only the depolar-
ization (stimulation) and repolarization (recovery) 
potentials generated by the atrial and ventricular 
myocardium. 
 The depolarization stimulus for the normal heart-
beat originates in the  sinoatrial (SA)  node  ( Fig. 11-1 ) , 
or  sinus node , a collection of  pacemaker cells . These cells 
fi re spontaneously; that is, they exhibit  automaticity . The 
fi rst phase of cardiac electrical activation is the spread 
of the depolarization wave through the right and left 
atria, followed by atrial contraction. Next, the impulse 
stimulates pacemaker and specialized conduction tis-
sues in the atrioventricular (AV) nodal and His-bundle 
areas; together, these two regions constitute the AV 
junction. The bundle of His bifurcates into two main 
branches, the right and left bundles, which rapidly 
 ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY 
 ChaPter 11 
transmit depolarization wave fronts to the right and left 
ventricular myocardium by way of Purkinje fi bers. The 
main left bundle bifurcates into two primary subdivi-
sions: a left anterior fascicle and a left posterior fascicle. 
The depolarization wave fronts then spread through the 
ventricular wall, from endocardium to epicardium, trig-
gering ventricular contraction. 
 Since the cardiac depolarization and repolarization 
waves have direction and magnitude, they can be rep-
resented by vectors. Vector analysis illustrates a central 
concept of electrocardiography: The ECG records the 
complex spatial and temporal summation of electrical 
potentials from multiple myocardial fi bers conducted 
to the surface of the body. This principle accounts 
for inherent limitations in both ECG  sensitivity (activ-
ity from certain cardiac regions may be canceled out 
or may be too weak to be recorded) and  speciﬁ city (the 
same vectorial sum can result from either a selective 
gain or a loss of forces in opposite directions). 
Ventricular
myocardium
Purkinje
fibers
Left bundle
branch
Ventricular septum
Right bundle branch
His bundle
AV junction
Sinoatrial (SA)
node
AV node
RA
LA
LV
RV
 Figure 11-1  
schematic of the cardiac conduction system . 
SECTION II
Diagnosis of Cardiovascular Disorders
90
There are four major ECG intervals: R-R, PR, QRS, 
and QT (Fig. 11-2). The heart rate (beats per minute) 
can be computed readily from the interbeat (R-R) inter-
val by dividing the number of large (0.20 s) time units 
between consecutive R waves into 300 or the number 
of small (0.04 s) units into 1500. The PR interval mea-
sures the time (normally 120–200 ms) between atrial and 
ventricular depolarization, which includes the physi-
ologic delay imposed by stimulation of cells in the AV 
junction area. The QRS interval (normally 100–110 ms 
or less) reflects the duration of ventricular depolarization. 
The QT interval includes both ventricular depolariza-
tion and repolarization times and varies inversely with 
the heart rate. A rate-related (“corrected”) QT interval, 
QTc, can be calculated as QT/√R-R and normally is 
≤0.44 s. (Some references give QTc upper normal limits 
as 0.43 s in men and 0.45 s in women. Also, a number 
of different formulas have been proposed, without con-
sensus, for calculating the QTc.)
The QRS complex is subdivided into specific deflec-
tions or waves. If the initial QRS deflection in a par-
ticular lead is negative, it is termed a Q wave; the first 
positive deflection is termed an R wave. A negative 
deflection after an R wave is an S wave. Subsequent 
positive or negative waves are labeled R′ and S′, respec-
tively. Lowercase letters (qrs) are used for waves of 
relatively small amplitude. An entirely negative QRS 
complex is termed a QS wave.
ECG Leads
The 12 conventional ECG leads record the differ-
ence in potential between electrodes placed on the 
surface of the body. These leads are divided into two 
groups: six limb (extremity) leads and six chest (precor-
dial) leads. The limb leads record potentials transmitted 
onto the frontal plane (Fig. 11-3A), and the chest leads 
record potentials transmitted onto the horizontal plane 
(Fig. 11-3B).
The spatial orientation and polarity of the six fron-
tal plane leads is represented on the hexaxial diagram 
(Fig. 11-4). The six chest leads (Fig. 11-5) are uni-
polar recordings obtained by electrodes in the following 
positions: lead V1, fourth intercostal space, just to the 
right of the sternum; lead V2, fourth intercostal space, 
just to the left of the sternum; lead V3, midway between 
V2 and V4; lead V4, midclavicular line, fifth intercostal 
space; lead V5, anterior axillary line, same level as V4; 
and lead V6, midaxillary line, same level as V4 and V5.
Together, the frontal and horizontal plane electrodes 
provide a three-dimensional representation of cardiac 
electrical activity. Each lead can be likened to a different 
video camera angle “looking” at the same events—atrial 
and ventricular depolarization and repolarization—from 
different spatial orientations. The conventional 12-lead 
ECG can be supplemented with additional leads in 
ECG Waveforms and Intervals
The ECG waveforms are labeled alphabetically, begin-
ning with the P wave, which represents atrial depo-
larization (Fig. 11-2). The QRS complex represents 
ventricular depolarization, and the ST-T-U complex 
(ST segment, T wave, and U wave) represents ventricu-
lar repolarization. The J point is the junction between 
the end of the QRS complex and the beginning of the 
ST segment. Atrial repolarization is usually too low in 
amplitude to be detected, but it may become apparent in 
conditions such as acute pericarditis and atrial infarction.
The QRS-T waveforms of the surface ECG cor-
respond in a general way with the different phases of 
simultaneously obtained ventricular action potentials, the 
intracellular recordings from single myocardial fibers 
(Chap. 15). The rapid upstroke (phase 0) of the action 
potential corresponds to the onset of QRS. The plateau 
(phase 2) corresponds to the isoelectric ST segment, 
and active repolarization (phase 3) corresponds to the 
inscription of the T wave. Factors that decrease the 
slope of phase 0 by impairing the influx of Na+ (e.g., 
hyperkalemia and drugs such as flecainide) tend to 
increase QRS duration. Conditions that prolong phase 2 
(amiodarone, hypocalcemia) increase the QT inter-
val. In contrast, shortening of ventricular repolarization 
(phase 2), such as by digitalis administration or hypercal-
cemia, abbreviates the ST segment.
The electrocardiogram ordinarily is recorded on 
special graph paper that is divided into 1-mm2 grid-
like boxes. Since the ECG paper speed is generally 
25 mm/s, the smallest (1 mm) horizontal divisions cor-
respond to 0.04 (40 ms), with heavier lines at intervals 
of 0.20 s (200 ms). Vertically, the ECG graph measures 
the amplitude of a specific wave or deflection (1 mV = 
10 mm with standard calibration; the voltage criteria for 
hypertrophy mentioned below are given in millimeters). 
QRS
P
ST
T
U
PR interval
J
QRS interval
QT interval
Figure 11-2 
Basic ECG waveforms and intervals. Not shown is the R-R 
interval, the time between consecutive QRS complexes.
 
CHAPTER 11
Electrocardiography
91
of the depolarization vector is at right angles to a par-
ticular lead axis, a biphasic (equally positive and negative) 
deflection will be recorded.
Genesis of the Normal ECG
P Wave
The normal atrial depolarization vector is oriented 
downward and toward the subject’s left, reflecting the 
spread of depolarization from the sinus node to the right 
and then the left atrial myocardium. Since this vector 
points toward the positive pole of lead II and toward the 
negative pole of lead aVR, the normal P wave will be 
positive in lead II and negative in lead aVR. By con-
trast, activation of the atria from an ectopic pacemaker 
in the lower part of either atrium or in the AV junction 
region may produce retrograde P waves (negative in lead 
II, positive in lead aVR). The normal P wave in lead V1 
special circumstances. For example, right precordial 
leads V3R, V4R, etc., are useful in detecting evidence of 
acute right ventricular ischemia. Bedside monitors and 
ambulatory ECG (Holter) recordings usually employ 
only one or two modified leads. Intracardiac electrocar-
diography and electrophysiologic testing are discussed in 
Chaps. 15 and 16.
The ECG leads are configured so that a positive 
(upright) deflection is recorded in a lead if a wave of 
depolarization spreads toward the positive pole of that 
lead, and a negative deflection is recorded if the wave 
spreads toward the negative pole. If the mean orientation 
V1
V3R
V4R
V2
V3
V4
V5
V6
Figure 11-5 
The horizontal plane (chest or precordial) leads are 
obtained with electrodes in the locations shown.
A
Superior
Inferior
Right
Left
+
–
–
–
–
–
–
+
+
+
+
+
aVR
aVL
II
III
aVF
B
Posterior
Right
Left
+
+
+
+
+
+
V6
V5
V4
V3
V2
V1
Anterior
–
–––
–
–
I
Figure 11-3 
The six frontal plane (A) and six horizontal plane (B) leads provide a three-dimensional representation of cardiac electrical activity.
E
xtr
e
me
axi
s d
ev
ia
ti
o
n
No
rm
al
ax
is
R
ig
ht
ax
is
de
vi
at
io
n
–90°
–aVF
–60°
–III
–30°
+aVL
0°
+I
+30°
–aVR
+60°
+II
+90°
+aVF
+120°
+III
+150°
– aVL
180°
–I
–150°
+aVR
–120°
–II
Le
ft
ax
is
d
ev
ia
ti
on
Figure 11-4 
The frontal plane (limb or extremity) leads are represented 
on a hexaxial diagram. Each ECG lead has a specific spatial 
orientation and polarity. The positive pole of each lead axis 
(solid line) and the negative pole (hatched line) are desig-
nated by their angular position relative to the positive pole 
of lead I (0°). The mean electrical axis of the QRS complex is 
measured with respect to this display.
SECTION II
Diagnosis of Cardiovascular Disorders
92
may be biphasic with a positive component reflecting 
right atrial depolarization, followed by a small (<1 mm2) 
negative component reflecting left atrial depolarization.
QRS Complex
Normal ventricular depolarization proceeds as a rapid, 
continuous spread of activation wave fronts. This com-
plex process can be divided into two major sequential 
phases, and each phase can be represented by a mean 
vector (Fig. 11-6). The first phase is depolarization of 
the interventricular septum from the left to the right and 
anteriorly (vector 1). The second results from the simul-
taneous depolarization of the right and left ventricles; it 
normally is dominated by the more massive left ventricle, 
so that vector 2 points leftward and posteriorly. There-
fore, a right precordial lead (V1) will record this biphasic 
depolarization process with a small positive deflection 
(septal r wave) followed by a larger negative deflection 
(S wave). A left precordial lead, e.g., V6, will record the 
same sequence with a small negative deflection (septal 
q wave) followed by a relatively tall positive deflection 
(R wave). Intermediate leads show a relative increase in 
R-wave amplitude (normal R-wave progression) and a 
decrease in S-wave amplitude progressing across the chest 
from right to left. The precordial lead where the R and S 
waves are of approximately equal amplitude is referred to 
as the transition zone (usually V3 or V4) (Fig. 11-7).
The QRS pattern in the extremity leads may vary 
considerably from one normal subject to another 
depending on the electrical axis of the QRS, which 
describes the mean orientation of the QRS vector 
with reference to the six frontal plane leads. Normally, 
the QRS axis ranges from –30° to +100° (Fig. 11-4). 
An axis more negative than –30° is referred to as left 
axis deviation, and an axis more positive than +100° is 
referred to as right axis deviation. Left axis deviation may 
occur as a normal variant but is more commonly asso-
ciated with left ventricular hypertrophy, a block in the 
anterior fascicle of the left bundle system (left anterior 
fascicular block or hemiblock), or inferior myocardial 
infarction. Right axis deviation also may occur as a nor-
mal variant (particularly in children and young adults), 
as a spurious finding due to reversal of the left and right 
arm electrodes, or in conditions such as right ventricular 
overload (acute or chronic), infarction of the lateral wall 
of the left ventricle, dextrocardia, left pneumothorax, 
and left posterior fascicular block.
T Wave and U Wave
Normally, the mean T-wave vector is oriented roughly 
concordant with the mean QRS vector (within about 
45° in the frontal plane). Since depolarization and repo-
larization are electrically opposite processes, this nor-
mal QRS–T-wave vector concordance indicates that 
repolarization normally must proceed in the reverse 
direction from depolarization (i.e., from ventricu-
lar epicardium to endocardium). The normal U wave 
is a small, rounded deflection (≤1 mm) that follows 
the T wave and usually has the same polarity as the 
T wave. An abnormal increase in U-wave amplitude is 
most commonly due to drugs (e.g., dofetilide, amioda-
rone, sotalol, quinidine, procainamide, disopyramide) or 
to hypokalemia. Very prominent U waves are a marker 
of increased susceptibility to the torsades de pointes 
type of ventricular tachycardia (Chap. 16). Inversion of 
the U wave in the precordial leads is abnormal and may 
be a subtle sign of ischemia.
–
–
–
–
–
–
2
1
+
+
+
+
+
+
V1
V2
V3
V4
V5
V6
C
V1
r
S
V1
RV
LV
2
q
V6
R
B
V1
r
RV
LV
1
q
V6
A
Figure 11-6 
Ventricular depolarization can be divided into two major 
phases, each represented by a vector. A. The first phase 
(arrow 1) denotes depolarization of the ventricular septum, 
beginning on the left side and spreading to the right. This pro-
cess is represented by a small “septal” r wave in lead V1 and 
a small septal q wave in lead V6. B. Simultaneous depolariza-
tion of the left and right ventricles (LV and RV) constitutes the 
second phase. Vector 2 is oriented to the left and posteriorly, 
reflecting the electrical predominance of the LV. C. Vectors 
(arrows) representing these two phases are shown in reference 
to the horizontal plane leads. (After AL Goldberger: Clinical 
Electrocardiography: A Simplified Approach, 8th ed. Philadel-
phia, Elsevier/Saunders, 2013.)
 
CHAPTER 11
Electrocardiography
93
in V1 with a broad negative component or a broad 
(≥120 ms), often notched P wave in one or more limb 
leads (Fig. 11-8). This pattern may also occur with left 
atrial conduction delays in the absence of actual atrial 
enlargement, leading to the more general designation of 
left atrial abnormality.
Right ventricular hypertrophy due to a pressure 
load (as from pulmonic valve stenosis or pulmonary 
artery hypertension) is characterized by a relatively tall 
R wave in lead V1 (R ≥ S wave), usually with right 
axis deviation (Fig. 11-9); alternatively, there may be 
a qR pattern in V1 or V3R. ST depression and T-wave 
inversion in the right-to-midprecordial leads are also 
often present. This pattern, formerly called right ven-
tricular “strain,” is attributed to repolarization abnor-
malities in acutely or chronically overloaded muscle. 
Prominent S waves may occur in the left lateral precor-
dial leads. Right ventricular hypertrophy due to ostium 
secundum–type atrial septal defects, with the accompa-
nying right ventricular volume overload, is commonly 
associated with an incomplete or complete right bundle 
branch block pattern with a rightward QRS axis.
Acute cor pulmonale due to pulmonary embolism, for 
example, may be associated with a normal ECG or a 
variety of abnormalities. Sinus tachycardia is the most 
common arrhythmia, although other tachyarrhythmias, 
such as atrial fibrillation or flutter, may occur. The 
QRS axis may shift to the right, sometimes in con-
cert with the so-called S1Q3T3 pattern (prominence of 
the S wave in lead I and the Q wave in lead III, with 
T-wave inversion in lead III). Acute right ventricular 
dilation also may be associated with slow R-wave pro-
gression and ST-T abnormalities in V1 to V4 simulating 
acute anterior infarction. A right ventricular conduction 
disturbance may appear.
Major ECG Abnormalities
Cardiac Enlargement and 
Hypertrophy
Right atrial overload (acute or chronic) may lead to an 
increase in P-wave amplitude (≥2.5 mm) (Fig. 11-8). 
Left atrial overload typically produces a biphasic P wave 
RA
LA
Normal
Right
Left
II
V1
RA
RA
RA
RA
RA
RA
LA
LA
LA
LA
LA
LA
V1
Figure 11-8 
Right atrial (RA) overload may cause tall, peaked P 
waves in the limb or precordial leads. Left atrial (LA) 
abnormality may cause broad, often notched P waves in the 
limb leads and a biphasic P wave in lead V1 with a prominent 
negative component representing delayed depolarization of 
the LA. (After MK Park, WG Guntheroth: How to Read Pedi-
atric ECGs, 4th ed. St. Louis, Mosby/Elsevier, 2006.)
aVR
I
II
III
aVL
aVF
V1
V2
V3
V4
V5
V6
Figure 11-7 
Normal electrocardiogram from a healthy subject. Sinus rhythm is present with a heart rate of 75 beats per minute. PR interval 
is 0.16 s; QRS interval (duration) is 0.08 s; QT interval is 0.36 s; QTc is 0.40 s; the mean QRS axis is about +70°. The precordial 
leads show normal R-wave progression with the transition zone (R wave = S wave) in lead V3.
SECTION II
Diagnosis of Cardiovascular Disorders
94
of underlying left ventricular hypertrophy in cases with 
borderline voltage criteria. Left ventricular hypertrophy 
often progresses to incomplete or complete left bundle 
branch block. The sensitivity of conventional voltage 
criteria for left ventricular hypertrophy is decreased in 
obese persons and smokers. ECG evidence for left ven-
tricular hypertrophy is a major noninvasive marker of 
increased risk of cardiovascular morbidity and mortality 
rates, including sudden cardiac death. However, because 
of false-positive and false-negative diagnoses, the ECG 
is of limited utility in diagnosing atrial or ventricular 
enlargement. More definitive information is provided 
by echocardiography (Chap. 12).
Bundle Branch Blocks
Intrinsic impairment of conduction in either the right 
or the left bundle system (intraventricular conduc-
tion disturbances) leads to prolongation of the QRS 
interval. With complete bundle branch blocks, the 
QRS interval is ≥120 ms in duration; with incomplete 
blocks, the QRS interval is between 100 and 120 ms. 
The QRS vector usually is oriented in the direction of 
the myocardial region where depolarization is delayed 
(Fig. 11-10). Thus, with right bundle branch block, 
the terminal QRS vector is oriented to the right and 
anteriorly (rSR′ in V1 and qRS in V6, typically). Left 
bundle branch block alters both early and later phases 
of ventricular depolarization. The major QRS vector 
Chronic cor pulmonale due to obstructive lung disease 
(Chap. 17) usually does not produce the classic ECG 
patterns of right ventricular hypertrophy noted earlier. 
Instead of tall right precordial R waves, chronic lung 
disease more typically is associated with small R waves 
in right-to-midprecordial leads (slow R-wave progres-
sion) due in part to downward displacement of the 
diaphragm and the heart. Low-voltage complexes are 
commonly present, owing to hyperaeration of the lungs.
A number of different voltage criteria for left ven-
tricular hypertrophy (Fig. 11-9) have been proposed on 
the basis of the presence of tall left precordial R waves 
and deep right precordial S waves (e.g., SV1 + [RV5 
or RV6] >35 mm). Repolarization abnormalities (ST 
depression with T-wave inversions, formerly called the 
left ventricular “strain” pattern) also may appear in leads 
with prominent R waves. However, prominent pre-
cordial voltages may occur as a normal variant, espe-
cially in athletic or young individuals. Left ventricular 
hypertrophy may increase limb lead voltage with or 
without increased precordial voltage (e.g., RaVL + SV3 
>20 mm in women and >28 mm in men). The pres-
ence of left atrial abnormality increases the likelihood 
QRS in hypertrophy
V1
Main QRS vector
Normal
RVH
or
or
V1
V6
V6
LVH
Figure 11-9 
Left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) increases the ampli-
tude of electrical forces directed to the left and poste-
riorly. In addition, repolarization abnormalities may cause 
ST-segment depression and T-wave inversion in leads with a 
prominent R wave. Right ventricular hypertrophy (RVH) may 
shift the QRS vector to the right; this effect usually is associ-
ated with an R, RS, or qR complex in lead V1. T-wave inver-
sions may be present in right precordial leads.
T
R′
r
S
V1
Normal
RBBB
LBBB
q
S
R
V6
T
Figure 11-10 
Comparison of typical QRS-T patterns in right bundle 
branch block (RBBB) and left bundle branch block (LBBB) 
with the normal pattern in leads V1 and V6. Note the second-
ary T-wave inversions (arrows) in leads with an rSR′ complex 
with RBBB and in leads with a wide R wave with LBBB.
 
CHAPTER 11
Electrocardiography
95
is directed to the left and posteriorly. In addition, the 
normal early left-to-right pattern of septal activation is 
disrupted such that septal depolarization proceeds from 
right to left as well. As a result, left bundle branch block 
generates wide, predominantly negative (QS) complexes 
in lead V1 and entirely positive (R) complexes in lead 
V6. A pattern identical to that of left bundle branch 
block, preceded by a sharp spike, is seen in most cases of 
electronic right ventricular pacing because of the rela-
tive delay in left ventricular activation.
Bundle branch block may occur in a variety of con-
ditions. In subjects without structural heart disease, 
right bundle branch block is seen more commonly than 
left bundle branch block. Right bundle branch block 
also occurs with heart disease, both congenital (e.g., 
atrial septal defect) and acquired (e.g., valvular, isch-
emic). Left bundle branch block is often a marker of one 
of four underlying conditions associated with increased 
risk of cardiovascular morbidity and mortality rates: cor-
onary heart disease (frequently with impaired left ven-
tricular function), hypertensive heart disease, aortic valve 
disease, and cardiomyopathy. Bundle branch blocks may 
be chronic or intermittent. A bundle branch block 
may be rate-related; for example, it often occurs when 
the heart rate exceeds some critical value.
Bundle branch blocks and depolarization abnormali-
ties secondary to artificial pacemakers not only affect 
ventricular depolarization (QRS) but also are charac-
teristically associated with secondary repolarization (ST-T) 
abnormalities. With bundle branch blocks, the T wave 
is typically opposite in polarity to the last deflec-
tion of the QRS (Fig. 11-10). This discordance of the 
QRS–T-wave vectors is caused by the altered sequence 
of repolarization that occurs secondary to altered depo-
larization. In contrast, primary repolarization abnormalities 
are independent of QRS changes and are related instead 
to actual alterations in the electrical properties of the 
myocardial fibers themselves (e.g., in the resting mem-
brane potential or action potential duration), not just 
to changes in the sequence of repolarization. Ischemia, 
electrolyte imbalance, and drugs such as digitalis all 
cause such primary ST–T-wave changes. Primary and 
secondary T-wave changes may coexist. For example, 
T-wave inversions in the right precordial leads with left 
bundle branch block or in the left precordial leads with 
right bundle branch block may be important markers of 
underlying ischemia or other abnormalities. A distinc-
tive abnormality simulating right bundle branch block 
with ST-segment elevations in the right chest leads is 
seen with the Brugada pattern (Chap. 16).
Partial blocks (fascicular or “hemiblocks”) in the 
left bundle system (left anterior or posterior fascicu-
lar blocks) generally do not prolong the QRS dura-
tion substantially but instead are associated with shifts 
in the frontal plane QRS axis (leftward or rightward, 
respectively). More complex combinations of fascicular 
and bundle branch blocks may occur that involve the 
left and right bundle system. Examples of bifascicular 
block include right bundle branch block and left pos-
terior fascicular block, right bundle branch block with 
left anterior fascicular block, and complete left bundle 
branch block. Chronic bifascicular block in an asymp-
tomatic individual is associated with a relatively low risk 
of progression to high-degree AV heart block. In con-
trast, new bifascicular block with acute anterior myo-
cardial infarction carries a much greater risk of complete 
heart block. Alternation of right and left bundle branch 
block is a sign of trifascicular disease. However, the pres-
ence of a prolonged PR interval and bifascicular block 
does not necessarily indicate trifascicular involvement, 
since this combination may arise with AV node dis-
ease and bifascicular block. Intraventricular conduction 
delays also can be caused by extrinsic (toxic) factors that 
slow ventricular conduction, particularly hyperkalemia 
or drugs (e.g., class 1 antiarrhythmic agents, tricyclic 
antidepressants, phenothiazines).
Prolongation of QRS duration does not necessarily 
indicate a conduction delay but may be due to preex-
citation of the ventricles via a bypass tract, as in Wolff-
Parkinson-White (WPW) patterns (Chap. 16) and 
related variants. The diagnostic triad of WPW consists 
of a wide QRS complex associated with a relatively 
short PR interval and slurring of the initial part of the 
QRS (delta wave), with the latter effect being due to 
aberrant activation of ventricular myocardium. The 
presence of a bypass tract predisposes to reentrant supra-
ventricular tachyarrhythmias.
Myocardial Ischemia and Infarction
(See also Chap. 35) The ECG is a cornerstone in the 
diagnosis of acute and chronic ischemic heart disease. 
The findings depend on several key factors: the nature 
of the process (reversible [i.e., ischemia] versus irre-
versible [i.e., infarction]), the duration (acute versus 
chronic), the extent (transmural versus subendocardial), 
and localization (anterior versus inferoposterior), 
as well as the presence of other underlying abnormalities 
(ventricular hypertrophy, conduction defects).
Ischemia exerts complex time-dependent effects 
on the electrical properties of myocardial cells. Severe, 
acute ischemia lowers the resting membrane potential 
and shortens the duration of the action potential. 
Such changes cause a voltage gradient between nor-
mal and ischemic zones. As a consequence, current 
flows between those regions. These currents of injury 
are represented on the surface ECG by deviation of 
the ST segment (Fig. 11-11). When the acute isch-
emia is transmural, the ST vector usually is shifted in 
the direction of the outer (epicardial) layers, producing 
ST elevations and sometimes, in the earliest stages of isch-
emia, tall, positive so-called hyperacute T waves over the 
SECTION II
Diagnosis of Cardiovascular Disorders
96
ischemic zone. With ischemia confined primarily to the 
subendocardium, the ST vector typically shifts toward the 
subendocardium and ventricular cavity, so that overly-
ing (e.g., anterior precordial) leads show ST-segment 
depression (with ST elevation in lead aVR). Multiple 
factors affect the amplitude of acute ischemic ST devia-
tions. Profound ST elevation or depression in mul-
tiple leads usually indicates very severe ischemia. From 
a clinical viewpoint, the division of acute myocardial 
infarction into ST-segment elevation and non-ST ele-
vation types is useful since the efficacy of acute reperfu-
sion therapy is limited to the former group.
The ECG leads are usually more helpful in localiz-
ing regions of ST elevation than non-ST elevation isch-
emia. For example, acute transmural anterior (including 
apical and lateral) wall ischemia is reflected by ST eleva-
tions or increased T-wave positivity in one or more of 
the precordial leads (V1–V6) and leads I and aVL. Inferior 
wall ischemia produces changes in leads II, III, and aVF. 
“Posterior” wall ischemia (usually associated with lateral 
or inferior involvement) may be indirectly recognized by 
reciprocal ST depressions in leads V1 to V3 (thus constituting 
an ST elevation “equivalent” acute coronary syndrome). 
Right ventricular ischemia usually produces ST elevations 
in right-sided chest leads (Fig. 11-5). When ischemic ST 
elevations occur as the earliest sign of acute infarction, 
they typically are followed within a period ranging from 
hours to days by evolving T-wave inversions and often by 
Q waves occurring in the same lead distribution. Revers-
ible transmural ischemia, for example, due to coronary 
vasospasm (Prinzmetal’s variant angina and probably the 
Tako-Tsubo “stress” cardiomyopathy syndrome), may 
cause transient ST-segment elevations without develop-
ment of Q waves, as may very early reperfusion in acute 
coronary syndromes. Depending on the severity and dura-
tion of ischemia, the ST elevations may resolve com-
pletely in minutes or be followed by T-wave inversions 
that persist for hours or even days. Patients with ischemic 
chest pain who present with deep T-wave inversions in 
multiple precordial leads (e.g., V1–V4) with or without 
cardiac enzyme elevations typically have severe obstruc-
tion in the left anterior descending coronary artery system 
(Fig. 11-12). In contrast, patients whose baseline ECG 
already shows abnormal T-wave inversions may develop 
T-wave normalization (pseudonormalization) during epi-
sodes of acute transmural ischemia.
With infarction, depolarization (QRS) changes often 
accompany repolarization (ST-T) abnormalities. Necro-
sis of sufficient myocardial tissue may lead to decreased 
R-wave amplitude or abnormal Q waves (even in the 
absence of transmurality) in the anterior or inferior leads 
(Fig. 11-13). Previously, abnormal Q waves were con-
sidered markers of transmural myocardial infarction, 
whereas subendocardial infarcts were thought not to 
produce Q waves. However, careful ECG-pathology 
correlative studies have indicated that transmural 
infarcts may occur without Q waves and that suben-
docardial (nontransmural) infarcts sometimes may be 
associated with Q waves. Therefore, infarcts are more 
appropriately classified as “Q-wave” or “non-Q-wave.” 
V5
ST
ST
A
B
ST
ST
V5
Figure 11-11 
Acute ischemia causes a current of injury. With predomi-
nant subendocardial ischemia (A), the resultant ST vector 
will be directed toward the inner layer of the affected ven-
tricle and the ventricular cavity. Overlying leads therefore will 
record ST depression. With ischemia involving the outer ven-
tricular layer (B) (transmural or epicardial injury), the ST vec-
tor will be directed outward. Overlying leads will record ST 
elevation.
V1
V2
V4
V5
V6
V3
Figure 11-12 
Severe anterior wall ischemia (with or without infarc-
tion) may cause prominent T-wave inversions in the precor-
dial leads. This pattern (sometimes referred to as Wellens 
T waves) is usually associated with a high-grade stenosis of 
the left anterior descending coronary artery.
 
CHAPTER 11
Electrocardiography
97
the diagnostic changes of acute or evolving ischemia are 
often masked by the presence of left bundle branch block, 
electronic ventricular pacemaker patterns, and Wolff-
Parkinson-White preexcitation. However, clinicians 
The major acute ECG changes in syndromes of isch-
emic heart disease are summarized schematically in 
Fig. 11-14. Loss of depolarization forces due to poste-
rior or lateral infarction may cause reciprocal increases 
in R-wave amplitude in leads V1 and V2 without diag-
nostic Q waves in any of the conventional leads. Atrial 
infarction may be associated with PR-segment devia-
tions due to an atrial current of injury, changes in 
P-wave morphology, or atrial arrhythmias.
In the weeks and months after infarction, these ECG 
changes may persist or begin to resolve. Complete nor-
malization of the ECG after Q-wave infarction is uncom-
mon but may occur, particularly with smaller infarcts. In 
contrast, ST-segment elevations that persist for several 
weeks or more after a Q-wave infarct usually correlate 
with a severe underlying wall motion disorder (akinetic 
or dyskinetic zone), although not necessarily a frank ven-
tricular aneurysm. ECG changes due to ischemia may 
occur spontaneously or may be provoked by various 
exercise protocols (stress electrocardiography; Chap. 33).
The ECG has important limitations in both sensitivity 
and specificity in the diagnosis of ischemic heart disease. 
Although a single normal ECG does not exclude isch-
emia or even acute infarction, a normal ECG throughout 
the course of an acute infarct is distinctly uncommon. 
Prolonged chest pain without diagnostic ECG changes 
therefore should always prompt a careful search for other 
noncoronary causes of chest pain (Chap. 4). Furthermore, 
A
B
ECG sequence with anterior Q-wave infarction
Early
Evolving
Early
Evolving
ECG sequence with inferior Q-wave infarction
I
II
III
I
II
III
aVR
aVL
aVF
V2
V4
V6
aVR
aVL
aVF
V2
V4
V6
Figure 11-13 
Sequence of depolarization and repolarization changes 
with (A) acute anterior and (B) acute inferior wall Q-wave 
infarctions. With anterior infarcts, ST elevation in leads I 
and aVL and the precordial leads may be accompanied by 
reciprocal ST depressions in leads II, III, and aVF. Conversely, 
acute inferior (or posterolateral) infarcts may be associ-
ated with reciprocal ST depressions in leads V1 to V3. (After 
AL Goldberger: Clinical Electrocardiography: A Simplified 
Approach, 8th ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier/Saunders, 2013.)
Noninfarction
subendocardial
ischemia
(classic angina)
Transient ST
depressions
Noninfarction
transmural ischemia
Transient ST elevations
or paradoxical T wave
normalization,
sometimes followed
by T wave
inversions
Non-Q wave
(Non-ST elevation)
infarction
ST depressions or
T wave
inversions
without Q waves
MYOCARDIAL
ISCHEMIA
ST elevation/
Q wave infarction
New Q waves preceded
by hyperacute
T waves/ST elevations
and followed by
T wave inversions
Figure 11-14 
Variability of ECG patterns with acute myocardial 
ischemia. The ECG also may be normal or nonspecifically 
abnormal. Furthermore, these categorizations are not mutually 
exclusive. (After AL Goldberger: Clinical Electrocardiography: A 
Simplified Approach, 7th ed. St. Louis, Mosby/Elsevier, 2006.)
SECTION II
Diagnosis of Cardiovascular Disorders
98
(ST-T-U) and sometimes QRS prolongation. Certain 
life-threatening electrolyte disturbances may be diagnosed 
initially and monitored from the ECG. Hyperkalemia 
produces a sequence of changes (Fig.  11-15), usually 
beginning with narrowing and peaking (tenting) of the 
T waves. Further elevation of extracellular K+ leads to 
continue to overdiagnose ischemia or infarction based 
on the presence of ST-segment elevations or depressions; 
T-wave inversions; tall, positive T waves; or Q waves 
not related to ischemic heart disease (pseudoinfarct pat-
terns). For example, ST-segment elevations simulating 
ischemia may occur with acute pericarditis or myocardi-
tis, as a normal variant (including the typical “early repo-
larization” pattern), or in a variety of other conditions 
(Table 11-1). Similarly, tall, positive T waves do not 
invariably represent hyperacute ischemic changes but may 
also be caused by normal variants, hyperkalemia, cerebro-
vascular injury, and left ventricular volume overload due 
to mitral or aortic regurgitation, among other causes.
ST-segment elevations and tall, positive T waves 
are common findings in leads V1 and V2 in left bun-
dle branch block or left ventricular hypertrophy in 
the absence of ischemia. The differential diagnosis of 
Q waves includes physiologic or positional variants, 
ventricular hypertrophy, acute or chronic noncoronary 
myocardial injury, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, and 
ventricular conduction disorders. Digoxin, ventricular 
hypertrophy, hypokalemia, and a variety of other fac-
tors may cause ST-segment depression mimicking sub-
endocardial ischemia. Prominent T-wave inversion may 
occur with ventricular hypertrophy, cardiomyopathies, 
myocarditis, and cerebrovascular injury (particularly 
intracranial bleeds), among many other conditions.
Metabolic Factors and Drug Effects
A variety of metabolic and pharmacologic agents alter the 
ECG and, in particular, cause changes in repolarization 
Table 11-1
Differential Diagnosis of ST-Segment 
Elevations
Ischemia/myocardial infarction
Noninfarction, transmural ischemia (Prinzmetal’s angina, 
and probably Tako-Tsubo syndrome, which may also 
exactly simulate classical acute infarction)
  Acute myocardial infarction
  Postmyocardial infarction (ventricular aneurysm pattern)
Acute pericarditis
Normal variants (including “early repolarization” patterns)
Left ventricular hypertrophy/left bundle branch blocka
Other (rarer)
  Acute pulmonary embolisma
Brugada patterns (right bundle branch block–like  
pattern with ST elevations in right precordial leads)a
  Class 1C antiarrhythmic drugsa
  DC cardioversion
  Hypercalcemiaa
  Hyperkalemiaa
  Hypothermia (J [Osborn] waves)
  Nonischemic myocardial injury
    Myocarditis
    Tumor invading left ventricle
    Trauma to ventricles
aUsually localized to V1−V2 or V3.
Source: Modified from AL Goldberger: Clinical Electrocardiography: 
A Simplified Approach, 8th ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier/Saunders, 2013.
Figure 11-15 
The earliest ECG change with hyperkalemia is usually 
peaking (“tenting”) of the T waves. With further increases in the 
serum potassium concentration, the QRS complexes widen, 
the P waves decrease in amplitude and may disappear, and 
finally a sine-wave pattern leads to asystole unless emer-
gency therapy is given. (After AL Goldberger: Clinical Elec-
trocardiography: A Simplified Approach, 8th ed. Philadelphia, 
Elsevier/Saunders, 2013.)
Hyperkalemia
Mild-Moderate
Moderate-Severe
Very Severe
Lead I
Lead II
V1
V2
V1
P
T
P
T
V2
1s
1mV
 
CHAPTER 11
Electrocardiography
99
transient nonspecific repolarization changes may also 
occur after a meal or with postural (orthostatic) change, 
hyperventilation, or exercise in healthy individuals.
Electrical Alternans
Electrical alternans—a beat-to-beat alternation in one 
or more components of the ECG signal—is a common 
type of nonlinear cardiovascular response to a variety 
of hemodynamic and electrophysiologic perturbations. 
Total electrical alternans (P-QRS-T) with sinus tachy-
cardia is a relatively specific sign of pericardial effusion, 
usually with cardiac tamponade. The mechanism relates 
to a periodic swinging motion of the heart in the effu-
sion at a frequency exactly one-half the heart rate. 
AV conduction disturbances, diminution in P-wave 
amplitude, and widening of the QRS interval. Severe 
hyperkalemia eventually causes cardiac arrest with a 
slow sinusoidal type of mechanism (“sine-wave” pattern) 
followed by asystole. Hypokalemia (Fig. 11-16) pro-
longs ventricular repolarization, often with prominent 
U waves. Prolongation of the QT interval is also seen 
with drugs that increase the duration of the ventricular 
action potential: class 1A antiarrhythmic agents and related 
drugs (e.g., quinidine, disopyramide, procainamide, tricy-
clic antidepressants, phenothiazines) and class III agents 
(e.g., amiodarone [Fig. 11-16], dofetilide, dronedarone, 
sotalol, ibutilide). Marked QT prolongation, sometimes 
with deep, wide T-wave inversions, may occur with 
intracranial bleeds, particularly subarachnoid hemor-
rhage (“CVA T-wave” pattern) (Fig. 11-16). Systemic 
hypothermia also prolongs repolarization, usually with 
a distinctive convex elevation of the J point (Osborn 
wave). Hypocalcemia typically prolongs the QT interval (ST 
portion), whereas hypercalcemia shortens it (Fig. 11-17). 
Digitalis glycosides also shorten the QT interval, often 
with a characteristic “scooping” of the ST–T-wave 
complex (digitalis effect).
Many other factors are associated with ECG changes, 
particularly alterations in ventricular repolarization. 
T-wave flattening, minimal T-wave inversions, or 
slight ST-segment depression (“nonspecific ST–T-wave 
changes”) may occur with a variety of electrolyte and 
acid-base disturbances, a variety of infectious processes, 
central nervous system disorders, endocrine abnormali-
ties, many drugs, ischemia, hypoxia, and virtually any 
type of cardiopulmonary abnormality. Although sub-
tle ST–T-wave changes may be markers of ischemia, 
Hypocalcemia
Normal
Hypercalcemia
QT  0.48 s
QTc 0.52
QT  0.36 s
QTc 0.41
QT  0.26 s
QTc 0.36
 II
 II
 II
I
I
I
Figure 11-17 
Prolongation of the Q-T interval (ST-segment portion) is 
typical of hypocalcemia. Hypercalcemia may cause abbre-
viation of the ST segment and shortening of the QT interval.
Hypokalemia
Hypothermia
Amiodarone
II
Tricyclic overdose
I
Subarachnoid hemorrhage
III
V3
V2
V3
U
V5
V4
T
Figure 11-16 
A variety of metabolic derangements, drug effects, and 
other factors may prolong ventricular repolarization with QT 
prolongation or prominent U waves. Prominent repolariza-
tion prolongation, particularly if due to hypokalemia, inherited 
“channelopathies,” or certain pharmacologic agents, indi-
cates increased susceptibility to torsades des pointes–type 
ventricular tachycardia (Chap. 16). Marked systemic hypo-
thermia is associated with a distinctive convex “hump” at the 
J point (Osborn wave, arrow) due to altered ventricular action 
potential characteristics. Note QRS and QT prolongation 
along with sinus tachycardia in the case of tricyclic antide-
pressant overdose.
SECTION II
Diagnosis of Cardiovascular Disorders
100
Repolarization (ST-T or U wave) alternans is a sign of elec-
trical instability and may precede ventricular tachyarrhythmias.
Clinical Interpretation of the ECG
Accurate analysis of ECGs requires thoroughness 
and care. The patient’s age, gender, and clinical status 
should always be taken into account. Many mistakes 
in ECG interpretation are errors of omission. There-
fore, a systematic approach is essential. The following 
14 points should be analyzed carefully in every ECG: 
(1) standardization (calibration) and technical features 
(including lead placement and artifacts), (2) rhythm, (3) 
heart rate, (4) PR interval/AV conduction, (5) QRS 
interval, (6) QT/QTc interval, (7) mean QRS electri-
cal axis, (8) P waves, (9) QRS voltages, (10) precordial 
R-wave progression, (11) abnormal Q waves, (12) ST 
segments, (13) T waves, and (14) U waves.
Only after analyzing all these points should the inter-
pretation be formulated. Where appropriate, important 
clinical correlates or inferences should be mentioned. 
For example, sinus tachycardia with QRS and QT-(U) 
prolongation, especially in the context of changes in 
mental status, suggests tricyclic antidepressant overdose 
(Fig. 11-16). The triad of peaked T waves (hyperkalemia), 
a long QT due to ST-segment lengthening (hypocalce-
mia), and left ventricular hypertrophy (systemic hyper-
tension) suggests chronic renal failure. Comparison with 
any previous ECGs is invaluable. The diagnosis and 
management of specific cardiac arrhythmias and conduc-
tion disturbances are discussed in Chaps. 15 and 16.
Computerized Electrocardiography
Computerized ECG systems are widely used for imme-
diate retrieval of thousands of ECG records. Computer 
interpretation of ECGs still has major limitations. 
Incomplete or inaccurate readings are most likely with 
arrhythmias and complex abnormalities. Therefore, 
computerized interpretation (including measurements 
of basic ECG intervals) should not be accepted without 
careful clinician review.
 Rick A. Nishimura  I   Panithaya Chareonthaitawee I  Matthew Martinez 
101
 Cardiovascular imaging plays an essential role in the prac-
tice of cardiology. Two-dimensional (2D) echocardiog-
raphy is able to visualize the heart directly in real time 
using ultrasound, providing instantaneous assessment of 
the myocardium, cardiac chambers, valves, pericardium, 
and great vessels. Doppler echocardiography measures 
the velocity of moving red blood cells and has become a 
noninvasive alternative to cardiac catheterization for assess-
ment of hemodynamics. Transesophageal echocardiography 
(TEE) provides a unique window for high-resolution imag-
ing of posterior structures of the heart, particularly the left 
atrium, mitral valve, and aorta. Nuclear cardiology uses 
radioactive tracers to provide assessment of myocardial per-
fusion and metabolism, along with ventricular function, 
and is applied primarily to the evaluation of patients with 
ischemic heart disease. Cardiac MRI and CT can delineate 
cardiac structure and function with high resolution. They 
are particularly useful in the examination of cardiac masses, 
the pericardium, the great vessels, and ventricular function 
and perfusion. Gadolinium enhancement during cardiac 
MRI adds information on myocardial perfusion. Detection 
of coronary calcifi cation by CT as well as direct visualiza-
tion of coronary arteries by CT angiography (CTA) may 
be useful in selected patients with suspected coronary artery 
disease (CAD). This chapter provides an overview of the 
basic concepts of these cardiac imaging modalities as well as 
the clinical indications for each procedure. 
 ecHocardiograPHy 
 Two-DiMenSional echocarDiography 
 Basic principles 
 2D echocardiography uses the principle of ultrasound 
refl ection off cardiac structures to produce images of 
 NONINVASIVE CARDIAC IMAGING: 
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY, NUCLEAR 
CARDIOLOGY, AND MRI/CT IMAGING 
 cHaPTer 12 
the heart  ( Table 12-1 ) . For a transthoracic echocardio-
gram (TTE), the imaging is performed with a handheld 
transducer placed directly on the chest wall. In selected 
patients, a TEE may be performed, in which an ultra-
sound transducer is mounted on the tip of an endoscope 
placed in the esophagus and directed toward the cardiac 
structures. 
 Current echocardiographic machines are portable 
and can be wheeled directly to the patient’s bedside. 
Thus, a major advantage of echocardiography over 
other imaging modalities is the ability to obtain instan-
taneous images of the cardiac structures for immediate 
 Table 12-1 
 clinical uSeS of echocarDiography 
Two-Dimensional 
echocardiography 
 Cardiac chambers 
  Chamber size 
  Left ventricular 
  hypertrophy 
  Regional wall motion 
 abnormalities 
 Valve 
  Morphology and motion 
 Pericardium 
  Effusion 
  Tamponade 
Masses
Great vessels
Stress echocardiography 
 Two-dimensional 
  Myocardial ischemia 
  Viable myocardium 
 Doppler 
  Valve disease 
 Doppler echocardiography 
 Valve stenosis 
  Gradient 
  Valve area 
 Valve regurgitation 
  Semiquantitation 
Intracardiac pressures
Volumetric fl ow
Diastolic fi lling
Intracardiac shunts
 Transesophageal 
echocardiography 
Inadequate transthoracic 
images
Aortic disease
Infective endocarditis
Source of embolism
Valve prosthesis
Intraoperative
SECTION II
Diagnosis of Cardiovascular Disorders
102
interpretation. Thus, echocardiography has become an 
ideal imaging modality for cardiac emergencies. A limi-
tation of TTE is the inability to obtain high-quality 
images in all patients, especially those with a thick chest 
wall or severe lung disease, as ultrasound waves are 
poorly transmitted through lung parenchyma. Technol-
ogy such as harmonic imaging and IV contrast agents 
(which traverse the pulmonary circulation) can be used 
to enhance endocardial borders in patients with poor 
acoustic windows.
Chamber size and function
2D echocardiography is an ideal imaging modality 
for assessing left ventricular (LV) size and function 
(Fig. 12-1). A qualitative assessment of the ventricular 
cavity and systolic function can be made directly from 
the 2D image by experienced observers. 2D echocar-
diography is useful in the diagnosis of LV hypertrophy 
and is the imaging modality of choice for the diagnosis 
of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Other chamber sizes 
are assessed by visual analysis, including the left atrium 
and right-sided chambers.
Valve abnormalities
2D echocardiography is the “gold standard” for imag-
ing valve morphology and motion. Leaflet thickness 
and mobility, valve calcification, and the appearance of 
subvalvular and supravalvular structures can be assessed. 
Valve stenosis is reliably diagnosed by the thickening 
and decreased mobility of the valve. 2D echocardiogra-
phy is also the gold standard for the diagnosis of mitral 
stenosis, which produces typical tethering and diastolic 
doming, and the severity of the stenosis can be ascer-
tained from a direct planimetry measurement of the 
mitral valve orifice. The presence and often the etiol-
ogy of stenosis of the semilunar valves can be made by 
2D echocardiography (Fig. 12-2), but evaluation of the 
severity of the stenosis requires Doppler echocardiography 
(discussed later). The diagnosis of valvular regurgitation 
must be made by Doppler echocardiog­raphy, but 2D 
echocardiography is valuable for determining the etiol-
ogy of the regurgitation, as well as its effects on ven-
tricular dimensions, shape, and function.
Pericardial disease
2D echocardiography is the imaging modality of choice 
for the detection of pericardial effusion, which is easily 
visualized as a black echolucent ovoid structure sur-
rounding the heart (Fig. 12-3). In the hemodynami-
cally unstable patient with pericardial tamponade, 
typical echo findings include a dilated inferior vena 
cava, right atrial collapse, and then right ventricular col-
lapse. Echocardiographically guided pericardiocentesis 
has now become a standard of care.
Figure 12-1 
Two-dimensional echocardiographic still-frame images 
from a normal patient with a normal heart. Upper: 
Parasternal long-axis view during systole and diastole (left) 
and systole (right). During systole, there is thickening of the 
myocardium and reduction in the size of the left ventricle 
(LV). The valve leaflets are thin and open widely. Lower: 
Parasternal short-axis view during diastole (left) and systole 
(right) demonstrating a decrease in the left ventricular cavity 
size during systole as well as an increase in wall thickening. 
LA, left atrium; RV, right ventricle; Ao, aorta.
Figure 12-2 
Two-dimensional echocardiographic still-frame images 
from a patient with aortic stenosis. Parasternal long-axis 
view shows a heavily calcified aortic valve. RV, right ventricle; 
LV, left ventricle; Ao, aorta; LA, left atrium.
 
CHAPTER 12
Noninvasive Cardiac Imaging: Echocardiography, Nuclear Cardiology, and MRI/CT Imaging
103
Intracardiac masses
Intracardiac masses can be visualized on 2D echocar-
diography, provided that image quality is adequate. 
Solid masses appear as echo-dense structures, which 
can be located inside the cardiac chambers or infiltrat-
ing into the myocardium or pericardium. LV thrombus 
appears as an echo-dense structure, usually in the api-
cal region associated with regional wall motion abnor-
malities. The appearance and mobility of the thrombus 
are predictive of embolic events. Vegetations appear as 
mobile linear echo densities attached to valve leaflets. 
Atrial myxoma can be diagnosed by the appearance of a 
Figure 12-3 
Two-dimensional echocardiographic still-frame image of 
a patient with a pericardial effusion. Pericardial effusion 
(PE) is shown as a black echo-free space surrounding the 
heart. LV, left ventricle.
well-circumscribed mobile mass with attachments to the 
atrial septum (Fig. 12-4). The high-resolution images 
provided by TEE may be required for further delineation 
of myocardial masses, especially those <1 cm in diameter.
Aortic disease
2D echocardiography can provide extremely useful 
information on diseases of the aorta. The proxi-
mal ascending aorta, the arch, and the distal descend-
ing aorta can usually be visualized via the transthoracic 
approach. The definitive diagnosis of a suspected aor-
tic dissection usually requires a TEE, which can rapidly 
provide high-resolution images of the proximal ascend-
ing and descending thoracic aorta (Fig. 12-5).
Figure 12-4 
Transesophageal still-frame echocardiographic images 
of a patient with a left atrial myxoma. There is a large 
echo-dense mass in the left atrium, attached to the atrial 
septum. The mass moves across the mitral valve in diastole. 
LV, left ventricle; RV, right ventricle.
Figure 12-5 
Transesophageal still-frame echocardiographic view of a 
patient with a dilated aorta, aortic dissection, and severe 
aortic regurgitation. The arrow points to the intimal flap that 
is seen in the dilated ascending aorta. Left: The long-axis 
apex-down view of the black-and-white two-dimensional 
image in diastole. Right: Color-flow imaging that demon-
strates a large mosaic jet of aortic regurgitation. Ao, aorta; 
RV, right ventricle; AR, aortic regurgitation.
SECTION II
Diagnosis of Cardiovascular Disorders
104
the right atrium and right ventricle can be calculated, 
yielding an accurate measurement of pulmonary artery 
systolic pressure (Fig. 12-8).
Cardiac output
Volume flow rates (or stroke volume and cardiac out-
put) can be reliably measured noninvasively by Doppler 
echocardiography. Flow is calculated as the product 
Doppler Echocardiography
Basic principles
Doppler echocardiography uses ultrasound reflecting off 
moving red blood cells to measure the velocity of blood 
flow across valves, within cardiac chambers, and through 
the great vessels. Normal and abnormal blood flow pat-
terns can be assessed noninvasively. Color-flow Doppler 
imaging displays the blood velocities in real time super-
imposed upon a 2D echocardiographic image. The dif-
ferent colors indicate the direction of blood flow (red 
toward and blue away from the transducer), with green 
superimposed when there is turbulent flow. Pulsed-
wave Doppler measures the blood flow velocity in a 
specific location on the 2D echocardiographic image. 
Continuous-wave Doppler echocardiography can mea-
sure high velocities of blood flow directed along the line 
of the Doppler beam, such as occur in the presence of 
valve stenosis, valve regurgitation, or intracardiac shunts. 
These high velocities can be used to determine intracar-
diac pressure gradients by a modified Bernoulli equation:
Pressure change = 4 times (velocity)2
Tissue Doppler echocardiography measures the 
velocity of myocardial motion. Myocardial velocities 
can be used to determine myocardial strain rate, which 
is a quantitative measure of regional myocardial con-
traction and relaxation.
Valve gradients
In the presence of valvular stenosis, there is an increase 
in the velocity of blood flow across the stenotic valve. A 
continuous-wave Doppler can be used to determine the 
pressure gradient across the valve (Fig. 12-6). A valve 
area can also be calculated from the Doppler velocities.
Valvular regurgitation
Valvular regurgitation is diagnosed by Doppler echo-
cardiography when there is abnormal retrograde flow 
across the valve. Color-flow imaging is the Doppler 
method used most frequently to detect valve regur-
gitation by visualization of a high-velocity turbulent 
jet in the chamber proximal to the regurgitant valve 
(Fig. 12-7). The size and extent of the color-flow jet 
into the receiving cardiac chamber provide a semiquan-
titative estimate of the severity of regurgitation.
Intracardiac pressures
These can be calculated from the peak continuous-wave 
Doppler signal of a regurgitant lesion, which reflects the 
pressure gradient between two cardiac chambers. This 
approach is commonly applied to a tricuspid regurgitant 
jet, from which the systolic pressure gradient between 
Figure 12-6 
Continuous-wave Doppler of mitral valve velocities in a 
patient with mitral stenosis. The mean gradient calculated 
from Doppler (DOPP) of 10 mmHg is similar to the mean gra-
dient of 11 mmHg from simultaneous cardiac catheterization 
in this patient.
Figure 12-7 
Left: Transesophageal echocardiographic view of a patient 
with severe mitral regurgitation due to a flail posterior leaflet. 
The arrow points to the portion of the posterior leaflet that is 
unsupported and moves into the left atrium during systole. 
Right: Color-flow imaging demonstrating a large mosaic jet 
of mitral regurgitation during systole. LA, left atrium; LV, left 
ventricle; AV, aortic valve.
 
CHAPTER 12
Noninvasive Cardiac Imaging: Echocardiography, Nuclear Cardiology, and MRI/CT Imaging
105
Congenital stenotic or regurgitant valve lesions can be 
assessed. The detection of intracardiac shunts is possible 
by 2D and Doppler echocardiography. Patency of surgi-
cal shunts and conduits can also be evaluated.
Stress Echocardiography
2D and Doppler echocardiography are usually per-
formed with the patient in the resting state. Further 
information can be obtained by reimaging during either 
exercise or pharmacologic stress. The primary indica-
tions for stress echocardiography are to confirm the 
suspicion of ischemic heart disease and determine 
the extent of ischemia.
A decrease in systolic contraction of an ischemic 
area (segment) of myocardium, termed a regional wall 
motion abnormality, occurs before symptoms or elec-
trocardiographic changes (Fig. 12-10). New regional 
wall motion abnormalities, a decline in ejection fraction, 
and an increase in end-systolic volume with stress are all 
indicators of myocardial ischemia. Exercise stress test-
ing is usually done with exercise protocols using either 
upright treadmill or bicycle exercise. In patients who are 
not able to exercise, pharmacologic testing can be per-
formed by infusion of dobutamine to increase myocar-
dial oxygen demand. Dobutamine echocardiography has 
also been used to assess myocardial viability in patients 
of the cross-sectional area of the vessel or chamber 
through which blood moves and the velocity of blood 
flow as assessed by Doppler.
Diastolic filling
Doppler echocardiography allows noninvasive evalu-
ation of ventricular diastolic filling. The transmitral 
velocity curves reflect the relative pressure gradients 
between the left atrium and ventricle throughout 
diastole and are influenced by the rate of ventricular 
relaxation, the driving force across the valve, and the 
compliance of the ventricle. In the early phase of dia-
stolic dysfunction there is primarily an impairment of 
LV relaxation, with reduced early transmitral flow and 
a compensatory increase in flow during atrial contrac-
tion (Fig. 12-9). As disease progresses and ventricular 
compliance declines, left atrial pressure rises, resulting 
in a higher early transmitral velocity and shortening 
of the deceleration of flow in early diastole. Analysis of 
Doppler tissue velocities of annular motion and myo-
cardial strain provides further information concerning 
the diastolic properties of the heart.
Congenital heart disease
2D and Doppler echocardiography have been useful in 
the evaluation of patients with congenital heart disease. 
Figure 12-8 
Continuous-wave Doppler of tricuspid regurgitation in a 
patient with pulmonary hypertension. There is an increase 
in the velocity to 5.4 m/s. Using the modified Bernoulli equa-
tion, the peak pressure gradient between the right ventricle 
and right atrium during systole is 116 mmHg. Assuming a 
right atrial pressure of 10 mmHg, the right ventricular systolic 
pressure is 126 mmHg. In the absence of right ventricular 
outflow tract obstruction, this indicates there is severe pul-
monary hypertension with a pulmonary artery systolic pres-
sure of 126 mmHg.
SECTION II
Diagnosis of Cardiovascular Disorders
106
with poor systolic function and concomitant CAD; 
when used for this purpose, dobutamine is administered 
at lower doses than standard pharmacologic stress doses.
Doppler echocardiography can be used at rest and 
during exercise in patients with valvular heart disease to 
determine the hemodynamic response of valve gradients 
and pulmonary pressures (Fig. 12-11). In patients with 
low-output, low-gradient aortic stenosis, the response 
of the gradient to dobutamine stimulation is of diagnos-
tic and therapeutic value.
Transesophageal Echocardiography
When limited information is obtained from a TTE due 
to poor imaging windows, TEE can be useful. Diseases 
of the aorta, such as aortic dissection, can be readily 
diagnosed by TEE. Defining the source of embolism is 
a common indication for TEE, as abnormalities such as 
atrial thrombi, patent foramen ovale, and aortic plaques 
can be detected. Other masses, particularly those in the 
atria, can be visualized. The presence of vegetations for 
the diagnosis of infective endocarditis and its complica-
tions can be assessed by TEE. This technique has been 
used before cardioversion in patients with atrial fibril-
lation to rule out a thrombus in the left atrium or left 
atrial appendage.
A
B
Figure 12-9 
High-fidelity left ventricular (LV) pressure curves super-
imposed on a mitral inflow velocity curve obtained by 
Doppler echocardiography. The ratio of early and late dia-
stolic flows is termed the E:A ratio. The deceleration time (DT) 
measures the rate of decline of early velocity and reflects the 
effective operative compliance of the left ventricle. Left: In 
early stages of diastolic dysfunction, there is an abnormality 
of relaxation. There is a decrease in the early diastolic filling 
and an increase with filling at atrial contraction, resulting in a 
low E:A ratio of 0.5, with a deceleration time (DT) of 250 ms. 
In this instance, the LV diastolic pressure is low at 6 mmHg. 
Right: As diastolic dysfunction progresses, there is a restric-
tion to filling, in which there is a high early diastolic velocity 
and low velocity at atrial contraction resulting in a high E:A 
ratio of 3.0, with DT of 150 ms. In this instance, the LV dia-
stolic pressure is markedly elevated to 34 mmHg.
Figure 12-10 
Systolic still-frame two-dimensional echocardiographic 
images of a patient undergoing a stress echocardiogram. 
During rest (left), there is contraction of all segments of the 
myocardium. During exercise (right), there are regional wall 
motion abnormalities in the anterior and anteroapical segments 
(arrows). 4 ch = four-chamber view, 2 ch = two-chamber views, 
LV = left ventricle, RV = right ventricle.
 
CHAPTER 12
Noninvasive Cardiac Imaging: Echocardiography, Nuclear Cardiology, and MRI/CT Imaging
107
Nuclear Cardiology
Basic Principles of Nuclear 
Cardiology
Nuclear (or radionuclide) imaging requires intrave-
nous administration of radiopharmaceuticals (isotopes 
or tracers). Once injected, the isotope traces physiologic 
processes and undergoes uptake in specific organs. During 
this process, radiation is emitted in the form of photons, 
generally gamma rays, generated during radioactive decay 
when the nucleus of an isotope changes from one energy 
level to a lower one. A special camera detects these pho-
tons and creates images via a computer interface. The 
two most commonly used technologies in clinical nuclear 
cardiology are single-photon emission computed tomog-
raphy (SPECT) and positron emission tomog­raphy (PET). 
These technologies differ in instrumentation, acquisition, 
resolution, and nuclides used.
Clinical Applications
Assessment of myocardial perfusion and 
coronary artery disease
Nuclear myocardial perfusion imaging (MPI) using 
SPECT and more recently PET has an established role 
in the evaluation and management of patients with 
known or suspected coronary artery disease (CAD). 
Both SPECT and PET MRI require the injection of 
isotopes at rest and during stress to produce images of 
regional myocardial uptake proportional to regional 
blood flow. Normally, myocardial blood flow can be 
increased up to fivefold above the resting state to meet 
the increased myocardial oxygen demand during stress. 
In the presence of a fixed coronary stenosis, the inability 
to increase myocardial perfusion in the territory sup-
plied by the stenosis creates a flow differential and inho-
mogeneous myocardial tracer uptake. In patients unable 
to exercise, pharmacologic agents are used to increase 
blood flow and create similar inhomogeneities.
The most commonly used SPECT perfusion tracers 
are thallium-201 (201Tl) and technetium-99m (99mTc) 
labeled isonitriles. 99mTc isonitriles have higher pho-
ton energies and shorter physical half-lives than 201Tl, 
permitting injection of higher doses with less radia-
tion exposure while concurrently producing higher-
quality images. The FDA-approved PET tracers are 
rubidium-82 (82Rb) and 13N ammonia (13NH3) for 
high-dose administration and shorter imaging protocols.
Both SPECT and PET myocardial perfusion images 
are commonly interpreted by visual analysis, which may 
be supplemented with quantitative software. Normal 
myocardial perfusion images demonstrate uniform tracer 
uptake throughout the LV myocardium (Fig. 12-12). 
In contrast, regions with reduced myocardial blood flow 
demonstrate varying degrees of reduced tracer uptake 
(Fig. 12-13), which can be graded on a semiquantita-
tive scale. Reduced tracer uptake in a myocardial region 
Figure 12-11 
Continuous-wave Doppler echocardio-
gram across the mitral valve of a patient 
with mitral stenosis. In the resting state 
(left), there is a mean gradient of 8 mmHg. 
During exercise (right), the mean gradient 
rises to 29 mmHg, indicating a hemody-
namically significant mitral stenosis.
Figure 12-12 
Exercise technetium-99m sestamibi images 
in a 65-year-old man with atypical angina. 
Images are shown in three standard views; 
stress (left) and rest (right) in each panel. 
There is uniform tracer uptake throughout the 
left ventricular myocardium at rest and peak 
stress in all three views.
SECTION II
Diagnosis of Cardiovascular Disorders
108
populations such as diabetics and those with high-risk 
exercise treadmill results. High-risk SPECT MPI find-
ings include severe resting or poststress LV systolic dys-
function, large or multiple stress-induced defects, or a 
large fixed defect with LV dilation or increased 201Tl 
lung uptake. The incremental prognostic value of 
SPECT MPI has been established in many clinical set-
tings, including populations with known CAD, prior 
myocardial infarction and/or revascularization, and 
acute chest pain in the emergency department.
Assessment of myocardial metabolism 
and viability
PET has traditionally been regarded as the gold standard 
technique for the assessment of myocardial viability. The 
positron-emitting tracer F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) 
assesses myocardial glucose metabolism and is an indicator 
of myocardial viability. Because uptake is heterogeneous 
in normal myocardium in the fasting state, oral glucose 
loading or a combination of insulin and glucose infu-
sions is used to enhance myocardial uptake. With reduced 
myocardial blood flow and ischemia, substrate utilization 
switches from fatty acids and lactate toward glucose, lead-
ing to enhanced myocardial FDG uptake. This pattern of 
enhanced FDG uptake in regions of decreased perfusion 
(termed flow/metabolism “mismatch”) identifies areas 
on both resting and stress images is called a fixed defect 
and is consistent with infarction. Reduced tracer uptake 
on the stress image with relatively preserved or improved 
uptake on the rest image is called a reversible defect and 
indicates ischemia. PET has the ability to quantify myo-
cardial blood flow and flow reserve in absolute terms.
For the diagnosis of angiographically significant 
CAD, SPECT using 201T1 and 99mTc isonitriles and 
either exercise or pharmacologic stress has an average 
sensitivity of 87% and specificity of 73%. In compari-
son, PET MPI has higher accuracy (average sensitiv-
ity 90%; specificity of 89%). The robust methods for 
attenuation correction with PET improve the specific-
ity, particularly in obese populations and women, while 
the superior resolution and higher extraction fraction of 
PET tracers increase the sensitivity (Fig. 12-14). PET 
has not been as widely used as SPECT due to decreased 
availability and less local experience, but PET scanners 
are becoming more widely available (Table 12-2).
Both SPECT and PET MPI have powerful prognos-
tic value. In patients with normal SPECT MPI results, 
the annual rate of cardiac death or myocardial infarc-
tion is generally very low (<0.7%). Annual death/event 
rates increase with the extent and severity of imaging 
abnormalities and are generally about 3% in those with 
mild to moderate abnormalities and about 7% in those 
with severe abnormalities; rates are higher in specific 
Figure 12-13 
Exercise technetium-99m sestamibi and rest thallium-201 
images in a 72-year-old woman with typical angina. 
Images are shown in three standard views, with stress (left) 
and rest (right) in each panel. Stress images demonstrate 
reduced tracer uptake in the apical, mid-anterior, mid-lateral, 
and mid-inferior regions (white arrowheads) with normal or 
near-normal tracer uptake in the corresponding regions on the 
rest images (white arrowheads), signifying a reversible defect 
consistent with ischemia. The lack of complete normalization 
(or reversibility) of tracer uptake on the rest images at the mid-
inferior and mid-lateral regions represents associated infarc-
tion in that area ( yellow arrowheads). On both stress and rest 
images, the basal inferior and basal lateral regions exhibit 
severely reduced tracer uptake, signifying a fixed defect con-
sistent with infarction (red arrowheads). Subsequent invasive 
coronary angiography demonstrated severe stenosis of the 
mid-left anterior descending coronary artery and occlusion of 
the left circumflex coronary artery with collaterals.
 
CHAPTER 12
Noninvasive Cardiac Imaging: Echocardiography, Nuclear Cardiology, and MRI/CT Imaging
109
of ischemic or hibernating myocardium that are likely to 
improve in function after revascularization (Fig. 12-15). 
This mismatch has a sensitivity and specificity of 92% and 
63%, respectively, for regional contractile recovery after 
revascularization. The SPECT radiopharmaceuticals, 201Tl 
and 99mTc isonitriles, require an intact (viable) cell mem-
brane for uptake and also provide an assessment of myo-
cardial viability in addition to perfusion. However, PET 
identifies ischemic or hibernating myocardium in 10–20% 
of regions otherwise classified as fibrotic (infarcted) by 
SPECT perfusion tracers. Patients with ischemic heart 
failure, who have viable myocardium identified by PET 
or SPECT and undergo revascularization, have a better 
survival than those who do not have viable myocardium 
or do not undergo revascularization.
Assessment of ventricular function
In addition to perfusion and metabolic information, 
LV systolic function and volumes are now routinely 
obtained with gated SPECT and PET acquisitions, as long 
as the heart rate is relatively constant. An automated tech-
nique determines the endocardial borders of the LV cavity, 
and a geometric model is used to calculate the LVEF and 
Table 12-2
Relative Advantages and Disadvantages of 
SPECT and PET
SPECT
Thallium-201
Lower radiopharmaceutical cost
Measurement of increased pulmonary uptake
Less hepatobiliary and bowel uptake
Detection of resting ischemia (hibernating myocardium)
Longer physical half-life of tracers (limiting dose administration)
Lower energy level
Technetium-99m isonitriles
Better image quality
Ventricular function assessment (gated SPECT)
Shorter imaging time
Shorter imaging protocols (patient/scheduling convenience)
Acute imaging in myocardial infarction and unstable angina
Superior quantification
PET
Robust attenuation correction
Short physical half-life of tracers
Best image quality (particularly in obese patients and women)
Shorter imaging time (particularly for rubidium-82)
Very short imaging protocols (particularly for rubidium-82)
More complex imaging protocols (particularly viability 
assessment)
Detection of viability
Absolute quantification
High diagnostic accuracy
Limited prognostic studies 
N-13 ammonia requires on-site cyclotron
Rubidium-82 generally requires costly commercial generator
Lower radiation exposure, particularly for N-13 ammonia
High Risk Perfusion Imaging Features
Severe resting or exercise LV systolic dysfunction (EF<35%)
Stress-induced large perfusion defect (especially if anterior)
Stress-induced multiple perfusion defects of moderate size 
Large, fixed perfusion defect with LV dilatation
Transient (poststress) LV dilatation
Increased lung uptake (thallium)
Abbreviatons: EF, ejection fraction; LV, left ventricle; PET, positron emis-
sion tomography; SPECT, single–photon emission computed tomography.
Figure 12-14 
SPECT and PET images in a 67-year-old woman with atyp-
ical angina. Images are shown in short-axis views, with stress 
(top) and rest (bottom) in each panel. Shifting breast position 
between the rest and stress SPECT acquisitions produced an 
apparent reversible apical, anterior, and anterolateral attenu-
ation artifact (arrowheads) resembling ischemia. With PET 
and its built-in attenuation correction in the same patient, the 
defect was not present. SPECT, single-photon emission com-
puted tomography; PET, positron emission tomography.
SECTION II
Diagnosis of Cardiovascular Disorders
110
excited states can be induced by an electric field, and 
as the nuclei relax and return to their ground state, 
they release energy in the form of electromagnetic 
radiation that is detected and processed into an image. 
Although the large vascular vessels can be visualized on 
MRI without contrast agents, gadolinium is frequently 
employed as a contrast agent to produce magnetic reso-
nance angiograms (MRAs). Contrast agents also provide 
enhanced soft tissue contrast as well as the opportunity 
to obtain rapid angiographic images during the first pass 
of contrast through the vascular system.
Cardiac MRI is challenging because of the rapid 
motion of the heart and coronary arteries. However, 
both static and cine images can usually now be obtained 
using electrocardiographic triggering, often within short 
breath holds of 10–15 s. Cine images can be acquired 
in any plane with excellent blood-myocardial contrast. 
These images can be used to quantify accurately ejection 
fraction, end-systolic and end-diastolic volumes, and 
cardiac mass with high accuracy, reliability, and repro-
ducibility, and without the need for ionizing radiation.
Clinical utility
The multiplanar capabilities of MRI, coupled with 
excellent contrast and spatial resolution, provide superb 
images of the myocardium and great vessels. MRI is of 
great value in defining anatomic relationships in patients 
with complex congenital heart disease (Fig. 12-16) 
and cardiomyopathies (Fig. 12-17). Cardiac masses 
can be characterized and distinguished from thrombus 
volumes with a high level of reproducibility. Regional wall 
motion can also be assessed by visual examination. The 
combined variables of perfusion and function are more 
effective in risk stratification than either alone.
Another established but less widely available nuclear 
technique for assessing LV function and volumes is equi-
librium radionuclide angiography RNA, also known as 
multiple-gated blood pool acquisition (MUGA). This 
technique involves imaging of 99mTc-labeled albumin or 
red cells that are uniformly distributed throughout the 
blood volume. LV volumes throughout the cardiac cycle 
are calculated from a time-activity curve generated using 
regions of interest.
Innovations in hybrid imaging technology, especially 
PET/CT and SPECT/CT, are occurring rapidly and con-
tribute to their emerging role in the combined assessments 
of anatomy and physiology in patients with suspected or 
known CAD. The diagnostic literature is evolving for 
these hybrid technologies but radiation exposure is a con-
cern and large-scale clinical trials are still needed to validate 
their clinical applications, determine their prognostic value, 
and address their cost-effectiveness and appropriateness.
MRI and CT Imaging
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Basic principles
MRI is a technique based on the magnetic properties 
of hydrogen nuclei. In the presence of a large magnetic 
field, nuclear spin transitions from the ground state to 
Figure 12-15 
PET viability study in a 63-year-old woman with heart fail-
ure, severe LV systolic dysfunction, and severe coronary 
artery disease. Images are shown in three standard views, 
with perfusion (left) and glucose metabolism (right) in each 
panel. The N-13 ammonia images show a very large api-
cal, septal, anterior, and lateral perfusion defect (arrowheads), 
but F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (18FDG) images demonstrate 
relatively preserved glucose uptake in the corresponding seg-
ments (arrowheads). This PET perfusion-metabolism mismatch 
is consistent with hibernating myocardium. The patient under-
went coronary artery bypass grafting surgery with improvement 
in left ventricular systolic function (ejection fraction increased 
from 26% pre- to 45% postoperatively). All regions identified 
as viable recovered contractile function after revascularization.
 
CHAPTER 12
Noninvasive Cardiac Imaging: Echocardiography, Nuclear Cardiology, and MRI/CT Imaging
111
MRA is a standard technique for imaging the aorta 
and large vessels of the chest and abdomen, with results 
essentially identical to conventional angiography. MRA 
of the coronary arteries is a much more difficult chal-
lenge, both because of the small size of these vessels and 
because of their rapid and complex motion during the car-
diac cycle; thus, coronary MRA is not yet a reliable clini-
cal technique.
MRI is now an accepted technology for the evalu-
ation of patients with suspected or known coronary 
disease. Ventricular function and wall motion can be 
assessed at rest and during infusion of inotropic agents. 
(Fig. 12-18). In addition to defining their relation-
ship to normal anatomic structures, MRI can determine 
whether a mediastinal or pulmonary mass has invaded 
the pericardium or heart. The entire pericardium can 
be visualized in multiple planes, and MRI has proved 
useful in characterizing pericardial effusions, pericar-
dial thickening, and inflammation. Specialized pulse 
sequences can measure the velocity of blood in each 
pixel of the image, so that flow across valves and within 
blood vessels may be determined with accuracy, thereby 
aiding in the evaluation of valvular disease and intracar-
diac shunts.
Figure 12-17 
MRI scan of a patient with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, 
showing the severe increase in left ventricular wall thick-
ness. Cardiac MRI is an ideal imaging modality for diagnos-
ing cardiomyopathies.
Figure 12-18 
MRI scan with delayed gadolinium enhancement in a 
patient with a large anteroapical infarction. The gadolin-
ium (white area) accumulated in the extracellular space in the 
presence of cell death from myocardial infarction.
Figure 12-16 
MRA scan of a patient with partial anomalous pulmo-
nary venous drainage of the right lung into the inferior 
vena cava (scimitar syndrome). MRA is able to define the 
abnormal anatomic relationships of cardiac structures and 
great vessels in patients with congenital heart disease.
SECTION II
Diagnosis of Cardiovascular Disorders
112
The development of electron-beam CT and multidetec-
tor-row CT have led to improved temporal resolution 
and routine imaging of the beating heart. Motion-free 
high-spatial-resolution images are now possible with 
multidetector CT technology (≥64 channel) that allows 
imaging of the coronary arteries.
Clinical applications
Cardiac CT has important clinical applications. Pericar-
dial calcification is easily detected by CT (Fig. 12-20). 
CT is useful in characterizing cardiac masses, particu-
larly those containing fat or calcium. The ability to 
detect small amounts of fat with high spatial resolution 
makes CT an attractive technique for imaging patients 
with suspected arrhythmogenic right ventricular dyspla-
sia. Cine images can be used to evaluate wall motion 
and to determine ejection fraction, end-diastolic and 
end-systolic volumes, and cardiac mass.
CT angiography (CTA) has demonstrated accuracy 
similar to MRA in imaging the aorta and great vessels, 
and CTA is the examination of choice in the evaluation 
of patients with suspected pulmonary embolus. CTA is 
an excellent imaging modality for the diagnosis of aortic 
Assessment of myocardial perfusion can be performed 
by injecting a bolus of gadolinium contrast and then 
continuously scanning the heart as the gadolinium passes 
through the cardiac chambers and into the myocardium. 
Relative perfusion deficits are reflected as regions of low 
signal intensity within the myocardium. Pharmacologic 
stress (typically achieved with vasodilators) can be 
applied during perfusion imaging to detect physiologi-
cally significant coronary artery lesions. Myocardial per-
fusion imaging with cardiac MRI is more sensitive than 
SPECT imaging for detecting subendocardial ischemia 
due to its enhanced spatial resolution.
Myocardial viability and infarction may be determined 
by imaging the heart 10–20 min after gadolinium injec-
tion, known as delayed enhancement magnetic resonance 
imaging. In normal myocardium, gadolinium cannot 
penetrate the membranes of the densely packed myo-
cytes. Abnormal myocardial tissue accumulates excess 
gadolinium following intravenous injection, as ruptured 
myocyte membranes allow gadolinium to passively dif-
fuse into intracellular space. In chronic infarction, the tis-
sue concentration of gadolinium is increased due to an 
expansion of the intracellular space from collagenous scar 
(Fig. 12-18). Thus, delayed enhancement is indicative of 
nonviable or infarcted myocardium, the subendocardial 
versus transmural extent of which is accurately assessed 
by the high spatial resolution of MRI. The presence and 
pattern of gadolinium enhancement not only is useful for 
determining viability but also has prognostic value in the 
patient with an ischemic cardiomyopathy. “Myocardium 
at risk” following myocardial infarction can be assessed 
by examining the amount of myocardial edema, using 
T2-weighted sequences (Fig. 12-19).
Limitations of MRI
Relative contraindications to MRI include the pres-
ence of pacemakers, internal defibrillators, or cere-
bral aneurysm clips. A small percentage of patients are 
claustrophobic and unable to tolerate the examination 
within the relatively confined quarters of the magnet 
bore. Examination of clinically unstable patients and 
those undergoing stress testing is problematic, since 
close hemodynamic and electrocardiographic monitor-
ing is difficult. Image quality in patients with significant 
arrhythmias is often limited. Patients with renal disease 
receiving gadolinium contrast may be at risk of devel-
oping nephrogenic systemic fibrosis, characterized by 
increased tissue deposition of collagen in the skin and 
development of fibrosis in skin and other organs.
Computed Tomographic Imaging
Basic principles
CT is a fast, simple, noninvasive technique that pro-
vides images of the myocardium and great vessels with 
excellent spatial resolution and good soft tissue contrast. 
Figure 12-19 
Left: Normal delayed enhancement and “edema”-sensitive 
images. Top (left): Delayed enhancement image illustrat-
ing normal black myocardium without infarction/fibrosis. 
Bottom (left): A triple inversion recovery sequence that is 
T2-weighted demonstrating normal homogenous-appearing 
gray myocardium. Right: A patient postmyocardial infarction 
and early revascularization without evidence of an infarction 
and an edematous myocardium in the septum. Top (right): 
Delayed enhanced with normal black myocardium without 
infarction or fibrosis. Bottom (right): A triple inversion recov-
ery sequence illustrating edema in the septum without infarc-
tion. This is the area of “salvaged” myocardium.
 
CHAPTER 12
Noninvasive Cardiac Imaging: Echocardiography, Nuclear Cardiology, and MRI/CT Imaging
113
Contrast-enhanced CT angiography
With the high temporal and spatial resolution of mul-
tislice spiral CT, accurate assessment of luminal nar-
rowing in the major branches of the coronary arteries is 
possible in selected patients. Studies at experienced cen-
ters have shown a sensitivity and specificity of >90% for 
detecting coronary artery lesions as compared to cardiac 
catheterization. The highest accuracy has been noted 
in the left main and the proximal portions of the left-
sided coronary arteries with decreased sensitivities in the 
more distal segments and in the more rapidly moving 
right coronary artery (Fig. 12-22).
dissection or penetrating ulcers. Complete visualization 
of the entire aorta and its branches is possible by CTA 
using a single contrast medial bolus injection.
Coronary calcification
Calcium in the coronary arteries occurs in athero-
sclerosis and is absent in the normal coronary artery 
(Fig. 12-21). CT is very sensitive for the detection of 
coronary artery calcification, and the absence of coro-
nary calcification excludes significant epicardial coronary 
disease. The quantity of coronary calcification (coronary 
calcium score) is related to the severity of CAD and 
prognosis. However, the utility of CT calcification score 
in clinical practice in the asymptomatic patient is limited 
to those with a moderate risk of coronary heart disease 
in whom the result will change management.
Figure 12-20 
CT scan showing pericardial calcification, seen as a white 
linear density anterior to the myocardium.
Figure 12-21 
CT scans of three patients showing the ability to detect 
coronary calcification. Left: Normal coronary arteries with-
out calcification. Middle: Calcification in the left anterior 
artery (LAD). Right: Severe calcification in the LAD and cir-
cumflex (CX) arteries.
No calcification
Moderate calcificaion
Severe calcification
LAD
LAD + LCX
Figure 12-22 
Three-dimensional volume rendered image of a contrast-
enhanced CT angiogram demonstrating a normal left main cor-
onary artery arising from the aorta and its two branches, the left 
anterior descending artery (left) and the circumflex artery (right).
SECTION II
Diagnosis of Cardiovascular Disorders
114
Selection of Imaging Tests  
(Table 12-3)
Basic Premise
The choice of the optimal imaging modality for a par-
ticular patient should be based upon the major problem 
The concept of “noninvasive coronary angiography” 
has generated great interest in CTA. However, as with 
any imaging modalities, CTA has technical limitations 
requiring proper patient selection and preparation. 
The integration of CTA into clinical practice requires 
knowledge of pretest diagnostic and prognostic data 
and the incremental information that will alter manage-
ment. The well-accepted indication for coronary CTA 
is in the evaluation of suspected coronary artery anoma-
lies for which CTA not only confirms the diagnosis but 
also shows the course of the arteries related to the great 
vessels (Fig. 12-23). For patients with chest pain syn-
dromes, CTA is best used to rule out significant cor-
onary disease, given its high negative predictive value. 
Thus, it is the patient with an intermediate pretest 
probability of CAD who cannot exercise or has unin-
terpretable or equivocal results on prior testing who 
would be best suited for CTA. The benefit of CTA in 
other groups of patients is still unclear.
Limitations of CT
Limitations of CT include its dependence on ioniz-
ing radiation (in contrast to MRI) and the need for 
iodinated contrast. Techniques to lower radiation 
doses continue to evolve, as the radiation doses for 
coronary CTA generally exceed those delivered dur-
ing standard diagnostic cardiac catheterization. Fast 
or irregular heart rhythms and body motion limit the 
accuracy of CTA. Heavy calcification and artifacts 
from stents preclude accurate assessment of the severity 
of a stenosis.
Figure 12-23 
Three-dimensional volume rendered image of a contrast-
enhanced CT angiogram illustrating an anomalous left coro-
nary artery arising from the right coronary artery and traveling 
posterior to the aorta.
Table 12-3
Selection of Imaging Tests
Echo
Nuclear
CTa
MRIb
LV size/function
Initial modality of choice
Low cost, portable
Provides ancillary structural and 
hemodynamic information
Available from 
gated SPECT or 
PET imaging
Best resolution
Highest cost
Best resolution
Highest cost
Valve disease
Initial modality of choice
Valve motion
Doppler hemodynamics
Visualize valve motion
Delineate abnormal 
flow
Pericardial disease
Pericardial effusion
Doppler hemodynamics
Pericardial thickening
Pericardial thickening
Aortic disease
TEE rapid diagnosisc
Acute dissection
Image entire aorta
Acute aneurysm
Aortic dissection
Image entire aorta
Aortic aneurysm
Chronic dissection
Cardiac masses
TTE—large intracardiac masses
TEE—smaller intracardiac massesc
Extracardiac masses
Myocardial masses
Extracardiac masses
Myocardiac masses
aContrast required.
bRelative contraindication: pacemakers, metallic objects, claustrophobic.
cWhen not seen on TTE.
Abbreviations: Echo, echocardiography; PET, positron emission tomography; SPECT, single-photon emission computed tomography; TEE, 
transesophageal echocardiography; TTE, transthoracic echocardiogram.
 
CHAPTER 12
Noninvasive Cardiac Imaging: Echocardiography, Nuclear Cardiology, and MRI/CT Imaging
115
being addressed, other concomitant clinical questions, 
as well as the local expertise and equipment available in 
an institution. The clinical urgency and costs of each test 
also need to be considered. To ensure the effective use 
of cardiovascular imaging tools, Appropriateness Criteria 
have been developed by the national societies to examine 
the incremental clinical benefit of imaging modalities.
Common Clinical Questions
Left ventricular size and function
2D echocardiography is the primary imaging modality 
obtained for assessment of LV cavity size, systolic function, 
and wall thickness. Echocardiography can also provide 
concomitant information on valve function, pulmonary 
artery pressures, and diastolic filling, which are valuable in 
the patient presenting with possible heart failure. The dis-
advantage is poor endocardial resolution in some patients 
and the lack of reproducible quantitative measurements.
Equilibrium radionuclide angiography can provide an 
accurate quantitative measurement of LV volumes and 
function but is not widely available and cannot be used 
in patients with irregular rhythms. Gated SPECT and 
PET measure LV systolic function and volumes as a part 
of myocardial perfusion and/or viability imaging but 
also require relatively regular rhythm. Both MRI and 
CT scanning provide the highest quality resolution of 
the endocardial border and, thus, are the most accurate 
of all modalities. However, they are of higher cost, lack 
portability, and do not provide concomitant hemody-
namic information as echocardiography does.
Valvular heart disease
2D and Doppler echocardiography provide both anatomic 
and hemodynamic information regarding valve disease, 
and are the first test of choice. MRI can also visualize valve 
motion and determine abnormal flow velocities across 
valves, but there is less validation of quantitative hemody-
namic measurements in comparison to echocardiography.
Pericardial disease
Echocardiography is the first imaging modality of 
choice in patients with suspected pericardial effusion 
and tamponade owing to its rapid image display and 
portability. For patients with suspected constrictive 
pericarditis, either MRI or CT scanning is the imag-
ing modality that best delineates pericardial thickness. 
Hemodynamic analysis of the enhancement of ventricu-
lar interaction that occurs in pericardial constriction can 
be assessed by Doppler echocardiography.
Aortic disease
Both CT scanning and MRI are the imaging modalities 
of choice for the evaluation of the stable patient with 
suspected aortic aneurysm or aortic dissection. In the 
acutely ill patient with suspected aortic dissection, either 
TEE or CT scanning is a reliable imaging modality.
Cardiac masses
2D TTE is the first test to rule out an intracardiac mass; 
masses >1.0 cm in diameter are usually well visualized. 
Intracardiac masses of smaller size may be visualized by 
TEE. CT scanning and MRI are optimal for evaluating 
masses extrinsic to the heart or involving the myocardium.
Choosing the Appropriate Imaging 
Test for the Evaluation of Known or 
Suspected CAD
The choice of an initial test should be based on the 
evaluation of the patient’s resting electrocardiogram, 
the ability to perform exercise, the clinical features, the 
patient’s body habitus, and the available local expertise 
and technology (Fig. 12-24). For the standard assess-
ment of CAD, the exercise electrocardiographic test 
should be the initial consideration in patients with an 
interpretable electrocardiogram who are able to exercise. 
If there are resting electrocardiographic abnormalities, or 
if the patient has had prior coronary revascularization, an 
imaging modality (either nuclear imaging or echocar-
diography) should be used for initial evaluation. Imag-
ing tests can add prognostic information to a standard 
exercise electrocardiographic test and, thus, are especially 
useful when the initial results fall into an intermediate 
risk category. Pharmacologic stress testing with imaging 
should be used in patients who are unable to exercise. 
The utility of CT coronary angiography is evolving.
While the patient is often best evaluated with the 
imaging modality for which most experience and 
expertise are available, there are additional consider-
ations and certain situations where one imaging modal-
ity has an advantage over another. Echocardiography 
provides structural information. Therefore, if there is a 
question of concomitant valve disease, pericardial dis-
ease, or aortic disease, stress echocardiography should 
be considered. In patients with previous infarction 
and/or LV systolic dysfunction on the basis of CAD, 
nuclear imaging, particularly PET, or MRI, is the pre-
ferred modality as it also establishes viability. In gen-
eral, nuclear imaging is more sensitive and less specific 
than echocardiography for the detection of myocardial 
ischemia and viability.
SECTION II
Diagnosis of Cardiovascular Disorders
116
Figure 12-24 
Flow diagram showing selection of initial stress test in a 
patient with chest pain. Patients who are able to exercise, 
without previous revascularization, and with an interpretable 
resting ECG can be tested with an exercise ECG. The appro-
priate imaging study for other patients depends on multi-
ple factors (see text). LBBB, left bundle branch block; Prev 
MI-Reg ischemia, previous MI with a need to detect regional 
ischemia; nuc, SPECT nuclear imaging study; Pharm, phar-
macologic. *Consider PET if morbidly obese or female with 
large/dense breasts.
CHOICE OF TEST FOR KNOWN/ SUSPECTED CAD
Exercise imaging
study
Exercise 
ECG
PET
LBBB or PPM
Prev MI?
LBBB or PPM
Prev MI
Patient able to 
exercise?
Previous coronary
revascularization
Resting ECG
interpretable?
Viability
Pharmacologic
imaging study
Dobutamine
echo
Pharmacologic
nuc*
Dobutamine
echo or pharm
nuc*
Exercise echo
Pharmacologic
nuc
Exercise nuc
Either  exercise
nuc or exercise
echo
Need structural
information?
Need structural
information?
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
 Jane A. Leopold  I   David P. Faxon 
117
 Diagnostic cardiac catheterization and coronary angiog-
raphy are considered the gold standard in the assessment 
of the anatomy and physiology of the heart and its asso-
ciated vasculature. In 1929, Forssmann demonstrated the 
feasibility of cardiac catheterization in humans when he 
passed a urological catheter from a vein in his arm to his 
right atrium and documented the catheter’s position in 
the heart by x-ray. In the 1940s, Cournand and Richards 
applied this technique to patients with cardiovascular dis-
ease to evaluate cardiac function.These three physicians 
were awarded the Nobel Prize in 1956. In 1958, Sones 
inadvertently performed the fi rst selective coronary angi-
ography when a catheter in the left ventricle slipped 
back across the aortic valve, engaged the right coronary 
artery, and power-injected 40 mL of contrast down the 
vessel. The resulting angiogram provided superb ana-
tomic detail of the artery, and the patient suffered no 
adverse effects. Sones went on to develop selective coro-
nary catheters, which were modifi ed further by Judkins, 
who developed preformed catheters and allowed coro-
nary artery angiography to gain widespread use as a diag-
nostic tool. In the United States, cardiac catheterization 
is the second most common operative procedure, with 
nearly 3 million procedures performed annually. 
 CarDiaC CaThETEriZaTion 
 indicaTions, risKs, and 
preprocedure ManageMenT 
 Cardiac catheterization and coronary angiography are 
indicated to evaluate the extent and severity of car-
diac disease in symptomatic patients and to determine 
if medical, surgical, or catheter-based interventions are 
warranted  ( Table 13-1 ) . They are also used to exclude 
severe disease in symptomatic patients with equivo-
cal fi ndings on noninvasive studies and in patients with 
 DIAGNOSTIC CARDIAC CATHETERIZATION 
AND CORONARY ANGIOGRAPHY 
 ChapTEr 13 
chest-pain syndromes of unclear etiology for whom 
a defi nitive diagnosis is necessary for management. 
Cardiac catheterization is not mandatory prior to cardiac 
surgery in some younger patients who have congenital 
or valvular heart disease that is well defi ned by nonin-
vasive imaging and who do not have symptoms or risk 
factors that suggest concomitant coronary artery disease. 
 The risks associated with elective cardiac cath-
eterization are relatively low, with a reported risk of 
0.05% for myocardial infarction, 0.07% for stroke, and 
0.08–0.14% for death. These risks increase substantially 
if the catheterization is performed emergently, dur-
ing acute myocardial infarction, or in hemodynami-
cally unstable patients. Additional risks of the procedure 
include tachy- or bradyarrhythmias that require coun-
tershock or pharmacologic therapy, acute renal failure 
leading to transient or permanent dialysis, vascular com-
plications that necessitate surgical repair, and signifi cant 
access-site bleeding. Of these risks, vascular access-site 
bleeding is the most common complication, occurring 
in 1.5–2.0% of patients, with major bleeding events 
associated with a worse short- and long-term outcome. 
 In patients who understand and accept the risks asso-
ciated with cardiac catheterization, there are no abso-
lute contraindications when the procedure is performed 
in anticipation of a life-saving intervention. Relative 
contraindications do, however, exist; these include 
decompensated congestive heart failure; acute renal fail-
ure; severe chronic renal insuffi ciency, unless dialysis is 
planned; bacteremia; acute stroke; active gastrointestinal 
bleeding; severe, uncorrected electrolyte abnormalities; 
a history of an anaphylactic/anaphylactoid reaction to 
iodinated contrast agents; and a history of allergy/bron-
chospasm to aspirin in patients for whom progression to 
a percutaneous coronary intervention is likely. 
 Contrast allergy and contrast-induced renal fail-
ure merit further consideration, because these adverse 
SECTION II
Diagnosis of Cardiovascular Disorders
118
events may occur in otherwise healthy individuals 
and prophylactic measures exist to reduce risk. Allergic 
reactions to contrast agents occur in <5% of cases 
with severe anaphylactoid (clinically indistinguish-
able from anaphylaxis, but not mediated by an IgE 
mechanism) reactions occurring in 0.1–0.2% of patients. 
Mild reactions manifest as nausea, vomiting, and urticaria, 
while severe anaphylactoid reactions lead to hypotensive 
shock, pulmonary edema, and cardiorespiratory arrest. 
Patients with a history of significant contrast allergy 
should be premedicated with corticosteroids and anti-
histamines (H1- and H2-blockers) and studies performed 
with nonionic, low-osmolar contrast agents that have a 
lower reported rate of allergic reactions.
Contrast-induced nephropathy, defined as an increase 
in creatinine >0.5 mg/dL or 25% above baseline that 
occurs 48–72 h after contrast administration, occurs in 
∼2–7% of patients with rates of 20–30% reported in high-
risk patients, including those with diabetes mellitus, con-
gestive heart failure, chronic kidney disease, anemia, and 
older age. Dialysis is required in 0.3–0.7% of patients and is 
associated with a five-fold increase in in-hospital mortality. 
For all patients, adequate intravascular volume expan-
sion with intravenous 0.9% saline (1.0–1.5 mL/kg per 
hour) for 3–12 h before and continued 6–24 h after the 
procedure limits the risk of contrast-induced nephropa-
thy. In patients with chronic kidney disease, additional 
pretreatment with N-acetylcysteine (Mucomist, 600 mg 
bid orally before and two days after catheterization) also 
decreases risk. Diabetic patients treated with metfor-
min should stop the drug 48 h prior to the procedure to 
limit the associated risk of lactic acidosis. Other strategies to 
decrease risk include the administration of sodium bicarbon-
ate, although there is conflicting data regarding its efficacy; 
use of low- or iso-osmolar contrast agents; and limiting the 
volume of contrast to <100 mL per procedure.
Cardiac catheterization is performed after the patient 
has fasted for 6 h and has received IV conscious seda-
tion to remain awake but sedated during the procedure. 
All patients with suspected coronary artery disease are 
pretreated with 325 mg aspirin. In patients in whom the 
procedure is likely to progress to a percutaneous coro-
nary intervention, a clopidogrel 600-mg loading dose 
followed by 75 mg daily should be started. Warfarin is 
held starting 48 h prior to the catheterization to allow 
the international normalized ratio (INR) to fall to <2.0 
and limit access-site bleeding complications. Cardiac 
catheterization is a sterile procedure, so antibiotic pro-
phylaxis is not required.
Technique
Cardiac catheterization and coronary angiography pro-
vide a detailed hemodynamic and anatomic assessment 
of the heart and coronary arteries. The selection of pro-
cedures is dependent upon the patient’s symptoms and 
Table 13-1
Indications for Cardiac Catheterization and 
Coronary Angiography
Coronary Artery Disease
Asymptomatic or Symptomatic
High risk for adverse outcome based on noninvasive testing
Sudden cardiac death
Sustained (>30 s) monomorphic ventricular tachycardia
Nonsustained (<30 s) polymorphic ventricular tachycardia
Symptomatic
Canadian Cardiology Society class III or IV angina on 
medical therapy
Unstable angina—high or intermediate risk
Chest-pain syndrome of unclear etiology and equivocal 
findings on noninvasive tests
Acute Myocardial Infarction
Reperfusion with primary percutaneous coronary intervention
Persistent or recurrent ischemia
Severe pulmonary edema
Cardiogenic shock or hemodynamic instability
Mechanical complications—mitral regurgitation, ventricular 
septal defect
Valvular Heart Disease
Suspected valve disease in symptomatic patients—
dyspnea, angina, heart failure, syncope
Infective endocarditis with coronary embolization
Asymptomatic patients with aortic regurgitation and 
cardiac enlargement or ↓ ejection fraction
Prevalve surgery in older patients with coronary artery 
disease risk factors
Congestive Heart Failure
New onset with angina or suspected undiagnosed 
coronary artery disease
Congenital Heart Disease
Prior to surgical correction, when symptoms or 
noninvasive testing suggests coronary disease
Suspicion for congenital coronary anomalies
Forms of congenital heart disease associated with 
coronary anomalies
Pericardial Disease
Symptomatic patients with suspected cardiac tamponade 
or constrictive pericarditis
Cardiac Transplantation
Preoperative and postsurgical evaluation
Other Conditions
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy with angina
Diseases of the aorta when knowledge of coronary artery 
involvement is necessary for management
Source: Adapted from American College of Cardiology/American Heart 
Association Ad Hoc Task Force on Practice Guidelines: ACC/AHA 
Guidelines for Coronary Angiography. Circulation 1999;99:2345–2357.
 
CHAPTER 13
Diagnostic Cardiac Catheterization and Coronary Angiography 
119
valve to the left ventricle. This technique is also used 
for mitral valvuloplasty. Heparin is given for prolonged 
procedures to limit the risk of stroke from embolism of 
clots that may form on the catheter.
Hemodynamics
A comprehensive hemodynamic assessment involves 
obtaining pressure measurements in the right and left 
heart and peripheral arterial system and determining 
the cardiac output (Table 13-2). The shape and mag-
nitude of the pressure waveforms provide important 
diagnostic information; an example of normal pres-
sure tracings is shown in Fig. 13-1. In the absence of 
valvular heart disease, the atria and ventricles are “one 
chamber” during diastole when the tricuspid and mitral 
valves are open while in systole, when the pulmonary 
and aortic valves are open, the ventricles and their 
respective outflow tracts are considered “one cham-
ber.” These concepts form the basis by which hemody-
namic measurements are used to assess valvular stenosis. 
When aortic stenosis is present, there is a systolic pres-
sure gradient between the left ventricle and the aorta; 
when mitral stenosis is present, there is a diastolic pres-
sure gradient between the pulmonary capillary wedge 
clinical condition, with some direction provided by 
noninvasive studies.
Vascular access
Cardiac catheterization procedures are performed using 
a percutaneous technique to enter the femoral artery 
and vein as the preferred access sites for left and right 
heart catheterization, respectively. A flexible sheath 
is inserted into the vessel over a guidewire, allow-
ing diagnostic catheters to be introduced into the ves-
sel and advanced toward the heart using fluoroscopic 
guidance. The brachial or radial artery may also be used 
as an arterial access site in patients with peripheral arte-
rial disease that involves the abdominal aorta, iliac, or 
femoral vessels; severe iliac-artery tortuosity; morbid 
obesity; or preference for early postprocedure ambu-
lation. Use of radial-artery access is gaining popularity 
owing to a lower rate of access-site bleeding complica-
tions. A normal Allen’s test confirming dual blood sup-
ply to the hand from the radial and ulnar arteries is a 
prerequisite to access this site. The internal jugular vein 
serves as an alternate access site to the right heart when 
the patient has an inferior vena cava filter in place or 
requires prolonged hemodynamic monitoring.
Right heart catheterization
This procedure measures pressures in the right heart. 
Right heart catheterization is no longer a routine part 
of diagnostic cardiac catheterization, but it is reasonable 
in patients with unexplained dyspnea, valvular heart 
disease, pericardial disease, right and/or left ventricu-
lar dysfunction, congenital heart disease, and suspected 
intracardiac shunts. Right heart catheterization uses a 
balloon-tipped flotation catheter that is inserted into 
the femoral or jugular vein. Using fluoroscopic guid-
ance, the catheter is advanced sequentially to the right 
atrium, right ventricle, pulmonary artery, and pulmo-
nary wedge position (as a surrogate for left atrial pres-
sure); in each cardiac chamber, pressure is measured and 
blood samples are obtained for oxygen-saturation analy-
sis to screen for intracardiac shunts.
Left heart catheterization
This procedure measures pressures in the left heart as a 
determinant of left ventricular performance. With the 
aid of fluoroscopy, a catheter is guided to the ascending 
aorta and across the aortic valve into the left ventricle to 
provide a direct measure of left ventricular pressure. In 
patients with a tilting-disc prosthetic aortic valve, cross-
ing the valve with a catheter is contraindicated and the 
left heart may be accessed from the right atrium using a 
needle-tipped catheter to puncture the atrial septum at 
the fossa ovalis. Once the catheter crosses from the right 
to the left atrium, it can be advanced across the mitral 
Table 13-2
Normal Values for Hemodynamic 
Measurements
Pressures (mmHg)
Right atrium
  Mean
  a wave
  v wave
0–5
1–7
1–7
Right ventricle
  Peak systolic/end diastolic
17–32/1–7
Pulmonary artery
  Peak systolic/end diastolic
  Mean
17–32/1–7
9–19
Pulmonary capillary wedge (mean)
4–12
Left atrium
  Mean
  a wave
  v wave
4–12
4–15
4–15
Left ventricle
  Peak systolic/end diastolic
90–140/5–12
Aorta
  Peak systolic/end diastolic
  Mean
90–140/60–90
70–105
Resistances ([dyn-s]/cm5)
Systemic vascular resistance
Pulmonary vascular resistance
900–1400
40–120
Oxygen Consumption Index ([L-min]/m2)
115–140
Arteriovenous oxygen difference (vol %)
Cardiac index ([L-min]/m2)]
3.5–4.8
2.8–4.2
SECTION II
Diagnosis of Cardiovascular Disorders
120
creates a dynamic intraventricular pressure gradient dur-
ing ventricular systole. The magnitude of this obstruc-
tion is measured using an end-hole catheter positioned 
at the left ventricular apex that is pulled back while 
(left atrial) pressure and the left ventricle (Fig. 13-2). 
Hemodynamic measurements also discriminate between 
aortic stenosis and hypertrophic obstructive cardiomy-
opathy where the asymmetrically hypertrophied septum 
mmHg
0
25
50
ECG
RA
RV
PA
PCWP
Figure 13-1 
Normal hemodynamic waveforms recorded during right 
heart catheterization. Atrial pressure tracings have a char-
acteristic “a” wave that reflects atrial contraction and a “v” 
wave that reflects pressure changes in the atrium during 
ventricular systole. Ventricular pressure tracings have a low 
pressure diastolic filling period and a sharp rise in pressure 
that occurs during ventricular systole. ra, right atrium; rv, 
right ventricle; pa, pulmonary artery; pcwp, pulmonary capil-
lary wedge pessure; s, systole; d, diastole.
mmHg
0
100
mmHg
0
200
50
 25
ECG
ECG
LV
Ao
Aortic
gradient
LV
PCW
Mitral
gradient
Figure 13-2 
Severe aortic and mitral stenosis. Simultaneous recording 
of left ventricular (LV) and aortic (Ao) pressure tracings dem-
onstrate a 62-mmHg mean systolic gradient (shaded area) 
that corresponds to an aortic valve area of 0.6 cm2 (left). 
Simultaneous recording of LV and pulmonary capillary wedge 
(PCW) pressure tracings reveal a 14-mmHg mean diastolic 
gradient (shaded area) that is consistent with critical mitral 
stenosis (mitral valve area = 0.5 cm2). s, systole; d, diastole; 
e, end diastole.
 
CHAPTER 13
Diagnostic Cardiac Catheterization and Coronary Angiography 
121
taken up or released by an organ (oxygen consumption) 
is equal to the product of its blood flow (cardiac output) 
and the difference in the concentration of the substance 
in the arterial and venous circulation (arterial-venous 
oxygen difference). Thus, the formula for calculating 
the Fick cardiac output is:
Cardiac output (L/min) = (oxygen consumption 
[mL/min])/(arterial-venous oxygen difference [mL/L])
Oxygen consumption is estimated as 125 mL oxygen/
minute × body surface area, and the arterial-venous oxygen 
difference is determined by first calculating the oxygen-
carrying capacity of blood (hemoglobin [g/100 mL] × 1.36 
[mL oxygen/g hemoglobin] × 10) and multiplying this 
product by the fractional oxygen saturation. The thermo-
dilution method measures a substance that is injected into 
and adequately mixes with blood. In contemporary prac-
tice, thermodilution cardiac outputs are measured using 
temperature as the indicator. Measurements are made with 
a thermistor-tipped catheter that detects temperature devia-
tions in the pulmonary artery after the injection of 10 mL 
of room-temperature normal saline into the right atrium. 
Cardiac output may also be calculated from the left ven-
triculogram by first determining left ventricular volumes in 
end diastole and end systole using the area-length method. 
Cardiac output is equal to the heart rate × stroke volume, 
which is the difference between the end-diastolic volume 
and the end-systolic volume.
Vascular resistance
Resistance across the systemic and pulmonary circula-
tions is calculated by extrapolating from Ohm’s law of 
electrical resistance and is equal to the mean pressure 
gradient divided by the mean flow (cardiac output). 
Therefore, systemic vascular resistance is ([mean aor-
tic pressure − mean right atrial pressure]/cardiac output) 
multiplied by 80 to convert the resistance from Wood 
units to dyn-s-cm−5. Similarly, the pulmonary vascular 
resistance is ([mean pulmonary artery − mean pulmonary 
capillary wedge pressure]/cardiac output) × 80. Pulmonary 
vascular resistance is lowered by oxygen, nitroprusside, 
calcium channel blockers, prostacyclin infusions, and 
inhaled nitric oxide; these therapies may be administered 
during catheterization to determine if increased pulmonary 
vascular resistance is fixed or reversible.
Valve area
Hemodynamic data may also be used to calculate 
the valve area using the Gorlin formula that equates 
the area to the flow across the valve divided by the pres-
sure gradient between the cardiac chambers surround-
ing the valve. The formula for the assessment of valve 
area is: Area = (cardiac output [cm3/min]/[systolic ejec-
tion period or diastolic filling period][heart rate])/44.3 
C × square root of the pressure gradient, where C = 1 
recording pressure; once the catheter has passed the sep-
tal obstruction and is positioned in the apex of the left 
ventricle, a gradient can be measured between the left 
ventricular apex and the aorta. Hypertrophic obstructive 
cardiomyopathy is confirmed by the Brockenbrough-
Braunwald sign: following a premature ventricular con-
traction, there is an increase in the left ventricular–aorta 
pressure gradient with a simultaneous decrease in the 
aortic pulse pressure. These findings are absent in aortic 
stenosis.
Regurgitant valvular lesions increase volume (and 
pressure) in the “receiving” cardiac chamber. In severe 
mitral and tricuspid regurgitation, the increase in blood 
flow to the atria takes place during ventricular systole, 
leading to an increase in the v wave (two times greater 
than the mean pressure). Severe aortic regurgitation 
leads to a decrease in aortic diastolic pressure with a 
concomitant rise in left ventricular end-diastolic pres-
sure, resulting in equalization of pressures between the 
two chambers at end diastole.
Hemodynamic measurements are also used to dif-
ferentiate between cardiac tamponade, constrictive 
pericarditis, and restrictive cardiomyopathy. In car-
diac tamponade, right atrial pressure is increased with a 
decreased “y” descent, indicative of impaired right atrial 
emptying in diastole, and there is diastolic equalization 
of pressures in all cardiac chambers. In constrictive peri-
carditis, right atrial pressure is elevated with a prominent 
“y” descent, indicating rapid filling of the right ventri-
cle during early diastole. A diastolic dip and plateau or 
“square root sign,” in the ventricular waveforms due to 
an abrupt halt in ventricular filling during diastole; right 
ventricular and pulmonary artery pressures are elevated; 
and discordant pressure changes in the right and left ven-
tricles with inspiration (right ventricular systolic pressure 
increases while left ventricular systolic pressure decreases) 
are observed. The latter hemodynamic phenomenon is 
the most specific for constriction. Restrictive cardiomy-
opathy may be distinguished from constrictive pericarditis 
by a marked increase in right ventricular and pulmonary 
artery systolic pressures (usually >60 mmHg), a separa-
tion of the left and right ventricular diastolic pressures by 
>5 mmHg (at baseline or with acute volume loading), 
and concordant changes in left and right ventricular dia-
stolic filling pressures with inspiration (both increase).
Cardiac output
Cardiac output is measured by the Fick method or the 
thermodilution technique or calculated from left ven-
tricular angiography. Typically, the Fick method and 
thermodilution technique are both performed dur-
ing cardiac catheterization, although the Fick method 
is considered more reliable in the presence of tricus-
pid regurgitation and in low-output states. The Fick 
method uses oxygen as the indicator substance and is 
based on the principle that the amount of a substance 
SECTION II
Diagnosis of Cardiovascular Disorders
122
content indicates the presence of a left-to-right shunt while 
a “step down” indicates a right-to-left shunt. The shunt is 
localized by detecting a difference in oxygen saturation levels 
of 5–7% between adjacent cardiac chambers. The severity 
of the shunt is determined by the ratio of pulmonary blood 
flow (Qp) to the systemic blood flow (Qs), or Qp/Qs = 
([systemic arterial oxygen content − mixed venous oxygen 
content]/pulmonary vein oxygen content − pulmonary 
artery oxygen content). For an atrial septal defect, a shunt 
ratio of 1.5 is considered significant and factored with other 
clinical variables to determine the need for intervention. 
When a congenital ventricular septal defect is present, a 
shunt ratio of ≥2.0 with evidence of left ventricular volume 
overload is a class I indication for surgical correction.
Ventriculography and Aortography
Ventriculography to assess left ventricular function may 
be performed during cardiac catheterization. A pig-
tail catheter is advanced retrograde across the aortic 
valve into the left ventricle and 30–45 mL of contrast is 
power-injected to visualize the left ventricular chamber 
during the cardiac cycle. The ventriculogram is usually 
performed in the right anterior oblique projection to 
examine wall motion and mitral valve function. Nor-
mal wall motion is observed as symmetric contraction 
of all segments; hypokinetic segments have decreased 
contraction, akinetic segments do not contract, and dys-
kinetic segments appear to bulge paradoxically during 
systole (Fig. 13-3). Ventriculography may also reveal 
for aortic valve and 0.85 for the mitral valve. A valve 
area of <1.0 cm2 and a mean gradient of greater than 
40 mmHg indicate severe aortic stenosis, while a valve 
area of <1.5 cm2 and a mean gradient >5–10 mmHg is 
consistent with moderate-to-severe mitral stenosis; in 
symptomatic patients with a mitral valve area >1.5 cm2, 
a mean gradient >15 mmHg, pulmonary artery pressure 
>60 mmHg, or a pulmonary artery wedge pressure >25 
mmHg after exercise is also considered significant and 
may warrant intervention. The modified Hakki formula 
has also been used to estimate aortic valve area. This 
formula calculates the valve area as the cardiac output 
(L/min) divided by the square root of the pressure gra-
dient. Aortic valve area calculations based on the Gorlin 
formula are flow-dependent and, therefore, for patients 
with low cardiac outputs, it is imperative to determine if 
a decreased valve area actually reflects a fixed stenosis or 
is overestimated by a low cardiac output and stroke vol-
ume that is insufficient to open the valve leaflets fully. 
In these instances, cautious hemodynamic manipulation 
using dobutamine to increase the cardiac output and 
recalculation of the aortic valve area may be necessary.
Intracardiac shunts
In patients with congenital heart disease, detection, local-
ization, and quantification of the intracardiac shunt should 
be evaluated. A shunt should be suspected when there is 
unexplained arterial desaturation or increased oxygen satu-
ration of venous blood. A “step up” or increase in oxygen 
Figure 13-3 
Left ventriculogram at end dias-
tole (left) and end systole (right). 
In patients with normal left ven-
tricular function, the ventriculogram 
reveals symmetric contraction of 
all walls (top). Patients with coro-
nary artery disease may have wall 
motion abnormalities on ventricu-
lography as seen in this 60-year-old 
male following a large anterior myo-
cardial infarction. In systole, the 
anterior, apical, and inferior walls 
are akinetic (white arrows) (bottom).
DIASTOLE
SYSTOLE
 
CHAPTER 13
Diagnostic Cardiac Catheterization and Coronary Angiography 
123
injection of radiopaque contrast agents create a coronary 
“luminogram” that is recorded on a radiographic images 
(cine angiography). Because the coronary arteries are 
three-dimensional objects that are in motion with the 
cardiac cycle, angiograms of the vessels using several dif-
ferent orthogonal projections are taken to best visualize 
the vessels without overlap or foreshortening.
The normal coronary anatomy is highly variable 
between individuals, but, in general, there are two cor-
onary ostia and three major coronary vessels—the left 
anterior descending, the left circumflex, and the right 
coronary arteries with the left anterior descending and 
left circumflex arteries arising from the left main cor-
onary artery (Fig. 13-4). When the right coronary 
artery is the origin of the A-V nodal branch, the pos-
terior descending artery, and the posterior lateral ves-
sels, the circulation is defined as right dominant; this 
is found in ∼85% of individuals. When these branches 
arise from the left circumflex artery as occurs in ∼5% of 
individuals, the circulation is defined as left dominant. 
The remaining ∼10% of patients have a codominant cir-
culation with vessels arising from both the right and left 
coronary circulation. In some patients, a ramus interme-
dius branch arises directly from the left main coronary 
artery; this finding is a normal variant. Coronary artery 
anomalies occur in 1–2% of patients, with separate 
ostia for the left anterior descending and left circumflex 
arteries being the most common (0.41%).
Coronary angiography visualizes coronary artery 
stenoses as luminal narrowings on the cine angiogram. 
The degree of narrowing is referred to as the percent 
stenosis and is determined visually by comparing the 
most severely diseased segment with a proximal or distal 
a left ventricular aneurysm, pseudoaneurysm, or diver-
ticulum and can be used to assess mitral valve prolapse 
and the severity of mitral regurgitation. The degree of 
mitral regurgitation is estimated by comparing the den-
sity of contrast opacification of the left atrium with that 
of the left ventricle. Minimal contrast reflux into the 
left atrium is considered 1+ mitral regurgitation while 
contrast density in the left atrium that is greater than 
that in the left ventricle with reflux of contrast into the 
pulmonary veins within three beats defines 4+ mitral 
regurgitation.
Aortography in the cardiac catheterization laboratory 
visualizes abnormalities of the ascending aorta, including 
aneurysmal dilation and involvement of the great ves-
sels, as well as dissection with compression of the true 
lumen by an intimal flap that separates the true and false 
lumina. Aortography can also be used to identify patent 
saphenous vein grafts that elude selective cannulation, 
identify shunts that involve the aorta such as a patent 
ductus arteriosus, and provide a qualitative assessment of 
aortic regurgitation using a 1+ – 4+ scale similar to that 
used for mitral regurgitation.
Coronary Angiography
Selective coronary angiography is almost always per-
formed during cardiac catheterization and is used to 
define the coronary anatomy and determine the extent 
of epicardial coronary artery and coronary artery bypass 
graft disease. Specially shaped coronary catheters are 
used to engage the left and right coronary ostia. Hand 
Figure 13-4 
Normal coronary artery anatomy. A. Coronary angiogram 
showing the left circumflex (LCx) artery and its obtuse mar-
ginal (OM) branches. The left anterior descending artery 
(LAD) is also seen but may be foreshortened in this view. 
B. The LAD and its diagonal (D) branches are best seen in 
cranial views. In this angiogram, the left main (LM) coronary 
artery is also seen. C. The right coronary artery gives off the 
posterior descending artery (PDA) so this is a right-dominant 
circulation.
LAD
RCA
LCx
LAD
LM
A
B
C
OM
D
PDA
SECTION II
Diagnosis of Cardiovascular Disorders
124
Intravascular Ultrasound, 
Fractional Flow Reserve, and 
Coronary Flow Reserve
During coronary angiography, intermediate stenoses 
(40–70%), indeterminate findings, or anatomic findings 
that are incongruous with the patient’s symptoms may 
require further interrogation. In these cases, intravascu-
lar ultrasound provides a more accurate anatomic assess-
ment of the coronary artery and the degree of coronary 
atherosclerosis (Fig. 13-5). Intravascular ultrasound is 
performed using a small flexible catheter with a 40-mHz 
transducer at its tip that is advanced into the coronary 
artery over a guidewire. Data from intravascular ultra-
sound studies may be used to image atherosclerotic 
plaque precisely, determine luminal cross-sectional area, 
and measure vessel size; it is also used during or follow-
ing percutaneous coronary intervention to assess the ste-
nosis and determine the adequacy of stent placement. 
Measurement of the fractional flow reserve provides a 
functional assessment of the stenosis. The fractional 
flow reserve is the ratio of the pressure in the coronary 
artery distal to the stenosis divided by the pressure in the 
artery proximal to the stenosis at maximal vasodilation. 
Fractional flow reserve is measured using a coronary 
pressure–sensor guidewire at rest and at maximal hyper-
emia following the injection of adenosine. A fractional 
flow reserve of <0.75 indicates a hemodynamically 
significant stenosis that would benefit from interven-
tion. Measurement of coronary flow reserve is another 
technique to assess the functional severity of a stenosis, 
although this technique is used with less frequency than 
fractional flow reserve. The coronary flow reserve is the 
maximal coronary blood flow increase above resting 
conditions during maximal vasodilation and is a measure 
of both epicardial coronary artery and microvascular 
function. Coronary flow reserve is determined using a 
Doppler flow guidewire before and after the adminis-
tration of adenosine to induce hyperemia. A coronary 
flow reserve <2:1 after maximal hyperemia is consid-
ered abnormal.
Postprocedure Care
Once the procedure is completed, vascular access 
sheaths are removed. If the femoral approach is used, 
direct manual compression or vascular closure devices 
that immediately close the arteriotomy site with a sta-
ple/clip, collagen plug, or suture are used to achieve 
hemostasis. These devices decrease the length of bed 
rest (from 6 h to 2–4 h) and improve patient satisfaction 
but have not been shown definitively to be superior to 
manual compression with respect to access-site compli-
cations. When cardiac catheterization is performed as 
an elective outpatient procedure, the patient completes 
“normal segment” mg; a stenosis >50% is considered 
significant (Fig. 13-5). Online quantitative coronary 
angiography can provide a more accurate assessment of 
the percent stenosis and lessen the tendency to overes-
timate lesion severity visually. The presence of a myo-
cardial bridge, which most commonly involves the left 
anterior descending artery, may be mistaken for a signif-
icant stenosis; this occurs when a portion of the vessel 
dips below the epicardial surface into the myocardium 
and is subject to compressive forces during ventricular 
systole. The key to differentiating a myocardial bridge 
from a fixed stenosis is that the “stenosed” part of the 
vessel returns to normal during diastole. Coronary cal-
cification is also seen during angiography prior to the 
injection of contrast agents. Collateral blood vessels may 
be seen traversing from one vessel to the distal vascu-
lature of a severely stenosed or totally occluded vessel. 
Thrombolysis in myocardial infarction (TIMI) flow 
grade, a measure of the relative duration of time that it 
takes for contrast to opacify the coronary artery fully, 
may provide an additional clue to the degree of lesion 
severity, and the presence of TIMI grade 1 or 2 flow 
suggests that a significant coronary artery stenosis is 
present.
A
B
C
D
A
B
C
D
Figure 13-5 
Coronary stenoses on cine angiogram and intravascular 
ultrasound. Significant stenoses in the coronary artery are 
seen as narrowings (black arrows) of the vessel. Intravascu-
lar ultrasound shows a normal segment of artery (A), areas 
with eccentric plaque (B, C), and near total obliteration of the 
lumen at the site of the significant stenosis (D). Note that the 
intravascular ultrasound catheter is present in the images as 
a black circle.
 
CHAPTER 13
Diagnostic Cardiac Catheterization and Coronary Angiography 
125
significant comorbidities, patients with complications 
occurring during the catheterization, or in patients who 
have undergone a percutaneous coronary intervention. 
Hypotension early after the procedure may be due to 
inadequate fluid replacement or retroperitoneal bleeding 
from the access site.
postprocedure bed rest in a monitored setting and is 
discharged home with instructions to liberalize fluids 
because contrast agents promote an osmotic diuresis, 
to avoid strenuous activity, and to observe the vascular 
access site for signs of complications. Overnight hospi-
talization may be required for high-risk patients with 
This page intentionally left blank 
Heart Rhythm  
Disturbances
SECTION III
 David D. spragg  I   Gordon F. tomaselli 
128
 HISTORY AND INTRODUCTION 
 The fi eld of cardiac electrophysiology was ushered in 
with the development of the electrocardiogram (ECG) 
by Einthoven at the turn of the twentieth century. The 
recording of cellular membrane currents revealed that 
the body surface ECG is the timed sum of the cellular 
action potentials in the atria and ventricles. In the late 
1960s, the development of intracavitary recording, in 
particular the ability to record His bundle electrograms 
with programmed stimulation of the heart, marked the 
beginning of contemporary clinical electrophysiology. 
Adoption of radio frequency technology to ablate car-
diac tissue in the early 1990s heralded the birth of inter-
ventional cardiac electrophysiology. 
 The clinical problem of sudden death caused by ven-
tricular arrhythmias, most commonly in the setting of 
coronary obstruction, was recognized as early as the 
late nineteenth century. The problem was vexing and 
led to the development of pharmacologic and nonphar-
macologic therapies, including transthoracic defi brilla-
tors, cardiac massage, and, most recently, implantable 
defi brillators. Over time the limitations of antiarrhyth-
mic drug therapy have been highlighted repeatedly in 
clinical trials, and now ablation and devices are fi rst-line 
therapy for a number of cardiac arrhythmias. 
 In the last two decades, the genetic basis of a num-
ber of heritable arrhythmias has been elucidated, reveal-
ing important insights into the mechanisms not only of 
these rare arrhythmias but also of similar rhythm dis-
turbances observed in more common forms of heart 
disease. 
 dESCrIpTIVE phySIOlOgy 
 The normal cardiac impulse is generated by pacemaker 
cells in the sinoatrial node situated at the junction of the 
right atrium and the superior vena cava (see  Fig. 11-1 ). 
 PRINCIPLES OF ELECTROPHYSIOLOGY 
 CHAPTER 14 
This impulse is transmitted slowly through nodal tissue 
to the anatomically complex atria, where it is conducted 
more rapidly to the atrioventricular node (AVN), 
inscribing the P wave of the ECG (see  Fig. 11-2 ). 
There is a perceptible delay in conduction through the 
anatomically and functionally heterogeneous AVN. The 
time needed for activation of the atria and the AVN 
delay is represented as the PR interval of the ECG. The 
AVN is the only electrical connection between the atria 
and the ventricles in the normal heart. The electrical 
impulse emerges from the AVN and is transmitted to 
the His-Purkinje system, specifi cally the common bun-
dle of His, then the left and right bundle branches, and 
then to the Purkinje network, facilitating activation of 
ventricular muscle. In normal circumstances, the ven-
tricles are activated rapidly in a well-defi ned fashion that 
is determined by the course of the Purkinje network, 
and this inscribes the QRS complex (see  Fig. 11-2 ). 
Recovery of electrical excitability occurs more slowly 
and is governed by the time of activation and dura-
tion of regional action potentials. The relative brevity 
of epicardial action potentials in the ventricle results 
in repolarization that occurs fi rst on the epicardial sur-
face and then proceeds to the endocardium, which 
inscribes a T wave normally of the same polarity as the 
QRS complex. The duration of activation and recov-
ery is determined by the action potential duration rep-
resented on the body surface ECG by the QT interval 
(see  Fig. 11-2 ). 
 Cardiac myocytes exhibit a characteristically long 
action potential (200–400 ms) compared with neurons 
and skeletal muscle cells (1–5 ms). The action potential 
profi le is sculpted by the orchestrated activity of mul-
tiple distinctive time- and voltage-dependent ionic cur-
rents  ( Fig. 14-1 A ) . The currents in turn are carried 
by transmembrane proteins that passively conduct ions 
down their electrochemical gradients through selective 
pores (ion channels), actively transport ions against their 
 
CHAPTER 14
Principles of Electrophysiology
129
electrochemical gradient (pumps, transporters), or elec-
trogenically exchange ionic species (exchangers).
Action potentials in the heart are regionally distinct. 
The regional variability in cardiac action potentials is 
a result of differences in the number and types of ion 
channel proteins expressed by different cell types in the 
heart. Further, unique sets of ionic currents are active in 
pacemaking and muscle cells, and the relative contribu-
tions of these currents may vary in the same cell type in 
different regions of the heart (Fig. 14-1A).
Ion channels are complex, multisubunit transmem-
brane glycoproteins that open and close in response to a 
number of biologic stimuli, including a change in mem-
brane voltage, ligand binding (directly to the channel 
or to a G protein–coupled receptor), and mechanical 
deformation (Fig. 14-2). Other ion motive exchang-
ers and transporters contribute importantly to cellular 
excitability in the heart. Ion pumps establish and main-
tain the ionic gradients across the cell membrane that 
serve as the driving force for current flow through ion 
channels. Transporters or exchangers that do not move 
ions in an electrically neutral manner (e.g., the sodium-
calcium exchanger transports three Na+ for one Ca2+) 
are termed electrogenic and contribute directly to the 
action potential profile.
The most abundant superfamily of ion channels 
expressed in the heart is voltage gated. Several structural 
themes are common to all voltage-dependent ion chan-
nels. First, the architecture is modular, consisting either 
of four homologous subunits (e.g., K channels) or of four 
internally homologous domains (e.g., Na and Ca chan-
nels). Second, the proteins fold around a central pore 
lined by amino acids that exhibit exquisite conservation 
within a given channel family of like selectivity (e.g., 
jellyfish, eel, fruit fly, and human Na channels have very 
similar P segments). Third, the general strategy for activa-
tion gating (opening and closing in response to changes in 
membrane voltage) is highly conserved: the fourth trans-
membrane segment (S4), studded with positively charged 
residues, lies within the membrane field and moves in 
response to depolarization, opening the channel. Fourth, 
most ion channel complexes include not only the pore-
forming proteins (α subunits) but also auxiliary subunits 
(e.g., β subunits) that modify channel function (Fig. 14-2).
Na and Ca channels are the primary carriers of 
depolarizing current in both the atria and the ven-
tricles; inactivation of these currents and activation of 
repolarizing K currents hyperpolarize the heart cells, 
reestablishing the negative resting membrane poten-
tial (Fig. 14-1B). The plateau phase is a time when 
Figure 14-1 
A. Cellular atrial and ventricular action potentials. Phases 0–4 
are the rapid upstroke, early repolarization, plateau, late 
repolarization, and diastole, respectively. The ionic currents 
and their respective genes are shown above and below the 
action potentials. The currents that underlie the action poten-
tials vary in atrial and ventricular myocytes. B. A ventricular 
action potential with a schematic of the ionic currents flowing 
during the phases of the action potential. Potassium current 
(IK1) is the principal current during phase 4 and determines 
the resting membrane potential of the myocyte. Sodium cur-
rent generates the upstroke of the action potential (phase 0); 
activation of Ito with inactivation of the Na current inscribes 
early repolarization (phase 1). The plateau (phase 2) is gen-
erated by a balance of repolarizing potassium currents and 
depolarizing calcium current. Inactivation of the calcium cur-
rent with persistent activation of potassium currents (pre-
dominantly IKr and IKs) causes phase 3 repolarization.
Ventricular AP
Current
GENE (Protein)
Depolarizing
Repolarizing
INa
ICa-L
INa
ICa-L
INCX
IK1
Ito
IKr
IKs
IK1
Ito
IKr
IKs
IKur
SCN5A (Nav1.5)
CACNA1C (Cav1.2)
SLC8A1 (NCX1.1)
KCNJ2 (Kir2.1)
voltage
outward
inward
time
voltage
0 1
2
3
4
4
0
1
2
3
time
KCND3/KCNIP2  (Kv4.3/KChIP2)
KCNH2/KCNE2 (HERG/MiRP-1)
KCNQ1/KCNE1 (KVLQT1/minK)
KCNA5 (Kv1.5)
Atrial AP
A
B
Na+
K+
K+
K+
Ca2+
SECTION III
Heart Rhythm Disturbances
130
little current is flowing, and relatively minor changes in 
depolarizing or repolarizing currents can have profound 
effects on the shape and duration of the action profile. 
Mutations in subunits of these channel proteins produce 
arrhythmogenic alterations in the action potentials that 
cause long and short QT syndrome, idiopathic ven-
tricular fibrillation, familial atrial fibrillation, and some 
forms of conduction system disease.
Mechanisms of Cardiac Arrhythmias
Cardiac arrhythmias result from abnormalities of 
electrical impulse generation, conduction, or both. 
Bradyarrhythmias typically arise from disturbances in 
impulse formation at the level of the sinoatrial node or 
from disturbances in impulse propagation at any level, 
including exit block from the sinus node, conduction 
block in the AV node, and impaired conduction in the 
His-Purkinje system. Tachyarrhythmias can be classified 
according to mechanism, including enhanced automa-
ticity (spontaneous depolarization of atrial, junctional, 
or ventricular pacemakers), reentry (circus propagation 
of a depolarizing wavefront), or triggered arrhythmias 
(initiated by afterdepolarizations) occurring during or 
immediately after cardiac repolarization, during phase 3 
or 4 of the action potential. A variety of mapping and 
pacing maneuvers typically performed during invasive 
electrophysiologic testing can often determine the under-
lying mechanism of a tachyarrhythmia (Table 14-1).
Alterations in impulse initiation: Automaticity
Spontaneous (phase 4) diastolic depolarization underlies 
the property of automaticity (pacemaking) characteristic 
of cells in the sinoatrial (SA) and atrioventricular (AV) 
nodes, His-Purkinje system, coronary sinus, and pulmo-
nary veins. Phase 4 depolarization results from the con-
certed action of a number of ionic currents, including 
K+ currents, Ca2+ currents, electrogenic Na, K-ATPase, 
the Na-Ca exchanger, and the so-called funny, or pace-
maker, current (If); however, the relative importance of 
these currents remains controversial.
The rate of phase 4 depolarization and, therefore, the 
firing rates of pacemaker cells are dynamically regulated. 
Prominent among the factors that modulate phase 4 is 
autonomic nervous system tone. The negative chrono-
tropic effect of activation of the parasympathetic ner-
vous system is a result of the release of acetylcholine 
that binds to muscarinic receptors, releasing G protein 
βγ subunits that activate a potassium current (IKACh) in 
nodal and atrial cells. The resulting increase in K+ con-
ductance opposes membrane depolarization, slowing 
the rate of rise of phase 4 of the action potential. Con-
versely, augmentation of sympathetic nervous system 
tone increases myocardial catecholamine concentrations, 
which activate both α– and β–adrenergic receptors. 
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
K channels
N
N
N
N
N
N
C
C
C
P
P
P P
P
S
S
P
K+
X4
C
C
α Subunits
Extracellular
Intracellular
Inactivation
Pore
segments
LA
binding
β Subunits
β1
β
γ
δ
α1
α2
β2
Na channels
Ca channels
Figure 14-2 
Topology and subunit composition of the voltage-
dependent ion channels. Potassium channels are formed by 
the tetramerization of α or pore-forming subunits and one or 
more β subunits; only single β subunits are shown for clarity. 
Sodium and calcium channels are composed of α subunits with 
four homologous domains and one or more ancillary subunits. In 
all channel types the loop of protein between the fifth and sixth 
membrane-spanning repeat in each subunit or domain forms 
the ion-selective pore. In the case of the sodium channel, the 
channel is a target for phosphorylation, the linker between the 
third and fourth homologous domain is critical to inactivation, 
and the sixth membrane-spanning repeat in the fourth domain is 
important in local anesthetic antiarrhythmic drug binding.
 
CHAPTER 14
Principles of Electrophysiology
131
The effect of β1-adrenergic stimulation predominates 
in pacemaking cells, augmenting both L-type Ca cur-
rent (ICa-L) and If, thus increasing the slope of phase 4. 
Enhanced sympathetic nervous system activity can dra-
matically increase the rate of firing of SA nodal cells, 
producing sinus tachycardia with rates >200 beats/min. 
By contrast, the increased rate of firing of Purkinje cells 
is more limited, rarely producing ventricular tachyar-
rhythmias >120 beats/min.
Normal automaticity may be affected by a number 
other factors associated with heart disease. Hypokalemia 
and ischemia may reduce the activity of Na, K-ATPase, 
thereby reducing the background repolarizing current 
and enhancing phase 4 diastolic depolarization. The end 
result would be an increase in the spontaneous firing 
rate of pacemaking cells. Modest increases in extracellu-
lar potassium may render the maximum diastolic poten-
tial more positive, thereby also increasing the firing 
rate of pacemaking cells. A more significant increase in 
[K+]o, however, renders the heart inexcitable by depo-
larizing the membrane potential.
Normal or enhanced automaticity of subsidiary latent 
pacemakers produces escape rhythms in the setting of 
failure of more dominant pacemakers. Suppression of a 
pacemaker cell by a faster rhythm leads to an increased 
intracellular Na+ load ([Na+]i), and extrusion of Na+ 
from the cell by Na, K-ATPase produces an increased 
background repolarizing current that slows phase 4 dia-
stolic depolarization. At slower rates, [Na+]i is decreased, 
as is the activity of the Na, K-ATPase, resulting in 
progressively more rapid diastolic depolarization and 
warm-up of the tachycardia rate. Overdrive suppres-
sion and warm-up are characteristic of, but may not be 
observed in, all automatic tachycardias. Abnormal con-
duction into tissue with enhanced automaticity (entrance 
block) may blunt or eliminate the phenomena of over-
drive suppression and warm-up of automatic tissue.
Abnormal automaticity may underlie atrial tachycar-
dia, accelerated idioventricular rhythms, and ventricular 
tachycardia, particularly that associated with ischemia 
and reperfusion. It has also been suggested that injury 
currents at the borders of ischemic myocardium may 
depolarize adjacent nonischemic tissue, predisposing to 
automatic ventricular tachycardia.
Afterdepolarizations and triggered 
automaticity
Triggered automaticity or activity refers to impulse initia-
tion that is dependent on afterdepolarizations (Fig. 14-3). 
Afterdepolarizations are membrane voltage oscillations that 
occur during (early afterdepolarizations, EADs) or after 
(delayed afterdepolarizations, DADs) an action potential.
The cellular feature common to the induction of DADs 
is the presence of an increased Ca2+ load in the cytosol 
and sarcoplasmic reticulum. Digitalis glycoside toxicity, 
catecholamines, and ischemia all can enhance Ca2+ load-
ing sufficiently to produce DADs. Accumulation of lyso-
phospholipids in ischemic myocardium with consequent 
Na+ and Ca2+ overload has been suggested as a mechanism 
Table 14-1
Arrhythmia Mechanisms
Electrophysiologic 
Property
Molecular Components
Mechanism
Prototypic Arrhythmias
Cellular
Impulse Initiation
Automaticity
If, ICa-L, ICa-T, IK, IK1
Suppression/acceleration 
of phase 4
Sinus bradycardia, sinus 
tachycardia
Triggered automaticity
Calcium overload, ITI
ICa-L, IK, INa
DADs
EADs
Digitalis toxicity, reperfusion VT
Torsades des pointes, 
congenital and acquired
Excitation
INa
IK-ATP
ICa-L
Suppression of phase 0
AP shortening, inexcitability
Suppression
Ischemic VF
AV block
Repolarization
INa, ICa-L, IK, IK1, Ca2+ homeostasis
ICa-L, K channels, 
Ca2+ homeostasis
AP prolongation, 
EADs, DADs
AP shortening
Polymorphic VT (HF, LVH)
Atrial fibrillation
Multicellular
Cellular Coupling
Connexins (Cx43), INa, IK-ATP
Decreased coupling
Ischemic VT/VF
Tissue Structure
Extracellular matrix, collagen
Excitable gap and 
functional reentry
Monomorphic VT, 
atrial fibrillation
Abbreviations: AP, action potential; AV, atrioventricular; DADs, delayed afterdepolarizations; EADs, early afterdepolarizations; HF, heart failure; 
LVH, left ventricular hypertrophy; VF, ventricular fibrillation; VT, ventricular tachyarrhythmia.
SECTION III
Heart Rhythm Disturbances
132
for DADs and triggered automaticity. Cells from damaged 
areas or cells that survive a myocardial infarction may dis-
play spontaneous release of calcium from the sarcoplasmic 
reticulum, and this may generate “waves” of intracellular 
calcium elevation and arrhythmias.
EADs occur during the action potential and interrupt 
the orderly repolarization of the myocyte. Traditionally, 
EADs have been thought to arise from action potential 
prolongation and reactivation of depolarizing currents, 
but more recent experimental evidence suggests a previ-
ously unappreciated interrelationship between intracel-
lular calcium loading and EADs. Cytosolic calcium may 
increase when action potentials are prolonged. This, 
in turn, appears to enhance L-type Ca current, further 
prolonging action potential duration as well as provid-
ing the inward current driving EADs. Intracellular cal-
cium loading by action potential prolongation may also 
enhance the likelihood of DADs. The interrelationship 
among intracellular [Ca2+], EADs, and DADs may be 
one explanation for the susceptibility of hearts that are 
calcium loaded (e.g., in ischemia or congestive heart 
failure) to develop arrhythmias, particularly on exposure 
to action potential–prolonging drugs.
EAD-triggered arrhythmias exhibit rate dependence. 
In general, the amplitude of an EAD is augmented at 
slow rates when action potentials are longer. Indeed, a 
fundamental condition that underlies the development of 
EADs is action potential and QT prolongation. Hypo-
kalemia, hypomagnesemia, bradycardia, and, most com-
monly, drugs can predispose to the generation of EADs, 
invariably in the context of prolonging the action poten-
tial. Antiarrhythmics with class IA and III action (see later) 
produce action potential and QT prolongation intended 
to be therapeutic but frequently causing arrhythmias. 
Noncardiac drugs such as phenothiazines, nonsedat-
ing antihistamines, and some antibiotics can also pro-
long the action potential duration and predispose to 
EAD-mediated triggered arrhythmias. Decreased [K+]o 
paradoxically may decrease membrane potassium cur-
rents (particularly the delayed rectifier current, IKr) in 
the ventricular myocyte, explaining why hypokalemia 
causes action potential prolongation and EADs. In fact, 
potassium infusions in patients with the congenital long 
QT syndrome (LQTS) and in those with drug-induced 
acquired QT prolongation shorten the QT interval.
EAD-mediated triggered activity probably under-
lies initiation of the characteristic polymorphic ventricu-
lar tachycardia, torsades des pointes, seen in patients with 
congenital and acquired forms of LQTS. Structural heart 
disease such as cardiac hypertrophy and failure may also 
delay ventricular repolarization (so-called electrical remod-
eling) and predispose to arrhythmias related to abnormali-
ties of repolarization. The abnormalities of repolarization 
in hypertrophy and heart failure are often magnified by 
concomitant drug therapy or electrolyte disturbances.
Abnormal impulse conduction: Reentry
The most common arrhythmia mechanism is reentry. 
Fundamentally, reentry is defined as circulation of an 
activation wave around an inexcitable obstacle. Thus, 
the requirements for reentry are two electrophysiologi-
cally dissimilar pathways for impulse propagation around 
an inexcitable region such that unidirectional block 
occurs in one of the pathways and a region of excitable 
tissue exists at the head of the propagating wavefront 
(Fig. 14-4). Structural and electrophysiologic properties 
EAD
DAD
50 mV
0.5 s
0 mV
Reactivation
of L-type Ca
current
 
Intracellular
Ca2+ overload 
Figure 14-3 
Schematic action potentials with early afterdepolarizations 
(EADs) and delayed afterdepolarizations (DADs). Afterde-
polarizations are spontaneous depolarizations in cardiac 
myocytes. EADs occur before the end of the action poten-
tial (phases 2 and 3), interrupting repolarization. DADs occur 
during phase 4 of the action potential after completion of 
repolarization. The cellular mechanisms of EADs and DADs 
differ (see text).
Reentrant 
circuit
slow
Initiation of 
reentry
block
Sustained  
reentry
Termination of 
reentry
gap
A
B
C
D
Figure 14-4 
Schematic diagram of reentry. A. The circuit contains two 
limbs, one with slow conduction. B. A premature impulse 
blocks in the fast pathway and conducts over the slow path-
way, allowing the fast pathway to recover so that the activa-
tion wave can reenter the fast pathway from the retrograde 
direction. C. During sustained reentry utilizing such a circuit, 
a gap (excitable gap) exists between the activating head of 
the wave and the recovering tail. D. One mechanism of ter-
mination of reentry occurs when the conduction and recovery 
characteristics of the circuit change and the activating head of 
the wave collides with the tail, extinguishing the tachycardia.
 
CHAPTER 14
Principles of Electrophysiology
133
of the heart may contribute to the development of the 
inexcitable obstacle and that of unidirectional block. 
The complex geometry of muscle bundles in the heart 
and spatial heterogeneity of cellular coupling or other 
active membrane properties (i.e., ionic currents) appear 
to be critical.
A key feature in classifying reentrant arrhythmias, 
particularly for therapy, is the presence and size of an 
excitable gap. An excitable gap exists when the tachy-
cardia circuit is longer than the tachycardia wavelength 
(λ = conduction velocity × refractory period, repre-
senting the size of the circuit that can sustain reentry), 
allowing appropriately timed stimuli to reset propaga-
tion in the circuit. Reentrant arrhythmias may exist in 
the heart in the absence of an excitable gap and with a 
tachycardia wavelength nearly the same size as the path 
length. In this case, the wavefront propagates through 
partially refractory tissue with no anatomic obstacle 
and no fully excitable gap; this is referred to as leading 
circle reentry, a form of functional reentry (reentry that 
depends on functional properties of the tissue). Unlike 
excitable gap reentry, there is no fixed anatomic cir-
cuit in leading circle reentry, and it may therefore not 
be possible to disrupt the tachycardia with pacing or 
destruction of a part of the circuit. Furthermore, the 
circuit in leading circle reentry tends to be less stable 
than that in excitable gap reentrant arrhythmias, with 
large variations in cycle length and a predilection to 
termination.
Anatomically determined, excitable gap reentry can 
explain several clinically important tachycardias, such 
as AV reentry, atrial flutter, bundle branch reentry 
ventricular tachycardia, and ventricular tachycardia in 
scarred myocardium. There is strong evidence to sug-
gest that other, less organized arrhythmias, such as atrial 
and ventricular fibrillation, are associated with more 
complex activation of the heart and are due to func-
tional reentry.
Structural heart disease is associated with changes in 
conduction and refractoriness that increase the risk of 
reentrant arrhythmias. Chronically ischemic myocar-
dium exhibits a downregulation of the gap junction 
channel protein (connexin 43) that carries intercellular 
ionic current. The border zones of infarcted and fail-
ing ventricular myocardium exhibit not only functional 
alterations of ionic currents but also remodeling of tissue 
and altered distribution of gap junctions. The changes 
in gap junction channel expression and distribution, in 
combination with macroscopic tissue alterations, sup-
port a role for slowed conduction in reentrant arrhyth-
mias that complicate chronic coronary artery disease 
(CAD). Aged human atrial myocardium exhibits altered 
conduction, manifest as highly fractionated atrial elec-
trograms, producing an ideal substrate for the reentry 
that may underlie the very common development of 
atrial fibrillation in the elderly.
Approach to the
Patient 
Cardiac Arrhythmias
The evaluation of patients with suspected cardiac 
arrhythmias is highly individualized; however, two key 
features—the history and ECG—are pivotal in direct-
ing the diagnostic workup and therapy. Patients with 
cardiac arrhythmias exhibit a wide spectrum of clini-
cal presentations that range from asymptomatic ECG 
abnormalities to survival from cardiac arrest. In gen-
eral, the more severe the presenting symptoms are, the 
more aggressive the evaluation and treatment are. Loss 
of consciousness that is believed to be of cardiac origin 
typically mandates an exhaustive search for the etiol-
ogy and often requires invasive, device-based therapy. 
The presence of structural heart disease and prior myo-
cardial infarction dictates a change in the approach to 
the management of syncope or ventricular arrhythmias. 
The presence of a family history of serious ventricular 
arrhythmias or premature sudden death will influence 
the evaluation of presumed heritable arrhythmias.
The physical examination is focused on determining 
whether there is cardiopulmonary disease that is asso-
ciated with specific cardiac arrhythmias. The absence 
of significant cardiopulmonary disease often, but not 
always, suggests benignity of the rhythm disturbance. 
In contrast, palpitations, syncope, or near syncope in the 
setting of significant heart or lung disease have more 
ominous implications. In addition, the physical examina-
tion may reveal the presence of a persistent arrhythmia 
such as atrial fibrillation.
The judicious use of noninvasive diagnostic tests 
is an important element in the evaluation of patients 
with arrhythmias, and there is no test more important 
than the ECG, particularly if recorded at the time of 
symptoms. Uncommon but diagnostically important 
signatures of electrophysiologic disturbances may be 
unearthed on the resting ECG, such as delta waves in 
Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW) syndrome, prolonga-
tion or shortening of the QT interval, right precordial 
ST-segment abnormalities in Brugada syndrome, and 
epsilon waves in arrhythmogenic right ventricular dys-
plasia. Variants of body surface ECG recording can pro-
vide important information about arrhythmia substrates 
and triggers. Holter monitoring and event recording, 
either continuous or intermittent, record the body sur-
face ECG over longer periods, enhancing the possibil-
ity of observing the cardiac rhythm during symptoms. 
Implantable long-term monitors and commercial ambu-
latory ECG monitoring services permit prolonged tele-
metric monitoring both for diagnosis and to assess the 
efficacy of therapy.
Long-term recordings permit the assessment of the 
time-varying behavior of the heart rhythm. Heart rate 
variability (HRV) and QT interval variability (QTV) pro-
vide noninvasive methods to assess autonomic nervous 
SECTION III
Heart Rhythm Disturbances
134
system influence on the heart. A decrease in HRV has 
been associated with increased sympathetic nervous 
system tone and increased mortality rates in patients 
after myocardial infarction. Signal-averaged electrocar-
diography (SAECG) uses signal-averaging techniques to 
amplify small potentials in the body surface ECG that 
are associated with slow conduction in the myocardium. 
The presence of these small potentials, referred to as 
late potentials because of their timing with respect to 
the QRS complex, and prolongation of the filtered (or 
averaged) QRS duration are indicative of slowed con-
duction in the ventricle and have been associated with 
an increased risk of ventricular arrhythmias after myo-
cardial infarction. Exercise electrocardiography is impor-
tant in determining the presence of myocardial demand 
ischemia; more recently, analysis of the morphology of 
the QT interval with exercise has been used to assess 
the risk of serious ventricular arrhythmias. Microscopic 
alterations in the T wave (T wave alternans, TWA) at low 
heart rates may identify patients at risk for ventricular 
arrhythmias. Cardiac imaging plays an important role in 
the detection and characterization of myocardial struc-
tural abnormalities that may render the heart more sus-
ceptible to arrhythmia. Ventricular tachyarrhythmias, for 
instance, occur more frequently in patients with ventric-
ular systolic dysfunction and chamber dilation, in hyper-
trophic cardiomyopathy, and in the setting of infiltrative 
diseases such as sarcoidosis. Supraventricular arrhyth-
mias may be associated with particular congenital con-
ditions, including AV reentry in the setting of Ebstein’s 
anomaly. Echocardiography is a frequently employed 
imaging technique to screen for disorders of cardiac 
structure and function. Increasingly, magnetic reso-
nance (MR) imaging of the myocardium is being used to 
screen for scar burden, fibrofatty infiltration of the myo-
cardium as seen in arrhythmogenic right ventricular car-
diomyopathy, and other structural changes that affect 
arrhythmia susceptibility.
Head-up tilt (HUT) testing is useful in the evalua-
tion of some patients with syncope. The physiologic 
response to HUT is incompletely understood; however, 
redistribution of blood volume and increased ventricu-
lar contractility occur consistently. Exaggerated activa-
tion of a central reflex in response to HUT produces a 
stereotypic response of an initial increase in heart rate, 
then a drop in blood pressure followed by a reduction 
in heart rate characteristic of neurally mediated hypo-
tension. Other responses to HUT may be observed in 
patients with orthostatic hypotension and autonomic 
insufficiency. HUT is used most often in patients with 
recurrent syncope, although it may be useful in patients 
with single syncopal episodes with associated injury, 
particularly in the absence of structural heart disease. 
In patients with structural heart disease, HUT may be 
indicated in those with syncope, in whom other causes 
(e.g., asystole, ventricular tachyarrhythmias) have been 
excluded. HUT has been suggested as a useful tool in 
the diagnosis of and therapy for recurrent idiopathic 
vertigo, chronic fatigue syndrome, recurrent tran-
sient ischemic attacks, and repeated falls of unknown 
etiology in the elderly. Importantly, HUT is relatively 
contraindicated in the presence of severe CAD with 
proximal coronary stenoses, known severe cerebrovas-
cular disease, severe mitral stenosis, and obstruction 
to left ventricular outflow (e.g., aortic stenosis). The 
method of HUT is variable, but the angle of tilt and the 
duration of upright posture are central to the diagnostic 
utility of the test. Pharmacologic provocation of ortho-
static stress with isoproterenol, nitrates, adenosine, and 
edrophonium has been used to shorten the test and 
enhance specificity.
Electrophysiologic testing is central to the under-
standing and treatment of many cardiac arrhythmias. 
Indeed, most frequently, electrophysiologic testing is 
interventional, providing both diagnosis and therapy. 
The components of the electrophysiologic test are base-
line measurements of conduction under resting and 
stressed (rate or pharmacologic) conditions and maneu-
vers, both pacing and pharmacologic, to induce arrhyth-
mias. A number of sophisticated electrical mapping and 
catheter-guidance techniques have been developed 
to facilitate catheter-based therapeutics in the electro-
physiology laboratory.
Treatment 
Cardiac Arrhythmias
Antiarrhythmic Drug Therapy  The interaction 
of antiarrhythmic drugs with cardiac tissues and the 
resulting electrophysiologic changes are complex. An 
incomplete understanding of the effects of these drugs 
has produced serious missteps that have had adverse 
effects on patient outcomes and the development of 
newer pharmacologic agents. Currently, antiarrhythmic 
drugs have been relegated to an ancillary role in the 
treatment of most cardiac arrhythmias.
There are several explanations for the complexity 
of antiarrhythmic drug action: the structural similarity 
of target ion channels; regional differences in the lev-
els of expression of channels and transporters, which 
change with disease; time and voltage dependence of 
drug action; and the effect of these drugs on targets 
other than ion channels. Because of the limitations of 
any scheme to classify antiarrhythmic agents, a short-
hand that is useful in describing the major mechanisms 
of action is of some utility. Such a classification scheme 
was proposed in 1970 by Vaughan-Williams and later 
modified by Singh and Harrison. The classes of antiar-
rhythmic action are class I, local anesthetic effect due 
to blockade of Na+ current; class II, interference with 
 
CHAPTER 14
Principles of Electrophysiology
135
mechanism, with the intensity of heating and tis-
sue destruction being proportional to the delivered 
power. Alternative, less frequently used energy sources 
for catheter ablation of cardiac arrhythmias include 
microwaves (915 MHz or 2450 MHz), lasers, ultrasound, 
and freezing (cryoablation). Of these alternative abla-
tion techniques, cryoablation is being used clinically 
with the most frequency, especially ablation in the 
region of the AV node. At temperatures just below 
32°C, membrane ion transport is disrupted, produc-
ing depolarization of cells, decreased action poten-
tial amplitude and duration, and slowed conduction 
velocity (resulting in local conduction block)—all of 
which are reversible if the tissue is rewarmed in a timely 
fashion. Tissue cooling can be used for mapping and 
ablation. Cryomapping can be used to confirm the 
location of a desired ablation target, such as an acces-
sory pathway in WPW syndrome, or can be used to 
determine the safety of ablation around the AV node 
by monitoring AV conduction during cooling. Another 
advantage of cryoablation is that once the catheter tip 
cools below freezing, it adheres to the tissue, increasing 
catheter stability independent of the rhythm or pacing.
Device Therapy  Bradyarrhythmias due either to 
primary sinus node dysfunction or to atrioventricular con-
duction defects are readily treated through implantation 
the action of catecholamines at the β-adrenergic recep-
tor; class III, delay of repolarization due to inhibition of 
K+ current or activation of depolarizing current; class IV, 
interference with calcium conductance (Table 14-2). 
The limitations of the Vaughan-Williams classification 
scheme include multiple actions of most drugs, over-
whelming consideration of antagonism as a mechanism 
of action, and the fact that several agents have none of 
the four classes of action in the scheme.
Catheter Ablation  The use of catheter ablation is 
based on the principle that there is a critical anatomic 
region of impulse generation or propagation that is 
required for the initiation and maintenance of car-
diac arrhythmias. Destruction of such a critical region 
results in the elimination of the arrhythmia. The use 
of radio frequency (RF) energy in clinical medicine is 
nearly a century old. The first catheter ablation using a 
DC energy source was performed in the early 1980s by 
Scheinman and colleagues. By the early 1990s, RF had 
been adapted for use in catheter-based ablation in the 
heart (Fig. 14-5).
The RF frequency band (300–30,000 kHz) is used 
to generate energy for several biomedical applica-
tions, including coagulation and cauterization of tis-
sues. Energy of this frequency will not stimulate skeletal 
muscle or the heart and heats tissue by a resistive 
Table 14-2
Antiarrhythmic Drug Actions
Drug
Class Actions
Miscellaneous Action
I
II
III
IV
Quinidine
++
++
α-Adrenergic 
blockade
Procainamide
++
++
Ganglionic blockade
Flecainide
+++
+
Propafenone
++
+
Sotalol
++
+++
Dofetilide
+++
Amiodarone
++
++
+++
+
α-Adrenergic blockade
Ibutilide
+++
Na+ channel activator
SECTION III
Heart Rhythm Disturbances
136
Figure 14-5 
Catheter ablation of cardiac arrhythmias. A. A schematic 
of the catheter system and generator in a patient undergoing 
radio frequency catheter ablation (RFCA); the circuit involves 
the catheter in the heart and a dispersive patch placed 
on the body surface (usually the back). The inset shows a 
diagram of the heart with a catheter located at the AV valve 
ring for ablation of an accessory pathway. B. A right anterior 
oblique fluoroscopic image of the catheter position for abla-
tion of a left-sided accessory pathway. A catheter is placed 
in the atrial side of the mitral valve ring (abl) via a transseptal 
puncture. Other catheters are placed in the coronary sinus, 
in the right atrium (RA), and in the right ventricular (RV) apex 
to record local electrical activation. C. Body surface ECG 
recordings (I, II, V1) and endocardial electrograms (HRA, high 
right atrium; HISp, proximal His bundle electrogram; CS 7,8, 
recordings from poles 7 and 8 of a decapolar catheter placed 
in the coronary sinus) during RFCA of a left-sided accessory 
pathway in a patient with Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome. 
The QRS narrows at the fourth complex; the arrow shows 
the His bundle electrogram, which becomes apparent with 
elimination of ventricular preexcitation over the accessory 
pathway.
A
of a permanent pacemaker. Clinical indications for pace­
maker implantation often depend on the presence either 
of symptomatic bradycardia or of an unreliable endog­
enous escape rhythm and are more fully reviewed in  
Chap. 15.
Ventricular tachyarrhythmias, particularly those occur­
ring in the context of progressive structural heart diseases 
such as ischemic cardiomyopathy or arrhythmogenic 
right ventricular cardiomyopathy, may recur despite 
therapy with antiarrhythmic drugs or catheter ablation. 
In appropriate candidates, implantation of an internal 
cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) may reduce mortality rates 
from sudden cardiac death. In a subset of patients with 
congestive heart failure (CHF) and ventricular mechani­
cal dyssynchrony, ICD or pacemaker platforms can be 
used to provide cardiac resynchronization therapy, typi­
cally through implantation of a left ventricular pacing 
lead. In patients with dyssynchronous CHF, such therapy 
has been shown to improve both morbidity and mortality 
rates.
 David D. Spragg  I   Gordon F. Tomaselli 
137
 Electrical activation of the heart normally originates in 
the sinoatrial (SA) node, the predominant pacemaker. 
Other subsidiary pacemakers in the atrioventricular 
(AV) node, specialized conducting system, and muscle 
may initiate electrical activation if the SA node is dys-
functional or suppressed. Typically, subsidiary pacemak-
ers discharge at a slower rate and, in the absence of an 
appropriate increase in stroke volume, may result in tis-
sue hypoperfusion. 
 Spontaneous activation and contraction of the heart 
are a consequence of the specialized pacemaking tissue 
in these anatomic locales. As described in  Chap. 14 , 
action potentials in the heart are regionally heteroge-
neous. The action potentials in cells isolated from nodal 
tissue are distinct from those recorded from atrial and 
ventricular myocytes  ( Fig. 15-1 ) . The complement of 
ionic currents present in nodal cells results in a less neg-
ative resting membrane potential compared with atrial 
or ventricular myocytes. Electrical diastole in nodal 
cells is characterized by slow diastolic depolarization 
(phase 4), which generates an action potential as the 
membrane voltage reaches threshold. The action poten-
tial upstrokes (phase 0) are slow compared with atrial 
or ventricular myocytes, being mediated by calcium 
rather than sodium current. Cells with properties of SA 
and AV nodal tissue are electrically connected to the 
remainder of the myocardium by cells with an electro-
physiologic phenotype between that of nodal cells and 
that of atrial or ventricular myocytes. Cells in the SA 
node exhibit the most rapid phase 4 depolarization and 
thus are the dominant pacemakers in a normal heart. 
 Bradycardia results from a failure of either impulse 
initiation or impulse conduction. Failure of impulse 
initiation may be caused by depressed automaticity 
resulting from a slowing or failure of phase 4 diastolic 
depolarization  ( Fig. 15-2 ) , which may result from dis-
ease or exposure to drugs. Prominently, the autonomic 
nervous system modulates the rate of phase 4 diastolic 
depolarization and thus the fi ring rate of both primary 
 THE BRADYARRHYTHMIAS 
 CHAPTER 15 
(SA node) and subsidiary pacemakers. Failure of con-
duction of an impulse from nodal tissue to atrial or 
ventricular myocardium may produce bradycardia as a 
result of exit block. Conditions that alter the activation 
and connectivity of cells (e.g., fi brosis) in the heart may 
result in failure of impulse conduction. 
 SA node dysfunction and AV conduction block are 
the most common causes of pathologic bradycardia. SA 
node dysfunction may be diffi cult to distinguish from 
physiologic sinus bradycardia, particularly in the young. 
SA node dysfunction increases in frequency between 
the fi fth and sixth decades of life and should be con-
sidered in patients with fatigue, exercise intolerance, or 
syncope and sinus bradycardia. Transient AV block is 
common in the young and probably is a result of the 
high vagal tone found in up to 10% of young adults. 
Acquired and persistent failure of AV conduction is 
decidedly rare in healthy adult populations, with an esti-
mated incidence of ∼200/million population per year. 
 Permanent pacemaking is the only reliable therapy 
for symptomatic bradycardia in the absence of extrin-
sic and reversible etiologies such as increased vagal 
tone, hypoxia, hypothermia, and drugs  ( Table 15-1 ) . 
Approximately 50% of the 150,000 permanent pacemak-
ers implanted in the United States and 20–30% of the 
150,000 of those in Europe were implanted for SA node 
disease. 
 sA NodE disEAsE 
 Structure and physiology of the SA node 
 The SA node is composed of a cluster of small fusiform 
cells in the sulcus terminalis on the epicardial surface of 
the heart at the right atrial–superior vena caval junc-
tion, where they envelop the SA nodal artery. The SA 
node is structurally heterogeneous, but the central pro-
totypic nodal cells have fewer distinct myofi brils than 
does the surrounding atrial myocardium, no intercalated 
SECTION III
Heart Rhythm Disturbances
138
cells. The relative absence of inward rectifier potassium 
current (IK1) accounts for the depolarized membrane 
Table 15-1
Etiologies of SA Node Dysfunction
Extrinsic
Intrinsic
Autonomic
  Carotid sinus hypersen-
sitivity
  Vasovagal (cardioinhibi-
tory) stimulation
Drugs
  Beta blockers
  Calcium channel blockers
  Digoxin
  Antiarrhythmics (class I 
and III)
  Adenosine
  Clonidine (other sympa-
tholytics)
  Lithium carbonate
  Cimetidine
  Amitriptyline
  Phenothiazines
  Narcotics (methadone)
  Pentamidine
Hypothyroidism
Sleep apnea
Hypoxia
Endotracheal suctioning 
(vagal maneuvers)
Hypothermia
Increased intracranial 
pressure
Sick-sinus syndrome (SSS)
Coronary artery disease 
(chronic and acute MI)
Inflammatory
  Pericarditis
  Myocarditis (including 
viral)
  Rheumatic heart disease
  Collagen vascular 
diseases
  Lyme disease
Senile amyloidosis
Congenital heart disease
  TGA/Mustard and Fontan 
repairs
Iatrogenic
  Radiation therapy
  Postsurgical
Chest trauma
Familial
  AD SSS, OMIM #163800 
(15q24-25)
  AR SSS, OMIM #608567 
(3p21)
  SA node disease with 
myopia, OMIM 182190
Kearns-Sayre syndrome, 
OMIM #530000
Myotonic dystrophy
  Type 1, OMIM #160900 
(19q13.2-13.3)
  Type 2, OMIM #602668 
(3q13.3-q24)
Friedreich’s ataxia, OMIM 
#229300 (9q13, 9p23-p11)
Abbreviations: AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; 
MI, myocardial infarction; OMIM, Online Mendelian Inheritance in 
Man (database); TGA, transposition of the great arteries.
disks visible on light microscopy, a poorly developed 
sarcoplasmic reticulum, and no T-tubules. Cells in the 
peripheral regions of the SA node are transitional in 
both structure and function. The SA nodal artery arises 
from the right coronary artery in 55–60% and the left 
circumflex artery in 40–45% of persons. The SA node 
is richly innervated by sympathetic and parasympathetic 
nerves and ganglia.
Irregular and slow propagation of impulses from the 
SA node can be explained by the electrophysiology of 
nodal cells and the structure of the SA node itself. The 
action potentials of SA nodal cells are characterized by 
a relatively depolarized membrane potential (Fig. 15-1) 
of −40 to −60 mV, slow phase 0 upstroke, and rela-
tively rapid phase 4 diastolic depolarization compared 
with the action potentials recorded in cardiac muscle 
Ventricular
Atrial
Nodal
200 ms
1
2
3
0
4
0
120
–100
Voltage, mV
ECa + 120 mV
ENa + 70 mV
0 mV
ECI -30 mV
EK -90 mV
Figure 15-1 
Action potential profiles recorded in cells isolated from 
sinoatrial or atrioventricular nodal tissue compared with 
those of cells from atrial or ventricular myocardium. Nodal 
cell action potentials exhibit more depolarized resting mem-
brane potentials, slower phase 0 upstrokes, and phase 4 dia-
stolic depolarization.
Phase 4
Acetylcholine
Control
0 mV
Depolarizing currents
Repolarizing currents
–50 mV
Ι
Ι
Ι
Ι
Ι
Ι
Ca-T
Ca-L
F
,
,
K, K1, K ACh
Figure 15-2 
Schematics of nodal action potentials and the cur-
rents that contribute to phase 4 depolarization. Relative 
increases in depolarizing L- (ICa-L) and T- (ICa-T) type calcium 
and pacemaker currents (If) along with a reduction in repolar-
izing inward rectifier (IK1) and delayed rectifier (IK) potassium 
currents result in depolarization. Activation of ACh-gated 
(IKACh) potassium current and beta blockade slow the rate 
of phase 4 and decrease the pacing rate. (Modified from J 
Jalife et al: Basic Cardiac Electrophysiology for the Clinician, 
Blackwell Publishing, 1999.)
 
CHAPTER 15
The Bradyarrhythmias
139
in the atrial myocardium can impair SA node func-
tion. Some SA node disease is iatrogenic and results 
from direct injury to the SA node during cardiothoracic 
surgery.
Rare heritable forms of sinus node disease have been 
described, and several have been characterized geneti-
cally. Autosomal dominant sinus node dysfunction in 
conjunction with supraventricular tachycardia (i.e., 
tachycardia-bradycardia variant of sick-sinus syndrome 
[SSS]) has been linked to mutations in the pacemaker 
current (If) subunit gene HCN4 on chromosome 15. 
An autosomal recessive form of SSS with the prominent 
feature of atrial inexcitability and absence of P waves on 
the electrocardiogram (ECG) is caused by mutations in 
the cardiac sodium channel gene, SCN5A, on chromo-
some 3. SSS associated with myopia has been described 
but not genetically characterized. There are several neu-
romuscular diseases, including Kearns-Sayre syndrome 
(ophthalmoplegia, pigmentary degeneration of the ret-
ina, and cardiomyopathy) and myotonic dystrophy, that 
have a predilection for the conducting system and SA 
node.
SSS in both the young and the elderly is associated 
with an increase in fibrous tissue in the SA node. The 
onset of SSS may be hastened by coexisting disease, 
such as CAD, diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and val-
vular diseases and cardiomyopathies.
Clinical features of SA node disease
SA node dysfunction may be completely asymptomatic 
and manifest as an ECG anomaly such as sinus bradycar-
dia; sinus arrest and exit block; or alternating supraven-
tricular tachycardia, usually atrial fibrillation, and brady-
cardia. Symptoms associated with SA node dysfunction, 
in particular tachycardia-bradycardia syndrome, may be 
related to both slow and fast heart rates. For example, 
tachycardia may be associated with palpitations, angina 
pectoris, and heart failure, and bradycardia may be asso-
ciated with hypotension, syncope, presyncope, fatigue, 
and weakness. In the setting of SSS, overdrive suppres-
sion of the SA node may result in prolonged pauses and 
syncope upon termination of the tachycardia. In many 
cases, symptoms associated with SA node dysfunction 
result from concomitant cardiovascular disease. A sig-
nificant minority of patients with SSS develop signs and 
symptoms of heart failure that may be related to slow or 
fast heart rates.
One-third to one-half of patients with SA node dys-
function develop supraventricular tachycardia, usually 
atrial fibrillation or atrial flutter. The incidence of per-
sistent atrial fibrillation in patients with SA node dys-
function increases with advanced age, hypertension, 
diabetes mellitus, left ventricular dilation, valvular heart 
disease, and ventricular pacing. Remarkably, some 
symptomatic patients may experience an improvement 
potential; the slow upstroke of phase 0 results from 
the absence of available fast sodium current (INa) and is 
mediated by L-type calcium current (ICa-L); and phase 
4 depolarization is a result of the aggregate activity of 
a number of ionic currents. Prominently, both L- and 
T-type (ICa-T) calcium currents, the pacemaker current 
(so-called funny current, or If) formed by the tetra-
merization of hyperpolarization-activated cyclic nucle-
otide-gated channels, and the electrogenic sodium-
calcium exchanger provide depolarizing current that 
is antagonized by delayed rectifier (IKr) and acetylcho-
line-gated (IKACh) potassium currents. ICa-L, ICa-T, and 
If are modulated by β-adrenergic stimulation and IKACh 
by vagal stimulation, explaining the exquisite sensitiv-
ity of diastolic depolarization to autonomic nervous 
system activity. The slow conduction within the SA 
node is explained by the absence of INa and poor elec-
trical coupling of cells in the node, resulting from siz-
able amounts of interstitial tissue and a low abundance 
of gap junctions. The poor coupling allows for graded 
electrophysiologic properties within the node, with the 
peripheral transitional cells being silenced by electro-
tonic coupling to atrial myocardium.
Etiology of SA nodal disease
SA nodal dysfunction has been classified as intrinsic or 
extrinsic. The distinction is important because extrin-
sic dysfunction is often reversible and generally should 
be corrected before pacemaker therapy is considered 
(Table 15-1). The most common causes of extrinsic 
SA node dysfunction are drugs and autonomic ner-
vous system influences that suppress automaticity and/
or compromise conduction. Other extrinsic causes 
include hypothyroidism, sleep apnea, and conditions 
likely to occur in critically ill patients such as hypother-
mia, hypoxia, increased intracranial pressure (Cushing’s 
response), and endotracheal suctioning via activation of 
the vagus nerve.
Intrinsic sinus node dysfunction is degenerative and 
often is characterized pathologically by fibrous replace-
ment of the SA node or its connections to the atrium. 
Acute and chronic coronary artery disease (CAD) may 
be associated with SA node dysfunction, although in 
the setting of acute myocardial infarction (MI; typically 
inferior), the vabnormalities are transient. Inflammatory 
processes may alter SA node function, ultimately pro-
ducing replacement fibrosis. Pericarditis, myocarditis, 
and rheumatic heart disease have been associated with 
SA nodal disease with sinus bradycardia, sinus arrest, 
and exit block. Carditis associated with systemic lupus 
erythematosus (SLE), rheumatoid arthritis (RA), and 
mixed connective tissue disorders (MCTDs) may also 
affect SA node structure and function. Senile amyloi-
dosis is an infiltrative disorder in patients typically in 
the ninth decade of life; deposition of amyloid protein 
SECTION III
Heart Rhythm Disturbances
140
By definition, sinus bradycardia is a rhythm driven by 
the SA node with a rate of <60 beats/min; sinus bra-
dycardia is very common and typically benign. Resting 
heart rates <60 beats/min are very common in young 
healthy individuals and physically conditioned subjects. 
A sinus rate of <40 beats/min in the awake state in 
the absence of physical conditioning generally is con-
sidered abnormal. Sinus pauses and sinus arrest result 
from failure of the SA node to discharge, producing a 
pause without P waves visible on the ECG (Fig. 15-3). 
Sinus pauses of up to 3 s are common in awake athletes, 
and pauses of this duration or longer may be observed 
in asymptomatic elderly subjects. Intermittent failure 
of conduction from the SA node produces sinus exit 
block. The severity of sinus exit block may vary in a 
manner similar to that of AV block (see later). Pro-
longation of conduction from the sinus node will not 
be apparent on the ECG; second-degree SA block will 
produce intermittent conduction from the SA node and 
a regularly irregular atrial rhythm.
Type I second-degree SA block results from pro-
gressive prolongation of SA node conduction with 
intermittent failure of the impulses originating in the 
sinus node to conduct to the surrounding atrial tis-
sue. Second-degree SA block appears on the ECG 
as an intermittent absence of P waves (Fig. 15-4). In 
type II second-degree SA block, there is no change 
in SA node conduction before the pause. Complete 
in symptoms with the development of atrial fibrillation, 
presumably from an increase in their average heart rate. 
Patients with the tachycardia-bradycardia variant of SSS, 
similar to patients with atrial fibrillation, are at risk for 
thromboembolism, and those at greatest risk, including 
patients ≥65 years and patients with a prior history of 
stroke, valvular heart disease, left ventricular dysfunc-
tion, or atrial enlargement, should be treated with anti-
coagulants. Up to one-quarter of patients with SA node 
disease will have concurrent AV conduction disease, 
although only a minority will require specific therapy 
for high-grade AV block.
The natural history of SA node dysfunction is one 
of varying intensity of symptoms even in patients who 
present with syncope. Symptoms related to SA node 
dysfunction may be significant, but overall mortality 
usually is not compromised in the absence of other sig-
nificant comorbid conditions. These features of the nat-
ural history need to be taken into account in consider-
ing therapy for these patients.
Electrocardiography of SA node disease
The electrocardiographic manifestations of SA node 
dysfunction include sinus bradycardia, sinus pauses, 
sinus arrest, sinus exit block, tachycardia (in SSS), and 
chronotropic incompetence. It is often difficult to dis-
tinguish pathologic from physiologic sinus bradycardia. 
II
II
V
V
Figure 15-3 
Sinus slowing and pauses on the ECG. The ECG is 
recorded during sleep in a young patient without heart dis-
ease. The heart rate before the pause is slow, and the PR 
interval is prolonged, consistent with an increase in vagal 
tone. The P waves have a morphology consistent with sinus 
rhythm. The recording is from a two-lead telemetry system in 
which the tracing labeled II mimics frontal lead II and V repre-
sents Modified Central Lead 1, which mimics lead V1 of the 
standard 12-lead ECG.
VI
SAN EG
Figure 15-4 
Mobitz type I SA nodal exit block. A theoretical SA node 
electrogram (SAN EG) is shown. Note that there is grouped 
beating producing a regularly irregular heart rhythm. The SA 
node EG rate is constant with progressive delay in exit from 
the node and activation of the atria, inscribing the P wave. 
This produces subtly decreasing P-P intervals before the 
pause, and the pause is less than twice the cycle length of 
the last sinus interval.
 
CHAPTER 15
The Bradyarrhythmias
141
several ways to assess SA node function invasively. They 
include the sinus node recovery time (SNRT), defined 
as the longest pause after cessation of overdrive pacing 
of the right atrium near the SA node (normal: <1500 
ms or, corrected for sinus cycle length, <550 ms), and 
the sinoatrial conduction time (SACT), defined as one- 
half the difference between the intrinsic sinus cycle 
length and a noncompensatory pause after a premature 
atrial stimulus (normal <125 ms). The combination of 
an abnormal SNRT, an abnormal SACT, and a low 
IHR is a sensitive and specific indicator of intrinsic SA 
node disease.
Treatment 
Sinoatrial Node Dysfunction
Since SA node dysfunction is not associated with 
increased mortality rates, the aim of therapy is allevia-
tion of symptoms. Exclusion of extrinsic causes of SA 
node dysfunction and correlation of the cardiac rhythm 
with symptoms is an essential part of patient manage-
ment. Pacemaker implantation is the primary therapeu-
tic intervention in patients with symptomatic SA node 
dysfunction. Pharmacologic considerations are impor-
tant in the evaluation and management of patients 
with SA nodal disease. A number of drugs modulate SA 
node function and are extrinsic causes of dysfunction 
(Table 15-1). Beta blockers and calcium channel blockers 
increase SNRT in patients with SA node dysfunction, and 
antiarrhythmic drugs with class I and III action may pro-
mote SA node exit block. In general, such agents should 
be discontinued before decisions regarding the need for 
permanent pacing in patients with SA node disease are 
made. Chronic pharmacologic therapy for sinus bradyar-
rhythmias is limited. Some pharmacologic agents may 
improve SA node function; digitalis, for example, has 
been shown to shorten SNRT in patients with SA node 
dysfunction. Isoproterenol or atropine administered IV 
may increase the sinus rate acutely. Theophylline has 
been used both acutely and chronically to increase 
heart rate but has liabilities when used in patients with 
tachycardia-bradycardia syndrome, increasing the fre-
quency of supraventricular tachyarrhythmias, and in 
patients with structural heart disease, increasing the 
risk of potentially serious ventricular arrhythmias. At the 
current time, there is only a single randomized study of 
therapy for SA node dysfunction. In patients with rest-
ing heart rates <50 and >30 beats/min on a Holter mon-
itor, patients who received dual-chamber pacemakers 
experienced significantly fewer syncopal episodes and 
had symptomatic improvement compared with patients 
randomized to theophylline or no treatment.
In certain circumstances, sinus bradycardia requires 
no specific treatment or only temporary rate support. 
Sinus bradycardia is common in patients with acute 
or third-degree SA block results in no P waves on the 
ECG. Tachycardia-bradycardia syndrome is manifest as 
alternating sinus bradycardia and atrial tachyarrhythmias. 
Although atrial tachycardia, atrial flutter, and atrial fibril-
lation may be observed, the latter is the most common 
tachycardia. Chronotropic incompetence is the inability 
to increase the heart rate in response to exercise or other 
stress appropriately and is defined in greater detail later.
Diagnostic testing
SA node dysfunction is most commonly a clinical or 
electrocardiographic diagnosis. Sinus bradycardia or 
pauses on the resting ECG are rarely sufficient to diag-
nose SA node disease, and longer-term recording and 
symptom correlation generally are required. Symptoms 
in the absence of sinus bradyarrhythmias may be suffi-
cient to exclude a diagnosis of SA node dysfunction.
Electrocardiographic recording plays a central role in 
the diagnosis and management of SA node dysfunction. 
Despite the limitations of the resting ECG, longer-term 
recording employing Holter or event monitors may per-
mit correlation of symptoms with the cardiac rhythm. 
Many contemporary event monitors may be automati-
cally triggered to record the ECG when certain pro-
grammed heart rate criteria are met. Implantable ECG 
monitors permit long-term recording (12–18 months) in 
particularly challenging patients.
Failure to increase the heart rate with exercise is 
referred to as chronotropic incompetence. This is alterna-
tively defined as failure to reach 85% of predicted maxi-
mal heart rate at peak exercise or failure to achieve a 
heart rate >100 beats/min with exercise or a maximal 
heart rate with exercise less than two standard devia-
tions below that of an age-matched control population. 
Exercise testing may be useful in discriminating chrono-
tropic incompetence from resting bradycardia and may 
aid in the identification of the mechanism of exercise 
intolerance.
Autonomic nervous system testing is useful in diag-
nosing carotid sinus hypersensitivity; pauses >3 s are 
consistent with the diagnosis but may be present in 
asymptomatic elderly subjects. Determining the intrin-
sic heart rate (IHR) may distinguish SA node dysfunc-
tion from slow heart rates that result from high vagal 
tone. The normal IHR after administration of 0.2 mg/
kg propranolol and 0.04 mg/kg atropine is 117.2 − 
(0.53 × age) in beats/min; a low IHR is indicative of 
SA disease.
Electrophysiologic testing may play a role in the 
assessment of patients with presumed SA node dysfunc-
tion and in the evaluation of syncope, particularly in the 
setting of structural heart disease. In this circumstance, 
electrophysiologic testing is used to rule out more 
malignant etiologies of syncope, such as ventricular 
tachyarrhythmias and AV conduction block. There are 
SECTION III
Heart Rhythm Disturbances
142
extensively ramifies on the endocardial surfaces of the 
right and left ventricles, respectively.
The blood supply to the penetrating AV bundle is 
from the AV nodal artery and first septal perforator of 
the left anterior descending coronary artery. The bundle 
branches also have a dual blood supply from the sep-
tal perforators of the left anterior descending coronary 
artery and branches of the posterior descending coro-
nary artery. The AV node is highly innervated with 
postganglionic sympathetic and parasympathetic nerves. 
The bundle of His and distal conducting system are 
minimally influenced by autonomic tone.
The cells that constitute the AV node complex are 
heterogeneous with a range of action potential pro-
files. In the transitional zones, the cells have an electri-
cal phenotype between those of atrial myocytes and cells 
of the compact node (Fig. 15-1). Atrionodal transitional 
connections may exhibit decremental conduction, defined 
as slowing of conduction with increasingly rapid rates 
of stimulation. Fast and slow AV nodal pathways have 
been described, but it is controversial whether these 
two types of pathway are anatomically distinct or rep-
resent functional heterogeneities in different regions of 
the AV nodal complex. Myocytes that constitute the 
compact node are depolarized (resting membrane poten-
tial ∼−60 mV) and exhibit action potentials with low 
amplitudes, slow upstrokes of phase 0 (<10 V/s), and 
phase 4 diastolic depolarization; high-input resistance; 
and relative insensitivity to external [K+]. The action 
potential phenotype is explained by the complement of 
ionic currents expressed. AV nodal cells lack IK1 and INa; 
ICa-L is responsible for phase 0; and phase 4 depolariza-
tion reflects the composite activity of the depolarizing 
currents If, ICa-L, ICa-T, and INCX and the repolarizing 
currents IKr and IKACh. Electrical coupling between cells 
in the AV node is tenuous due to the relatively sparse 
expression of gap junction channels (predominantly 
connexin-40) and increased extracellular volume.
The His bundle and the bundle branches are insulated 
from ventricular myocardium. The most rapid conduction 
in the heart is observed in these tissues. The action poten-
tials exhibit very rapid upstrokes (phase 0), prolonged pla-
teaus (phase 2), and modest automaticity (phase 4 depolar-
ization). Gap junctions, composed largely of connexin-40, 
are abundant, but bundles are poorly connected trans-
versely to ventricular myocardium.
Etiology of AV conduction disease
Conduction block from the atrium to the ventricle can 
occur for a variety of reasons in a number of clinical 
situations, and AV conduction block may be classified 
in a number of ways. The etiologies may be functional 
or structural, in part analogous to extrinsic and intrin-
sic causes of SA nodal dysfunction. The block may be 
inferior or posterior MI and can be exacerbated by vagal 
activation induced by pain or the use of drugs such as 
morphine. Ischemia of the SA nodal artery probably 
occurs in acute coronary syndromes more typically with 
involvement with the right coronary artery, and even 
with infarction, the effect on SA node function most 
often is transient.
Sinus bradycardia is a prominent feature of carotid 
sinus hypersensitivity and neurally mediated hypoten-
sion associated with vasovagal syncope that responds 
to pacemaker therapy. Carotid hypersensitivity with 
recurrent syncope or presyncope associated with a 
predominant cardioinhibitory component responds 
to pacemaker implantation. Several randomized trials 
have investigated the efficacy of permanent pacing in 
patients with drug-refractory vasovagal syncope, with 
mixed results. Although initial trials suggested that 
patients undergoing pacemaker implantation have 
fewer recurrences and a longer time to recurrence of 
symptoms, at least one follow-up study did not confirm 
these results.
The details of pacing modes and indications for pac-
ing in SA node dysfunction are discussed below.
Atrioventricular Conduction 
Disease
Structure and physiology of the AV node
The AV conduction axis is structurally complex, involv-
ing the atria and ventricles as well as the AV node. 
Unlike the SA node, the AV node is a subendocardial 
structure originating in the transitional zone, which is 
composed of aggregates of cells in the posterior-inferior 
right atrium. Superior, medial, and posterior transitional 
atrionodal bundles converge on the compact AV node. 
The compact AV node (∼1 × 3 × 5 mm) is situated 
at the apex of the triangle of Koch, which is defined by 
the coronary sinus ostium posteriorly, the septal tricus-
pid valve annulus anteriorly, and the tendon of Todaro 
superiorly. The compact AV node continues as the pen-
etrating AV bundle where it immediately traverses the 
central fibrous body and is in close proximity to the aor-
tic, mitral, and tricuspid valve annuli; thus, it is subject 
to injury in the setting of valvular heart disease or its 
surgical treatment. The penetrating AV bundle contin-
ues through the annulus fibrosis and emerges along the 
ventricular septum adjacent to the membranous septum 
as the bundle of His. The right bundle branch (RBB) 
emerges from the distal AV bundle in a band that tra-
verses the right ventricle (moderator band). In contrast, 
the left bundle branch (LBB) is a broad subendocardial 
sheet of tissue on the septal left ventricle. The Purkinje 
fiber network emerges from the RBB and LBB and 
 
CHAPTER 15
The Bradyarrhythmias
143
consequence of catheter ablation. AV block is a decid-
edly rare complication of the surgical repair of VSDs or 
ASDs but may complicate repairs of transposition of the 
great arteries.
CAD may produce transient or persistent AV block. 
In the setting of coronary spasm, ischemia, particularly 
in the right coronary artery distribution, may produce 
classified by its severity from first to third degree or 
complete AV block or by the location of block within 
the AV conduction system. Table 15-2 summarizes the 
etiologies of AV conduction block. Those which are 
functional (autonomic, metabolic/endocrine, and drug 
related) tend to be reversible. Most other etiologies pro-
duce structural changes, typically fibrosis, in segments 
of the AV conduction axis that are generally perma-
nent. Heightened vagal tone during sleep or in well-
conditioned individuals can be associated with all grades 
of AV block. Carotid sinus hypersensitivity, vasovagal 
syncope, and cough and micturition syncope may be 
associated with SA node slowing and AV conduction 
block. Transient metabolic and endocrinologic distur-
bances as well as a number of pharmacologic agents also 
may produce reversible AV conduction block.
Several infectious diseases have a predilection for the 
conducting system. Lyme disease may involve the heart 
in up to 50% of cases; 10% of patients with Lyme car-
ditis develop AV conduction block, which is generally 
reversible but may require temporary pacing support. 
Chagas’ disease, which is common in Latin America, 
and syphilis may produce more persistent AV conduc-
tion disturbances. Some autoimmune and infiltrative 
diseases may produce AV conduction block, including 
SLE, RA, MCTD, scleroderma, amyloidosis (primary 
and secondary), sarcoidosis, and hemochromatosis; rare 
malignancies also may impair AV conduction.
Idiopathic progressive fibrosis of the conduction 
system is one of the more common and degenerative 
causes of AV conduction block. Aging is associated with 
degenerative changes in the summit of the ventricu-
lar septum, central fibrous body, and aortic and mitral 
annuli and has been described as “sclerosis of the left 
cardiac skeleton.” The process typically begins in the 
fourth decade of life and may be accelerated by athero-
sclerosis, hypertension, and diabetes mellitus. Accel-
erated forms of progressive familial heart block have 
been identified in families with mutations in the cardiac 
sodium channel gene (SCN5A) and other loci that have 
been mapped to chromosomes 1 and 19.
AV conduction block has been associated with heri-
table neuromuscular diseases, including the nucleotide 
repeat disease myotonic dystrophy, the mitochondrial 
myopathy Kearns-Sayre syndrome, and several of the 
monogenic muscular dystrophies. Congenital AV block 
may be observed in complex congenital cardiac anoma-
lies (Chap. 19), such as transposition of the great arter-
ies, ostium primum atrial septal defects (ASDs), ventric-
ular septal defects (VSDs), endocardial cushion defects, 
and some single-ventricle defects. Congenital AV block 
in the setting of a structurally normal heart has been 
seen in children born to mothers with SLE. Iatrogenic 
AV block may occur during mitral or aortic valve sur-
gery, rarely in the setting of thoracic radiation, and as a 
Table 15-2
Etiologies of Atrioventricular Block
Autonomic
Carotid sinus 
hypersensitivity
Vasovagal
Metabolic/Endocrine
Hyperkalemia
Hypermagnesemia
Hypothyroidism
Adrenal insufficiency
Drug-Related
Beta blockers
Calcium channel blockers
Digitalis
Adenosine
Antiarrhythmics (class I and III)
Lithium
Infectious
Endocarditis
Lyme disease
Chagas’ disease
Syphilis
Tuberculosis
Diphtheria
Toxoplasmosis
Heritable/Congenital
Congenital heart disease 
Maternal SLE
Kearns-Sayre syndrome, 
OMIM #530000
Myotonic dystrophy
Type 1, OMIM #160900 
(19q13.2-13.3)
Type 2, OMIM #602668 
(3q13.3-q24)
Facioscapulohumeral MD, 
OMIM #158900 (4q35)
Emery-Dreifuss MD, OMIM 
#310300 (Xq28)
Progressive familial heart 
block, OMIM #113900 
(19q13.2-q13.3, 3p21)
Inflammatory
SLE
Rheumatoid arthritis
MCTD
Scleroderma
Infiltrative
Amyloidosis 
Sarcoidosis
Hemochromatosis
Neoplastic/Traumatic
Lymphoma
Mesothelioma 
Melanoma
Radiation
Catheter ablation
Degenerative
Lev disease
Lenègre disease
Coronary Artery Disease
Acute MI
Abbreviations: MCTD, mixed connective tissue disease; MI, myo-
cardial infarction; OMIM, Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (data-
base); SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus.
SECTION III
Heart Rhythm Disturbances
144
block (PR interval >200 ms) is a slowing of conduc-
tion through the AV junction (Fig. 15-5). The site 
of delay is typically in the AV node but may be in the 
atria, bundle of His, or His-Purkinje system. A wide 
QRS is suggestive of delay in the distal conduction sys-
tem, whereas a narrow QRS suggests delay in the AV 
node proper or, less commonly, in the bundle of His. In 
second-degree AV block there is an intermittent failure 
of electrical impulse conduction from atrium to ventri-
cle. Second-degree AV block is subclassified as Mobitz 
type I (Wenckebach) or Mobitz type II. The periodic 
failure of conduction in Mobitz type I block is char-
acterized by a progressively lengthening PR interval, 
shortening of the RR interval, and a pause that is less 
than two times the immediately preceding RR interval 
on the ECG. The ECG complex after the pause exhib-
its a shorter PR interval than that immediately pre-
ceding the pause (Fig. 15-6). This ECG pattern most 
often arises because of decremental conduction of elec-
trical impulses in the AV node.
It is important to distinguish type I from type II 
second-degree AV nodal block because the latter 
has more serious prognostic implications. Type II 
transient AV block. In acute MI, AV block transiently 
develops in 10–25% of patients; most commonly this 
is first- or second-degree AV block, but complete 
heart block (CHB) may also occur. Second-degree and 
higher-grade AV block tends to occur more often in 
inferior than in anterior acute MI; however, the level 
of block in inferior MI tends to be in the AV node 
with more stable, narrow escape rhythms. In contrast, 
acute anterior MI is associated with block in the distal 
AV nodal complex, His bundle, or bundle branches and 
results in wide complex, unstable escape rhythms and a 
worse prognosis with high mortality rates.
Electrocardiography and electrophysiology 
of AV conduction block
Atrioventricular conduction block typically is diag-
nosed electrocardiographically, which characterizes the 
severity of the conduction disturbance and allows one 
to draw inferences about the location of the block. AV 
conduction block manifests as slow conduction in its 
mildest forms and failure to conduct, either intermittent 
or persistently, in more severe varieties. First-degree AV 
Figure 15-5 
First-degree AV block with slow-
ing of conduction in the AV node 
as indicated by the prolonged atrial-
to-His bundle electrogram (AH) inter-
val, in this case 157 ms. The His 
bundle-to-earliest ventricular activa-
tion on the surface ECG (HV) inter-
val is normal. The normal HV interval 
suggests normal conduction below 
the AV node to the ventricle. I and 
V1 are surface ECG leads, HIS is the 
recording of the endocavitary elec-
trogram at the His bundle position. 
A, H, and V are labels for the atrial, 
His bundle, and right ventricular 
electrograms, respectively.
I
II
V1
V6
HIS
RV
A
H
V
A
H
200 ms
V
137 msec
II
A
AV
V
1 sec
0.32
0.30
0.53
0.40
Figure 15-6 
Mobitz type I second-degree AV block. The PR interval 
prolongs before the pause, as shown in the ladder diagram. 
The ECG pattern results from slowing of conduction in the 
AV node.
 
CHAPTER 15
The Bradyarrhythmias
145
and the duration of the QRS complex can be help-
ful in determining the level of the block. In the absence 
of a preexisting bundle branch block, a wide QRS 
escape rhythm (Fig. 15-8B) implies a block in the dis-
tal His or bundle branches; in contrast, a narrow QRS 
rhythm implies a block in the AV node or proximal His 
and an escape rhythm originating in the AV junction 
(Fig. 15-8A). Narrow QRS escape rhythms are typically 
faster and more stable than wide QRS escape rhythms and 
originate more proximally in the AV conduction system.
Diagnostic testing
Diagnostic testing in the evaluation of AV block is 
aimed at determining the level of conduction block, 
particularly in asymptomatic patients, since the prognosis 
and therapy depend on whether the block is in or below 
the AV node. Vagal maneuvers, carotid sinus massage, 
exercise, and administration of drugs such as atropine 
and isoproterenol may be diagnostically informative. 
second-degree AV block is characterized by intermittent 
failure of conduction of the P wave without changes in 
the preceding PR or RR intervals. When AV block is 
2:1, it may be difficult to distinguish type I from type 
II block. Type II second-degree AV block typically 
occurs in the distal or infra-His conduction system, is 
often associated with intraventricular conduction delays 
(e.g., bundle branch block), and is more likely to pro-
ceed to higher grades of AV block than is type I second-
degree AV block. Second-degree AV block (particularly 
type II) may be associated with a series of nonconducted 
P waves, referred to as paroxysmal AV block (Fig. 15-7), 
and implies significant conduction system disease and is 
an indication for permanent pacing. Complete failure 
of conduction from atrium to ventricle is referred to as 
complete or third-degree AV block. AV block that is 
intermediate between second degree and third degree 
is referred to as high-grade AV block and, as with CHB, 
implies advanced AV conduction system disease. In both 
cases, the block is most often distal to the AV node, 
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
V1
V1
A
B
Figure 15-8 
High-grade AV block. A. Multiple nonconducted P waves 
with a regular narrow complex QRS escape rhythm prob-
ably emanating from the AV junction. B. A wide complex 
QRS escape and a single premature ventricular contraction. 
In both cases, there is no consistent temporal relationship 
between the P waves and QRS complexes.
II
III
V1
Figure 15-7 
Paroxysmal AV block. Multiple nonconducted P waves after 
a period of sinus bradycardia with a normal PR interval. This 
implies significant conduction system disease, requiring per-
manent pacemaker implantation.
SECTION III
Heart Rhythm Disturbances
146
simultaneously with recorded body surface electrocardio-
graphic traces, intraatrial, AV nodal, and infranodal con-
duction times can be assessed (Fig. 15-5). The time from 
the most rapid deflection of the atrial electrogram in the 
His bundle recording to the His electrogram (AH inter-
val) represents conduction through the AV node and is 
normally <130 ms. The time from the His electrogram 
to the earliest onset of the QRS on the surface ECG (HV 
interval) represents the conduction time through the His-
Purkinje system and is normally ≤55 ms.
Rate stress produced by pacing can unveil abnor-
mal AV conduction. Mobitz I second-degree AV block 
at short atrial paced cycle lengths is a normal response. 
However, when it occurs at atrial cycle lengths >500 ms 
(<120 beats/min) in the absence of high vagal tone, it is 
abnormal. Typically, type I second-degree AV block is 
associated with prolongation of the AH interval, repre-
senting conduction slowing and block in the AV node. 
AH prolongation occasionally is due to the effect of 
drugs (beta blockers, calcium channel blockers, digitalis) 
or increased vagal tone. Atropine can be used to reverse 
high vagal tone; however, if AH prolongation and AV 
block at long pacing cycle lengths persist, intrinsic AV 
node disease is likely. Type II second-degree block is 
typically infranodal, often in the His-Purkinje system. 
Block below the node with prolongation of the HV 
interval or a His bundle electrogram with no ventricu-
lar activation (Fig. 15-9) is abnormal unless it is elicited 
Owing to the differences in innervation of the AV node 
and infranodal conduction system, vagal stimulation and 
carotid sinus massage slow conduction in the AV node 
but have less of an effect on infranodal tissue and may 
even improve conduction due to a reduced rate of acti-
vation of distal tissues. Conversely, atropine, isoproter-
enol, and exercise improve conduction through the AV 
node and impair infranodal conduction. In patients with 
congenital CHB and a narrow QRS complex, exercise 
typically increases heart rate; by contrast, those with 
acquired CHB, particularly with wide QRS, do not 
respond to exercise with an increase in heart rate.
Additional diagnostic evaluation, including electro-
physiologic testing, may be indicated in patients with 
syncope and suspected high-grade AV block. This is par-
ticularly relevant if noninvasive testing does not reveal 
the cause of syncope or if the patient has structural heart 
disease with ventricular tachyarrhythmias as a cause of 
symptoms. Electrophysiologic testing provides more pre-
cise information regarding the location of AV conduction 
block and permits studies of AV conduction under con-
ditions of pharmacologic stress and exercise. Recording 
of the His bundle electrogram by a catheter positioned 
at the superior margin of the tricuspid valve annulus pro-
vides information about conduction at all levels of the AV 
conduction axis. A properly recorded His bundle elec-
trogram reveals local atrial activity, the His electrogram, 
and local ventricular activation; when it is monitored 
Figure 15-9 
High-grade AV block below the 
His. The AH interval is normal and 
is not changing before the block. 
Atrial and His bundle electrograms 
are recorded consistent with block 
below the distal AV junction. I, II, 
III, and V1 are surface ECG leads. 
HISp, HISd, and RVA are the proxi-
mal HIS, distal HIS, and right ven-
tricular apical electrical recordings. 
A, H, and V represent the atrial, His, 
and ventricular electrograms on the 
His bundle recording. (Tracing cour-
tesy of Dr. Joseph Marine; with per-
mission.)
I
II
III
V1
HI Sd
HI Sp
RVA
HRA
H
A
H
A
H
A
H
A
H
A
H
A
V
 
CHAPTER 15
The Bradyarrhythmias
147
most circumstances, in the absence of prompt resolu-
tion, conduction block distal to the AV node requires 
permanent pacemaking.
Permanent Pacemakers
Nomenclature and Complications  The main 
therapeutic intervention in SA node dysfunction and 
AV conduction block is permanent pacing. Since the 
first implementation of permanent pacing in the 1950s, 
many advances in technology have resulted in min-
iaturization, increased longevity of pulse generators, 
improvement in leads, and increased functionality. To 
better understand pacemaker therapy for bradycar-
dias, it is important to be familiar with the fundamen-
tals of pacemaking. Pacemaker modes and function are 
named using a five-letter code. The first letter indicates 
the chamber(s) that is paced (O, none; A, atrium; V, ven-
tricle; D, dual; S, single), the second is the chamber(s) in 
which sensing occurs (O, none; A, atrium; V, ventricle; 
D, dual; S, single), the third is the response to a sensed 
event (O, none; I, inhibition; T, triggered; D, inhibition 
+ triggered), the fourth refers to the programmabil-
ity or rate response (R, rate responsive), and the fifth 
refers to the existence of antitachycardia functions if 
present (O, none; P, antitachycardia pacing; S, shock; D, 
pace + shock). Almost all modern pacemakers are mul-
tiprogrammable and have the capability for rate respon-
siveness using one of several rate sensors: activity or 
motion, minute ventilation, or QT interval. The most 
commonly programmed modes of implanted single- 
and dual-chamber pacemakers are VVIR and DDDR, 
respectively, although multiple modes can be pro-
grammed in modern pacemakers.
Although pacemakers are highly reliable, they are 
subject to a number of complications related to implan-
tation and electronic function. In adults, permanent 
pacemakers are most commonly implanted with access 
to the heart by way of the subclavian–superior vena 
cava venous system. Rare, but possible, acute complica-
tions of transvenous pacemaker implantation include 
infection, hematoma, pneumothorax, cardiac perfora-
tion, diaphragmatic/phrenic nerve stimulation, and 
lead dislodgment. Limitations of chronic pacemaker 
therapy include infection, erosion, lead failure, and 
abnormalities resulting from inappropriate program-
ming or interaction with the patient’s native electrical 
cardiac function. Rotation of the pacemaker pulse gen-
erator in its subcutaneous pocket, either intentionally or 
inadvertently, often referred to as “twiddler’s syndrome,” 
can wrap the leads around the generator and produce 
dislodgment with failure to sense or pace the heart. The 
small size and light weight of contemporary pacemak-
ers make this a rare complication.
Complications stemming from chronic cardiac pac-
ing also result from disturbances in atrioventricular 
at fast pacing rates or short coupling intervals with extra 
stimulation. It is often difficult to determine the type of 
second-degree AV block when 2:1 conduction is pres-
ent; however, the finding of a His bundle electrogram 
after every atrial electrogram indicates that block is 
occurring in the distal conduction system.
Intracardiac recording at electrophysiologic study that 
reveals prolongation of conduction through the His-
Purkinje system (i.e., long HV interval) is associated 
with an increased risk of progression to higher grades 
of block and is generally an indication for pacing. In the 
setting of bundle branch block, the HV interval may 
reveal the condition of the unblocked bundle and the 
prognosis for developing more advanced AV conduc-
tion block. Prolongation of the HV interval in patients 
with asymptomatic bundle branch block is associated 
with an increased risk of developing higher-grade AV 
block. The risk increases with greater prolongation of 
the HV interval such that in patients with an HV inter-
val >100 ms, the annual incidence of complete AV 
block approaches 10%, indicating a need for pacing. In 
patients with acquired CHB, even if intermittent, there 
is little role for electrophysiologic testing, and pace-
maker implantation is almost always indicated.
Treatment 
 Management of AV Conduction Block
Temporary or permanent artificial pacing is the most 
reliable treatment for patients with symptomatic AV 
conduction system disease. However, exclusion of 
reversible causes of AV block and the need for tempo-
rary heart rate support based on the hemodynamic 
condition of the patient are essential considerations in 
each patient. Correction of electrolyte derangements 
and ischemia, inhibition of excessive vagal tone, and 
withholding of drugs with AV nodal blocking properties 
may increase the heart rate. Adjunctive pharmacologic 
treatment with atropine or isoproterenol may be useful 
if the block is in the AV node. Since most pharmacologic 
treatment may take some time to initiate and become 
effective, temporary pacing may be necessary. The most 
expeditious technique is the use of transcutaneous pac-
ing, where pacing patches are placed anteriorly over 
the cardiac apex (cathode) and posteriorly between the 
spine and the scapula or above the right nipple (anode). 
Acutely, transcutaneous pacing is highly effective, but 
its duration is limited by patient discomfort and longer-
term failure to capture the ventricle owing to changes 
in lead impedance. If a patient requires more than a few 
minutes of pacemaker support, transvenous temporary 
pacing should be instituted. Temporary pacing leads 
can be placed from the jugular or subclavian venous 
system and advanced to the right ventricle, permitting 
stable temporary pacing for many days, if necessary. In 
SECTION III
Heart Rhythm Disturbances
148
of randomized, single-blind trials of pacing mode have 
been performed. There are no trials that demonstrate 
an improvement in mortality rate with AV synchro-
nous pacing compared with single-chamber pacing 
in SA node disease. In some of these studies, the inci-
dence of atrial fibrillation and thromboembolic events 
was reduced with AV synchronous pacing. In trials of 
patients with dual-chamber pacemakers designed to 
compare single-chamber with dual-chamber pacing 
by crossover design, the need for AV synchronous pac-
ing due to pacemaker syndrome was common. Pacing 
modes that preserve AV synchrony appear to be associ-
ated with a reduction in the incidence of atrial fibrilla-
tion and improved quality of life. Because of the low but 
finite incidence of AV conduction disease, patients with 
SA node dysfunction usually undergo dual-chamber 
pacemaker implantation.
Pacemaker 
Therapy 
in 
Carotid 
Sinus 
Hypersensitivity and Vasovagal Syncope
Carotid sinus hypersensitivity, if accompanied by a sig-
nificant cardioinhibitory component, responds well 
synchrony and/or left ventricular mechanical synchrony. 
Pacing modes that interrupt or fail to restore atrioven-
tricular synchrony may lead to a constellation of signs 
and symptoms, collectively referred to as pacemaker 
syndrome, that include neck pulsation, fatigue, palpita-
tions, cough, confusion, exertional dyspnea, dizziness, 
syncope, elevation in jugular venous pressure, canon A 
waves, and stigmata of congestive heart failure, includ-
ing edema, rales, and a third heart sound. Right ventricu-
lar apical pacing can induce dyssynchronous activation 
of the left ventricle, leading to compromised left ven-
tricular (LV) systolic function, mitral valve regurgitation, 
and the previously mentioned stigmata of congestive 
heart failure. Maintenance of AV synchrony can minimize 
the sequelae of pacemaker syndrome. Selection of pac-
ing modes that minimize unnecessary ventricular pac-
ing or implantation of a device capable of right and left 
ventricular pacing (biventricular pacing) can help mini-
mize the deleterious consequences of pacing-induced 
mechanical dyssynchrony at the ventricular level.
Pacemaker 
Therapy 
in 
SA 
Node 
Dysfunction  Pacing in SA nodal disease is indi-
cated to alleviate symptoms of bradycardia. Consensus 
guidelines published by the American Heart Association 
(AHA)/American College of Cardiology/Heart Rhythm 
Society (ACC/HRS) outline the indications for the use of 
pacemakers and categorize them by class based on lev-
els of evidence. Class I conditions are those for which 
there is evidence or consensus of opinion that therapy 
is useful and effective. In class II conditions there is con-
flicting evidence or a divergence of opinion about the 
efficacy of a procedure or treatment; in class IIa condi-
tions the weight of evidence or opinion favors treat-
ment, and in class IIb conditions efficacy is less well 
established by the evidence or opinion of experts. In 
class III conditions, the evidence or weight of opinion 
indicates that the therapy is not efficacious or useful and 
may be harmful.
Class I indications for pacing in SA node dysfunction 
include documented symptomatic bradycardia, sinus 
node dysfunction–associated long-term drug therapy for 
which there is no alternative, and symptomatic chrono-
tropic incompetence. Class IIa indications include those 
outlined previously in which sinus node dysfunction is 
suspected but not documented and for syncope of unex-
plained origin in the presence of major abnormalities of 
SA node dysfunction. Mildly symptomatic individuals 
with heart rates consistently <40 beats/min constitute 
a class IIb indication for pacing. Pacing is not indicated 
in patients with SA node dysfunction who do not have 
symptoms and in those in whom bradycardia is associ-
ated with the use of nonessential drugs (Table 15-3).
There is some controversy about the mode of pacing 
that should be employed in SA node disease. A number 
Table 15-3
Summary of Guidelines for Pacemaker 
Implantation in SA Node Dysfunction
Class I
1. SA node dysfunction with symptomatic bradycardia or 
sinus pauses
2. Symptomatic SA node dysfunction as a result of essen-
tial long-term drug therapy with no acceptable alterna-
tives
3. Symptomatic chronotropic incompetence
4. Atrial fibrillation with bradycardia and pauses >5s
Class IIa
1. SA node dysfunction with heart rates <40 beats/min 
without a clear and consistent relationship between bra-
dycardia and symptoms
2. SA node dysfunction with heart rates <40 beats/min on 
an essential long-term drug therapy with no acceptable 
alternatives, without a clear and consistent relationship 
between bradycardia and symptoms
3. Syncope of unknown origin when major abnormalities 
of SA node dysfunction are discovered or provoked by 
electrophysiologic testing
Class IIb
1. Mildly symptomatic patients with waking chronic heart 
rates <40 beats/min
Class III
1. SA node dysfunction in asymptomatic patients, even 
those with heart rates <40 beats/min
2. SA node dysfunction in which symptoms suggestive of 
bradycardia are not associated with a slow heart rate
3. SA node dysfunction with symptomatic bradycardia due 
to nonessential drug therapy
Source: Modified from AE Epstein et al: J Am Coll Cardiol 51:e1, 
2008 and G Gregoratos et al: J Am Coll Cardiol 40:703, 2002.
 
CHAPTER 15
The Bradyarrhythmias
149
if symptomatic, and transient second- or third-degree 
AV block associated with bundle branch block 
(Table 15-5). Pacing is generally not indicated in the 
setting of transient AV block in the absence of intraven-
tricular conduction delays or in the presence of fascicu-
lar block or first-degree AV block that develops in the 
setting of preexisting bundle branch block. Fascicular 
blocks that develop in acute MI in the absence of other 
to pacing. In this circumstance, pacing is required only 
intermittently and single-chamber ventricular pacing is 
often sufficient. The mechanism of vasovagal syncope is 
incompletely understood but appears to involve activa-
tion of cardiac mechanoreceptors with consequent acti-
vation of neural centers that mediate vagal activation 
and withdrawal of sympathetic nervous system tone. 
Several randomized clinical trials have been performed 
in patients with drug-refractory vasovagal syncope, with 
some studies suggesting reduction in the frequency 
and the time to recurrent syncope in patients who were 
paced compared with those who were not. A recent 
follow-up study to one of those initial trials, however, 
found less convincing results, casting some doubt on 
the utility of pacing for vagally mediated syncope.
Pacemakers in AV Conduction Disease
There are no randomized trials that evaluate the efficacy 
of pacing in patients with AV block, as there are no reli-
able therapeutic alternatives for AV block and untreated 
high-grade AV block is potentially lethal. The consen-
sus guidelines for pacing in acquired AV conduction 
block in adults provide a general outline for situations 
in which pacing is indicated (Table 15-4). Pacemaker 
implantation should be performed in any patient with 
symptomatic bradycardia and irreversible second- or 
third-degree AV block, regardless of the cause or level of 
block in the conducting system. Symptoms may include 
those directly related to bradycardia and low cardiac 
output or to worsening heart failure, angina, or intoler-
ance to an essential medication. Pacing in patients with 
asymptomatic AV block should be individualized; situa-
tions in which pacing should be considered are patients 
with acquired CHB, particularly in the setting of cardiac 
enlargement; left ventricular dysfunction; and waking 
heart rates ≤40 beats/min. Patients who have asymp-
tomatic second-degree AV block of either type should be 
considered for pacing if the block is demonstrated to be 
intra- or infra-His or is associated with a wide QRS com-
plex. Pacing may be indicated in asymptomatic patients 
in special circumstances, in patients with profound 
first-degree AV block and left ventricular dysfunction 
in whom a shorter AV interval produces hemodynamic 
improvement, and in the setting of milder forms of AV 
conduction delay (first-degree AV block, intraventricular 
conduction delay) in patients with neuromuscular dis-
eases that have a predilection for the conduction system, 
such as myotonic dystrophy and other muscular dystro-
phies, and Kearns-Sayre syndrome.
Pacemaker Therapy in Myocardial Infarction
Atrioventricular block in acute MI is often transient, 
particularly in inferior infarction. The circumstances 
in which pacing is indicated in acute MI are persis-
tent second- or third-degree AV block, particularly  
Table 15-4
Guideline Summary for Pacemaker 
Implantation in Acquired AV Block
Class I
1. Third-degree or high-grade AV block at any anatomic 
level associated with:
 a. Symptomatic bradycardia
b. Essential drug therapy that produces symptomatic 
bradycardia
 c. Periods of asystole >3 s or any escape rate <40 
beats/min while awake
d. Postoperative AV block not expected to resolve
 e. Catheter ablation of the AV junction
  f. Neuromuscular diseases such as myotonic dystro-
phy, Kearns-Sayre syndrome, Erb dystrophy, and 
peroneal muscular atrophy, regardless of the pres-
ence of symptoms
2. Second-degree AV block with symptomatic bradycardia
3. Type II second-degree AV block with a wide QRS com-
plex with or without symptoms
4. Exercise-induced second- or third-degree AV block in 
the absence of ischemia
5. Atrial fibrillation with bradycardia and pauses >5s
Class IIa
1. Asymptomatic third-degree AV block regardless of level
2. Asymptomatic type II second-degree AV block with a 
narrow QRS complex
3. Asymptomatic type II second-degree AV block with 
block within or below the His at electrophysiologic 
study
4. First- or second-degree AV block with symptoms similar 
to pacemaker syndrome
Class IIb
1. Marked first-degree AV block (PR interval >300 ms) in 
patients with LV dysfunction in whom shortening the AV 
delay would improve hemodynamics
2. Neuromuscular diseases such as myotonic dystrophy, 
Kearns-Sayre syndrome, Erb dystrophy, and peroneal 
muscular atrophy with any degree of AV block regard-
less of the presence of symptoms
Class III
1. Asymptomatic first-degree AV block
2. Asymptomatic type I second-degree AV block at the AV 
node level
3. AV block that is expected to resolve or is unlikely to 
recur (Lyme disease, drug toxicity)
Source: Modified from AE Epstein et al: J Am Coll Cardiol 51:e1, 
2008 and G Gregoratos et al: J Am Coll Cardiol 40:703, 2002.
SECTION III
Heart Rhythm Disturbances
150
previously described should also undergo pacemaker 
implantation (Table 15-6).
Selection of Pacing Mode  In general, a pacing 
mode that maintains AV synchrony reduces complications 
of pacing such as pacemaker syndrome and pacemaker-
mediated tachycardia. This is particularly true in younger 
patients; the importance of dual-chamber pacing in the 
elderly, however, is not well established. Several studies 
have failed to demonstrate a difference in mortality rate 
in older patients with AV block treated with a single-(VVI) 
compared with a dual-(DDD) chamber pacing mode. In 
some of the studies that randomized pacing mode, the risk 
of chronic atrial fibrillation and stroke risk decreased with 
physiologic pacing. In patients with sinus rhythm and AV 
block, the very modest increase in risk with dual-chamber 
pacemaker implantation appears to be justified to avoid 
the possible complications of single-chamber pacing.
forms of AV block also do not require pacing (Table 15-5 
and Table 15-6).
Pacemaker Therapy in Bifascicular and 
Trifascicular Block  Distal forms of AV conduction 
block may require pacemaker implantation in certain 
clinical settings. Patients with bifascicular or trifascicu-
lar block and symptoms, particularly syncope that is not 
attributable to other causes, should undergo pacemaker 
implantation. Pacemaking is indicated in asymptom-
atic patients with bifascicular or trifascicular block who 
experience intermittent third-degree, type II second-
degree AV block or alternating bundle branch block. In 
patients with fascicular block who are undergoing elec-
trophysiologic study, a markedly prolonged HV interval 
or block below the His at long cycle lengths also may 
constitute an indication for permanent pacing. Patients 
with fascicular block and the neuromuscular diseases 
Table 15-5
Guideline Summary for Pacemaker 
Implantation in AV Conduction Block 
in Acute Myocardial Infarction (AMI)
Class I
1. Persistent second-degree AV block in the His-
Purkinje system with bilateral bundle branch block or 
third-degree block within or below the His after AMI
2. Transient advanced (second- or third-degree) 
infranodal AV block and associated bundle branch 
block. If the site of block is uncertain, an electrophysi-
ologic study may be necessary
3. Persistent and symptomatic second- or third-degree 
AV block
Class IIb
1. Persistent second- or third-degree AV block at the AV 
node level
Class III
1. Transient AV block in the absence of intraventricular 
conduction defects
2. Transient AV block in the presence of isolated left 
anterior fascicular block
3. Acquired left anterior fascicular block in the absence 
of AV block
4. Persistent first-degree AV block in the presence of 
bundle branch block that is old or age-indeterminate
Source: Modified from AE Epstein et al: J Am Coll Cardiol 51:e1, 
2008 and G Gregoratos et al: J Am Coll Cardiol 40:703, 2002.
Table 15-6
Indications for Pacemaker Implantation 
in Chronic Bifascicular and Trifascicular 
Block
Class I
1. Intermittent third-degree AV block
2. Type II second-degree AV block
3. Alternating bundle branch block
Class IIa
1. Syncope not demonstrated to be due to AV block 
when other likely causes (e.g., ventricular tachycardia) 
have been excluded
2. Incidental finding at electrophysiologic study of a 
markedly prolonged HV interval (>100 ms) in asymp-
tomatic patients
3. Incidental finding at electrophysiologic study of 
pacing-induced infra-His block that is not physiologic
Class IIb
1. Neuromuscular diseases such as myotonic dystrophy, 
Kearns-Sayre syndrome, Erb dystrophy, and peroneal 
muscular atrophy with any degree of fascicular block 
regardless of the presence of symptoms, because 
there may be unpredictable progression of AV con-
duction disease
Class III
1. Fascicular block without AV block or symptoms
2. Fascicular block with first-degree AV block without 
symptoms
Source: Modified from AE Epstein et al: J Am Coll Cardiol 51:e1, 
2008 and G Gregoratos et al: J Am Coll Cardiol 40:703, 2002.
 Francis Marchlinski 
151
 The term  tachyarrhythmias typically refers to nonsus-
tained and sustained forms of tachycardia originating 
from myocardial foci or reentrant circuits. The stan-
dard defi nition of tachycardia is a rhythm that produces 
a ventricular rate >100 beats per minute. This defi ni-
tion has some limitations in that atrial rates can exceed 
100 beats per minute despite a slow ventricular rate. 
Furthermore, ventricular rates may exceed the baseline 
sinus rate and be <100 beats per minute but still repre-
sent an important “tachycardia” response, as is observed 
with accelerated ventricular rhythms. Premature com-
plexes (depolarizations) are considered under the cat-
egory of tachyarrhythmias because they may cause 
arrhythmia-related symptoms and/or serve as triggering 
events for more sustained forms of tachycardia. 
 syMPToMs due To TachyarrhyThMias 
 Tachyarrhythmias classically produce symptoms of pal-
pitations or racing of the pulse. With premature beats, 
skipping of the pulse or a pause may be experienced, 
and patients may even sense slowing of the heart rate 
or dizziness. A more dramatic irregularity of the pulse is 
experienced with chaotic rapid rhythms or tachyarrhyth-
mias that originate in the atrium and conduct variably 
to the ventricles. With rapid tachyarrhythmias, hemody-
namic compromise can occur, as can dizziness or syn-
cope due to a decrease in cardiac output or breathless-
ness due to a marked increase in cardiac fi lling pressures. 
Occasionally, chest discomfort may be experienced that 
mimics symptoms of myocardial ischemia. The under-
lying cardiac condition typically dictates the severity of 
symptoms at any specifi c heart rate. Even patients with 
normal systolic left ventricular (LV) function may expe-
rience severe symptoms if diastolic compliance due to 
hypertrophy or valvular obstruction is present and a 
tachycardia develops. Hemodynamic collapse with the 
development of ventricular fi brillation (VF) can lead to 
sudden cardiac death (SCD) ( Chap. 29 ). 
 THE TACHYARRHYTHMIAS 
 chapter 16 
 diagnosTic TesTs in evaluaTing 
TachyarrhyThMias 
 In patients who present with nonlife-threatening symp-
toms such as palpitations or dizziness, electrocardio-
graphic (ECG) confi rmation of an arrhythmia with 
the development of recurrent symptoms is essential. 
A 24-h Holter monitor should be considered only for 
patients with daily symptoms. For intermittent symp-
toms that are of prolonged duration, a patient-activated 
event monitor can be used to obtain the ECG infor-
mation without the need for continuous ECG lead 
attachment and recordings. A patient-activated moni-
tor with a continuously recorded memory loop (“loop 
recorder”) can be used to document short-lived epi-
sodes and the onset of the arrhythmia. This is the pre-
ferred monitoring technique for symptomatic patients 
with less frequent arrhythmia events, but it requires 
continuous ECG recording. A monitor that automati-
cally triggers to record a fast rhythm can be used to 
detect asymptomatic arrhythmias. Patients with infre-
quent, severe symptoms that cannot be identifi ed by 
intermittent ECG monitoring may receive an implanted 
loop ECG monitor that provides more extended peri-
ods of monitoring and automatic arrhythmia detection 
 ( Fig. 16-1 ) . 
 In patients who present with more severe symp-
toms, such as syncope, outpatient monitoring may be 
insuffi cient. In patients with structural heart disease 
and syncope in whom there is suspicion of ventricular 
tachycardia (VT), hospitalization and diagnostic electro-
physiologic testing are warranted, with strong consider-
ation of an implantable cardioverter/defi brillator (ICD) 
device. The 12-lead ECG recorded in sinus rhythm 
should be assessed carefully in patients without struc-
tural heart disease for evidence of ST-segment elevation 
in leads V 1 and V 2 consistent with Brugada syndrome, 
QT interval changes consistent with long or short QT 
syndromes, or a short PR interval and delta wave 
SECTION III
Heart Rhythm Disturbances
152
RV cardiomyopathy. Polymorphic VT in the absence 
of QT prolongation should always raise concern for a 
potentially unstable ischemic process that may need to 
be corrected to effect VT control.
Mechanisms of Tachyarrhythmias
Tachycardias are due to abnormalities of impulse for-
mation and/or abnormalities of impulse propagation 
(Fig. 16-2).
Abnormalities in impulse formation
An increase in automaticity normally causes an increase 
in sinus rate and sinus tachycardia (Fig. 16-2A). 
Abnormal automaticity is due to an increase in the 
slope of phase 4 depolarization or a reduced threshold 
for action potential depolarization in myocardium other 
than the sinus node. Abnormal automaticity is thought 
to be responsible for most atrial premature complexes 
(APCs) and VPCs and some ATs. Pacing does not pro-
voke automatic rhythms. Less commonly, abnormal 
impulse formation is due to triggered activity. Triggered 
activity is related to cellular afterdepolarizations that 
occur at the end of the action potential, during phase 3, 
and are referred to as early afterdepolarizations; when they 
occur after the action potential, during phase 4, they 
are referred to as late afterdepolarizations. Afterdepolar-
izations are attributable to an increase in intracellular 
calcium accumulation. If sufficient afterdepolarization 
amplitude is achieved, repeated myocardial depolarization 
and a tachycardic response can occur. Early afterdepo-
larizations may be responsible for the VPCs that trigger 
the polymorphic ventricular arrhythmia known as tor-
sades des pointes (TDP). Late afterdepolarizations are 
thought to be responsible for atrial, junctional, and fas-
cicular tachyarrhythmias caused by digoxin toxicity and 
also appear to be the basis for catecholamine-sensitive 
VT originating in the outflow tract. In contrast to 
automatic tachycardias, those due to triggered activity 
(Fig. 16-2B) frequently can be provoked with pacing 
maneuvers.
Abnormalities in impulse propagation
Reentry is due to inhomogeneities in myocardial con-
duction and/or recovery properties. The presence of a 
consistent with Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW) syn-
drome. These ECG patterns identify a possible arrhyth-
mogenic substrate that may cause intermittent life-
threatening symptoms and warrant further evaluation 
and therapy. The individual syndromes are discussed in 
detail later in this chapter.
Monitoring for asymptomatic tachyarrhythmias is 
indicated in several specific situations. In patients with a 
suspected tachycardia-induced cardiomyopathy marked 
by chamber dilation and depression in systolic func-
tion, the demonstration of arrhythmia control is essen-
tial. Monitoring for asymptomatic ventricular premature 
complexes (VPCs) and nonsustained VT can be helpful 
in stratifying the risk of SCD in patients with depressed 
LV function after myocardial infarction (MI). Finally, in 
patients with asymptomatic atrial fibrillation (AF), anti-
coagulation treatment strategies depend on an accurate 
assessment of the presence of this arrhythmia. The dura-
tion of monitoring for asymptomatic arrhythmias may 
have to be extended to optimize detection capabilities.
A 12-lead ECG recording during the tachycar-
dia can be an important diagnostic tool in identify-
ing the mechanism and origin of a tachycardia to a 
degree not afforded by one- or two-lead ECG record-
ings. A 12-lead ECG of the tachyarrhythmia should be 
recorded and incorporated as a permanent part of the 
medical record whenever possible. For patients whose 
arrhythmias are provoked by exercise, an exercise test 
may provide an opportunity to obtain 12-lead ECG 
recordings of the arrhythmia and may obviate the need 
for more extended periods of monitoring.
Many paroxysmal supraventricular tachyarrhyth-
mias are not associated with a significant risk of struc-
tural heart disease, and an evaluation for the presence of 
ischemic heart disease and cardiac function is required 
infrequently unless dictated by the severity or character-
istics of the symptoms. However, in patients with focal 
or macroreentrant atrial tachycardias (ATs), atrial flutter 
(AFL), or AF, an evaluation of cardiac chamber size and 
function and of valve function is warranted. In patients 
with VT, an echocardiographic assessment of LV and 
right ventricular (RV) size and function should be the 
norm. Ventricular tachycardia that occurs in the setting 
of depressed LV function should raise the suspicion of 
advanced coronary artery disease (CAD). Ventricular 
tachycardia in the setting of isolated RV dilation should 
raise concern about the diagnosis of arrhythmogenic 
Figure 16-1 
Spontaneous 
termination 
of 
atrial fibrillation at the time of a 
syncopal episode identified from 
implantable loop ECG recording.
09:22:49
09:22:59
09:23:09
A
 
CHAPTER 16
The Tachyarrhythmias
153
the vertical crest on the interior wall of the right atrium 
that separates the nontrabeculated posterior right atrium 
from the rest of the trabeculated right atrium located lat-
eral to the structure, and/or extensive fibrosis created 
by underlying myocardial disease. This form of reentry 
seems to be more stable and results in a tachycardia that 
has a uniform (often monomorphic), repetitive appear-
ance. Other forms of reentry appear to be more func-
tional and are more dependent on dynamic changes in 
electrophysiologic properties of the myocardium. These 
tachycardias tend to be more unstable and may result in 
tachycardias that have a polymorphic appearance. Two 
classic examples of reentry that are primarily functional 
are VF due to acute myocardial ischemia and polymor-
phic VT in patients with a genetically determined ion 
channel abnormality such as Brugada syndrome, LQTS, 
or catecholaminergic polymorphic VT.
unidirectional block with slow conduction to allow for 
retrograde recovery of the blocked myocardium allows 
the formation of a circuit that, if perpetuated, can sus-
tain a tachycardia (Fig. 16-2C). These inhomogeneities 
are somewhat inherent but are minimized in normal 
myocardial activation/recovery. The inhomogeneities 
can be exaggerated by the presence of extra pathways, 
as occurs with the WPW syndrome; generalized geneti-
cally determined myocardial ion channel abnormalities, 
as occur with long QT syndrome (LQTS); or the inter-
ruption of normal myocardial patterns of activation due 
to the development of fibrosis.
Reentry appears to be the basis for most abnormal 
sustained supraventricular tachycardias (SVTs) and VTs. 
In general, reentry can be anatomically driven (fixed) 
based on the presence of “extra” pathways, natural ana-
tomic barriers of conduction such as the crista terminalis, 
Figure 16-2 
Schematic representation of the different mecha-
nisms for arrhythmias. A. Abnormal automaticity due to 
an increased slope of phase 4 of the action potential or a 
decrease in the threshold for phase 0. B. Triggered activity 
due to early afterdepolarizations (EADs) during phase 3 of 
the action potential due to alteration of plateau currents or 
delayed afterdepolarizations (DADs) during phase 4 of the 
action potential due to intracellular calcium accumulation. 
C. Reentry with basic requirements of two pathways that 
have heterogeneous electrophysiologic properties which 
allows conduction to block in one pathway and propagate 
slowly in the other, allowing for sufficient delay so that the 
blocked site has time for recovery to allow for reentry or cir-
cus movement tachycardia. Shown is a typical schema for 
reentry in the AV node. AV, atrioventricular; APC, atrial pre-
mature complex.
A
B
ICa
1
Phase 4 slope
Threshold for excitation
Early
 afterdepolarization
Delayed
 afterdepolarization
2
3
4
0
↑
↑
$3&
Atria
AV 
node
Ventricles
C
SECTION III
Heart Rhythm Disturbances
154
atrial appendage, superior vena cava (SVC), and supe-
rior aspect of the crista terminalis in the region of the 
sinus node may mimic the sinus P-wave morphology. 
In response to an APC, the PR interval lengthens, 
although APCs that originate near the atrioventricu-
lar (AV) nodal region may actually have a shorter PR 
interval because the atrial conduction time to the junc-
tion is shortened. A very early APC may not conduct 
to the ventricle and can create a pulse irregularity that 
may be perceived as a pause or “dropped beat.” If the 
APC conducts rapidly through the AV node, a par-
tially recovered His-Purkinje system will be encoun-
tered and a QRS pattern consistent with a right or left 
bundle branch block may occur. This wide QRS pat-
tern and the failure to recognize the preceding P wave 
may result in misdiagnosis of VPCs. APCs character-
istically reset the sinus node. The resulting sum of the 
pre- and post-APC RR interval is less than two sinus 
PP intervals.
Treatment	
Atrial Premature Complexes
Atrial premature complexes generally do not require 
intervention. For extremely symptomatic patients who 
do not respond to explanation and reassurance, an 
attempt can be made to suppress the APCs with phar-
macologic agents. The repetitive focus can even be tar-
geted for catheter ablation. Beta blockers may be tried. 
Of note, these agents may uncommonly exacerbate 
symptoms if AV block occurs with the APC and irregular-
ity of the pulse consequently becomes more profound. 
The use of class IC antiarrhythmic agents may eliminate 
the APCs but should be avoided if structural heart dis-
ease is present.
Junctional Premature Complexes
Junctional premature complexes are extremely uncom-
mon. The complexes originate from the AV node and 
His bundle region and may produce retrograde atrial 
activation with the P wave distorting the initial or ter-
minal portions of the QRS complex, producing pseudo 
Q or S waves in leads II, III, and aVF. Extrasystoles 
originating in the bundle of His that do not conduct to 
the ventricle and also block the atria can produce unex-
plained surface ECG PR prolongation that does not 
follow a typical Wenckebach periodicity (i.e., gradual 
PR prolongation culminating in atrial activity that fails 
to conduct to the ventricles). Intracardiac recordings 
frequently can identify a His depolarization, thus iden-
tifying the origin of the complex to the AV junction. 
Symptomatic patients typically may be treated with beta 
blockers or, if there is no structural heart disease, class 
IC antiarrhythmic agents.
Supraventricular 
Tachyarrhythmias
Atrial Premature Complexes
Atrial premature complexes are the most common 
arrhythmia identified during extended ECG monitor-
ing. The incidence of APCs frequently increases with 
age and with the presence of structural heart diseases. 
Atrial premature complexes typically are asymptomatic, 
although some patients experience palpitations or an 
irregularity of the pulse.
ECG diagnosis of APCs
The ECG diagnosis of APCs is based on the identifi-
cation of a P wave that occurs before the anticipated 
sinus beat (Fig. 16-3A and B). The source of the APC 
appears to parallel the typical sites of origin for ATs. 
The P-wave contour typically differs from that noted 
during sinus rhythm, although APCs from the right 
A
B
C
Figure 16-3 
Atrial and ventricular premature complexes (APCs, 
VPCs). The APC resets the sinus node, and no compensa-
tory pause is present A. even when conducted aberrantly in 
the ventricles with a bundle branch block-type QRS pattern 
B. VPCs tend not to reset the sinus activity (arrows) and will 
demonstrate a full compensatory pause C.
 
CHAPTER 16
The Tachyarrhythmias
155
Treatment	
Inappropriate Sinus Tachycardia
For symptomatic patients, maintaining an increased 
state of hydration, salt loading, and careful titration of 
beta blockers to the maximum tolerated dose, adminis-
tered in divided doses, frequently minimize symptoms. 
For severely symptomatic patients who are intolerant 
of or unresponsive to beta blockers, catheter ablation 
directed at modifying the sinus node may be effective. 
Because of the high recurrence rate after ablation and 
the frequent need for atrial pacing therapy, this inter-
vention remains second-line treatment.
Atrial Fibrillation
(Fig. 16-4) Atrial fibrillation is the most common sus-
tained arrhythmia. It is marked by disorganized, rapid, 
and irregular atrial activation. The ventricular response to 
the rapid atrial activation is also irregular. In an untreated 
patient, the ventricular rate also tends to be rapid and 
is entirely dependent on the conduction properties of 
the AV junction. Although typically the rate will vary 
between 120 and 160 beats per minute, in some patients 
it can be >200 beats per minute. In other patients, 
because of heightened vagal tone or intrinsic AV nodal 
conduction properties, the ventricular response is <100 
beats per minute and occasionally even profoundly slow. 
The mechanism for AF initiation and maintenance, 
although still debated, appears to be a complex interac-
tion between drivers responsible for the initiation and 
the complex anatomic atrial substrate that promotes the 
maintenance of multiple wavelets of (micro)reentry. The 
drivers appear to originate predominantly from the atri-
alized musculature that enters the pulmonary veins and 
represent either focal abnormal automaticity or triggered 
firing that is somewhat modulated by autonomic influ-
ences. Sustained forms of microreentry as drivers also 
have been documented around the orifice of pulmonary 
veins; nonpulmonary vein drivers also have been dem-
onstrated. The role these drivers play in maintaining the 
tachycardias may be significant and may explain the suc-
cess of pulmonary vein isolation procedures in eliminat-
ing more chronic or persistent forms of AF.
Although AF is common in the adult population, it 
is extremely unusual in children unless structural heart 
disease is present or there is another arrhythmia that 
precipitates the AF, such as paroxysmal SVT in patients 
with WPW syndrome. The incidence of AF increases 
with age such that >5% of the adult population over 
70 will experience the arrhythmia. As many patients 
are asymptomatic with AF, it is anticipated that the 
overall incidence, particularly that noted in the elderly, 
may be more than double the previously reported 
rates. Occasionally, AF appears to have a well-defined 
Sinus Tachycardia
Physiologic sinus tachycardia represents a normal or appro-
priate response to physiologic stress, such as that which 
occurs with exercise, anxiety, or fever. Pathologic con-
ditions such as thyrotoxicosis, anemia, and hypotension 
also may produce sinus tachycardia. It is important to 
distinguish sinus tachycardia from other SVTs. Sinus 
tachycardia will produce a P-wave contour consis-
tent with its origin from the sinus node located in the 
superior-lateral and posterior aspect of the right atrium. 
The P wave is upright in leads II, III, and aVF and 
negative in lead aVR. The P-wave morphology in lead 
V1 characteristically has a biphasic, positive/negative 
contour. Onset of sinus tachycardia is gradual, and in 
response to carotid sinus pressure there may be some 
modest and transient slowing but no abrupt termina-
tion. Importantly, the diagnosis should not be based 
on the PR interval or the presence of a P wave before 
every QRS complex. The PR interval and the presence 
of 1:1 AV conduction properties are determined by 
AV nodal and His-Purkinje conduction; therefore, the 
PR interval can be dramatically prolonged while sinus 
tachycardia remains the atrial mechanism.
Treatment	
Physiologic Sinus Tachycardia
Treatment of physiologic sinus tachycardia is directed 
at the underlying condition causing the tachycardia 
response. Uncommonly, beta blockers are used to 
minimize the tachycardia response if it is determined 
to be potentially harmful, as may occur in a patient 
with ischemic heart disease and rate-related anginal 
symptoms.
Inappropriate sinus tachycardia represents an uncom-
mon but important medical condition in which the 
heart rate increases either spontaneously or out of pro-
portion to the degree of physiologic stress/exercise. 
Dizziness and even frank syncope often accompany the 
sinus tachycardia and symptoms of palpitations. The 
syndrome can be quite disabling. Associated symptoms 
of chest pain, headaches, and gastrointestinal upset 
are common. In many patients, the syndrome occurs 
after a viral illness and may resolve spontaneously over 
the course of 3–12 months, suggesting a postviral 
dysautonomia.
Excluding the diagnosis of an automatic AT that 
originates in the region of the sinus node can be dif-
ficult and may require invasive electrophysiologic 
evaluation. Frequently, patients are misdiagnosed 
as having an anxiety disorder with physiologic sinus 
tachycardia.
SECTION III
Heart Rhythm Disturbances
156
even more dramatic, especially if the ventricular rate 
does not permit adequate ventricular filling. Exercise 
intolerance and easy fatigability are the hallmarks of 
poor rate control with exertion. Occasionally, the only 
manifestation of AF is severe dizziness or syncope asso-
ciated with the pause that occurs upon termination of 
AF before sinus rhythm resumes (Fig. 16-1).
The ECG in AF is characterized by the lack of orga-
nized atrial activity and the irregularly irregular ven-
tricular response. Occasionally, one needs to record 
from multiple ECG leads simultaneously to identify the 
chaotic continuous atrial activation. Lead V1 frequently 
shows the appearance of organized atrial activity that 
mimics AFL. This occurs because the crista terminalis 
serves as an effective anatomic barrier to electrical con-
duction, and the activation of the lateral right atrium 
may be represented by a more uniform activation wave 
front that originates over the roof of the right atrium. 
ECG assessment of the PP interval (<200 ms) and the 
chaotic P-wave morphology in the remaining ECG 
leads will confirm the presence of AF.
Evaluation of a patient with AF should include a 
search for a reversible cause of the arrhythmia, such as 
hyperthyroidism or anemia. An echocardiogram should 
be performed to determine whether there is structural 
heart disease. Persistent or labile hypertension should be 
identified and treated.
etiology, such as acute hyperthyroidism, an acute vago-
tonic episode, or acute alcohol intoxication. Acute AF is 
particularly common during the acute or early recovery 
phase of major vascular, abdominal, and thoracic surgery, 
in which case autonomic fluxes and/or direct mechanical 
irritation potentiate the arrhythmia. AF also may be trig-
gered by other supraventricular tachycardias, such as AV 
nodal reentrant tachycardia (AVNRT), and elimination 
of these arrhythmias may prevent AF recurrence.
AF has clinical importance related to (1) the loss of 
atrial contractility, (2) the inappropriate fast ventricular 
response, and (3) the loss of atrial appendage contractil-
ity and emptying leading to the risk of clot formation 
and subsequent thromboembolic events.
Symptoms from AF vary dramatically. Many patients 
are asymptomatic and have no apparent hemody-
namic consequences from the development of AF. 
Other patients experience only minor palpitations or 
sense irregularity of the pulse. Many patients, how-
ever, experience severe palpitations. The hemodynamic 
effect in patients can be quite dramatic, depending on 
the need for normal atrial contractility and the ven-
tricular response. Hypotension, pulmonary congestion, 
and anginal symptoms may be severe in some patients. 
In patients with LV diastolic dysfunction that occurs 
with hypertension, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, or 
obstructive aortic valvular disease, symptoms may be 
VI
A
II
VI
B
II
VI
C
II
VI
D
II
Figure 16-4 
Supraventricular tachycardias with irregular ventricular 
rates. Atrial fibrillation (A), atrial flutter (B), atrial tachycar-
dia (C), and multifocal atrial tachycardia (MAT; D) are shown. 
The characteristics of the atrial activity with respect to the 
morphology and rate provide the clues to the diagnosis. The 
variable ventricular response to the atrial flutter and the atrial 
tachycardia suggest a Wenckebach-type periodicity.
 
CHAPTER 16
The Tachyarrhythmias
157
1 month after restoration of sinus rhythm if the dura-
tion of AF has been prolonged or is unknown. Heparin is 
maintained routinely until the INR is 1.8 with the admin-
istration of warfarin after the TEE. For patients who do 
not warrant early cardioversion of AF, anticoagulation 
should be maintained for at least 3 weeks with the INR 
confirmed to be >1.8 on at least two separate occasions 
before attempts at cardioversion.
Termination of AF acutely may be warranted on the 
basis of clinical parameters and/or hemodynamic status. 
Confirmation of appropriate anticoagulation status as 
described earlier in the chapter must be documented 
unless symptoms and clinical status warrant emergent 
intervention. Direct current transthoracic cardiover-
sion during short-acting anesthesia is a reliable way to 
terminate AF. Conversion rates using a 200-J biphasic 
shock delivered synchronously with the QRS complex 
typically are >90%. Pharmacologic therapy to termi-
nate AF is less reliable. Oral and/or IV administration of 
amiodarone or procainamide has only modest success. 
The acute IV administration of ibutilide appears to be 
somewhat more effective and may be used in selected 
patients to facilitate termination with direct current (DC) 
cardioversion (Tables 16-2 and 16-3).
Pharmacologic therapy to maintain sinus rhythm 
can be instituted once sinus rhythm has been estab-
lished or in anticipation of cardioversion to attempt to 
maintain sinus rhythm (Table 16-3). A single episode 
of AF may not warrant any intervention or only a short 
course of beta blocker therapy. To prevent recurrent AF 
unresponsive to beta blockade, a trial of antiarrhyth-
mic therapy may be warranted, particularly if the AF is 
associated with rapid rates and/or significant symp-
toms. The selection of antiarrhythmic agents should be 
dictated primarily by the presence or absence of CAD, 
depressed LV function not attributable to a reversible 
tachycardia-induced cardiomyopathy, and/or severe 
hypertension with evidence of marked LV hypertrophy. 
The presence of any significant structural heart disease 
typically narrows treatment to the use of sotalol, amio-
darone, dofetilide, or dronedarone. Severely depressed 
LV function with heart failure symptoms precludes 
the use of dronedarone and may limit sotalol therapy. 
Owing to the risk of QT prolongation and polymorphic 
VT, sotalol and dofetilide have to be initiated in the hos-
pital in most cases.
In patients without evidence of structural heart dis-
ease or hypertensive heart disease without evidence 
of severe hypertrophy, the use of the class IC antiar-
rhythmic agents flecainide or propafenone appears to 
be well tolerated and does not have significant proar-
rhythmia risk. It is important to recognize that no drug 
is uniformly effective, and arrhythmia recurrence should 
be anticipated in over one-half of the patients during 
Treatment	
Atrial Fibrillation
Treatment for AF must take into account the clinical 
situation in which the arrhythmia is encountered, the 
chronicity of the AF, the status of the patient’s level of 
anticoagulation, risk factors for stroke, the patient’s 
symptoms, the hemodynamic impact of the AF, and the 
ventricular rate.
ACUTE 
RATE 
CONTROL  In the absence of 
hemodynamic compromise that might warrant emer-
gent cardioversion to terminate the AF, the initial goals 
of therapy are to (1) establish control of the ventricular 
rate and (2) address anticoagulation status and begin 
IV heparin treatment if the duration of AF is >12 h and 
risk factors for stroke with AF are present (Table 16-1). 
Ventricular rate control for acute AF is best established 
with beta blockers and/or the calcium channel blocking 
agents verapamil and diltiazem. The route of administra-
tion and dose will be dictated by the ventricular rate and 
clinical status. Digoxin may add to the rate-controlling 
benefit of the other agents but is uncommonly used as a 
stand-alone agent, especially in acute AF.
Anticoagulation is of particular importance in 
patients who have known risk factors for stroke associ-
ated with AF. Factors associated with the highest risk 
of stroke include a history of stroke, transient ischemic 
attack (TIA) or systemic embolism, and the presence 
of rheumatic mitral stenosis. Other identified risk fac-
tors include age >65 years, history of congestive heart 
failure (CHF), diabetes mellitus, hypertension, LV dys-
function, and evidence of marked left atrial enlarge-
ment (>5.0 cm). Chronic anticoagulation with warfarin 
targeted to achieve an international normalized ratio 
(INR) between 2.0 and 3.0 is recommended in patients 
with persistent or frequent and long-lived paroxysmal 
AF and risk factors. If patients have not been adequately 
anticoagulated and the AF is more than 24–48 h in dura-
tion, a transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) can be 
performed to exclude the presence of a left atrial throm-
bus that might dislodge with the attempted restoration 
of sinus rhythm with either nonpharmacologic or phar-
macologic therapy. Anticoagulation must be instituted 
coincident with the TEE and maintained for at least 
Table 16-1
Risk Factors for Stroke in Atrial 
Fibrillation
History of stroke or transient 
ischemic attack
Mitral stenosis
Hypertension
Diabetes mellitus
Age >75 years
Congestive heart failure
Left ventricular dysfunction
Marked left atrial enlarge-
ment (>5.0 cm)
Spontaneous echo contrast
SECTION III
Heart Rhythm Disturbances
158
It is clear that to reduce the risk of drug-induced 
complications in treating AF, a thorough understand-
ing of the drug planned to be used is critical—its dos-
ing, metabolism, and common side effects and impor-
tant drug-drug interactions. This information has been 
summarized in Tables 16-2, 16-3, 16-4, and 16-5 and 
serves as a starting point for a more complete review. In 
using antiarrhythmic agents that slow atrial conduction, 
strong consideration should be given to adding a beta 
blocker or a calcium channel blocker (verapamil or dilti-
azem) to the treatment regimen. This should help avoid 
a rapid ventricular response if AF is converted to “slow” 
AFL with the drug therapy (Fig. 16-5).
Chronic Rate Control  This is an option 
in patients who are asymptomatic or symptomatic due 
to the resulting tachycardia. Rate control is frequently 
difficult to achieve in patients who have paroxysmal 
AF. In patients with more persistent forms of AF, rate 
control with beta blockers, the calcium channel block-
ers diltiazem and verapamil, and/or digoxin frequently 
can be achieved. Using the drugs in combination may 
avoid some of the common side effects seen with high-
dose monotherapy. An effort should be made to docu-
ment the adequacy of rate control to reduce the risk 
of a tachycardia-induced cardiomyopathy. Heart rates 
>80 beats/min at rest or 100 beats/min with very mod-
est physical activity are indications that rate control may 
long-term follow-up regardless of the type and num-
ber of agents tried. It is also important to recognize that 
although the maintenance of sinus rhythm has been 
associated with improved long-term survival, the sur-
vival outcome of patients randomized to the pharmaco-
logic maintenance of sinus rhythm was not superior to 
that of patients treated with rate control and anticoag-
ulation in the AFFIRM and RACE trials. The AFFIRM and 
RACE trials compared outcome with respect to survival 
and thromboembolic events in patients with AF and risk 
factors for stroke using the two treatment strategies. 
It is believed that the poor outcome related to phar-
macologic therapy used to maintain sinus rhythm was 
primarily due to the common inefficacy of such drug 
therapy and an increased incidence of asymptomatic 
AF. Many of the drugs used for rhythm control, including 
sotalol, amiodarone, propafenone, dronedarone, and 
flecainide, enhance slowing of AV nodal conduction. 
The absence of symptoms frequently leads to stopping 
anticoagulant therapy, and asymptomatic AF without 
anticoagulation increases stroke risk. Any consideration 
for stopping anticoagulation therefore must be accom-
panied by a prolonged period of ECG monitoring to 
document asymptomatic AF. It is also recommended 
that patients participate in monitoring by learning to 
take their pulse on a twice-daily basis and reliably iden-
tify its regularity if discontinuing anticoagulant therapy 
is contemplated seriously.
Table 16-2
Commonly Used Antiarrhythmic Agents—Intravenous Dose Range/Primary Indication
Drug
Loading
Maintenance
Primary Indication
Classa
Adenosine
6–18 mg (rapid bolus)
N/A
Terminate reentrant SVT involving AV 
node
—
Amiodarone
15 mg/min for 10 min, 1 mg/
min for 6 h
0.5–1 mg/min
AF, AFL, SVT, VT/VF
III
Digoxin
0.25 mg q2h until 1 mg total
0.125–0.25 mg/d
AF/AFL rate control
—
Diltiazem
0.25 mg/kg over 3–5 min  
(max 20 mg)
5–15 mg/h
SVT, AF/AFL rate control
IV
Esmolol
500 μg/kg over 1 min
50 μg/kg per min
AF/AFL rate control
II
Ibutilide
1 mg over 10 min if over 60 kg
N/A
Terminate AF/AFL
III
Lidocaine
1–3 mg/kg at 20–50 mg/min
1–4 mg/min
VT
IB
Metoprolol
5 mg over 3–5 min × 3 doses
1.25–5 mg q6h
SVT, AF rate control; exercise-induced 
VT; long QT
II
Procainamide
15 mg/kg over 60 min
1–4 mg/min
Convert/prevent AF/VT
IA
Quinidine
6–10 mg/kg at 0.3–0.5 mg/kg 
per min
N/A
Convert/prevent AF/VT
IA
Verapamil
5–10 mg over 3–5 min
2.5–10 mg/h
SVT, AF rate control
IV
aClassification of antiarrhythmic drugs: Class I—agents that primarily block inward sodium current; class IA agents also prolong action potential dura-
tion; class II—antisympathetic agents; class III—agents that primarily prolong action potential duration; class IV—calcium channel-blocking agents.
Abbreviations: AF, atrial fibrillation; AFL, atrial flutter; AV, atrioventricular; SVT, supraventricular tachycardia; VF, ventricular fibrillation; VT, ven-
tricular tachycardia.
 
CHAPTER 16
The Tachyarrhythmias
159
elimination of embolic risk by elimination or isolation of 
the left atrial appendage or by endovascular insertion of 
a left atrial appendage-occluding device may provide 
other treatment options that can eliminate the need for 
chronic anticoagulation.
Catheter 
and 
Surgical 
Ablative 
Therapy to Prevent Recurrent AF  
Although the optimum ablation strategy has not been 
defined, most ablation strategies incorporate techniques 
that isolate the atrial muscle sleeves entering the pulmo-
nary veins; these muscle sleeves have been identified as 
the source of the majority of triggers responsible for the 
initiation of AF. Ablation therapy is currently considered 
an alternative to additional pharmacologic therapy trials 
in patients with recurrent symptomatic AF or AF asso-
ciated with poor rate control who have failed an initial 
attempt at rhythm control with pharmacologic manage-
ment. Ablative therapy appears superior to additional 
be inadequate in persistent AF. Extended periods of ECG 
monitoring and assessment of heart rate with exercise 
should be considered.
In patients with symptoms resulting from inadequate 
rate control with pharmacologic therapy or worsening 
LV function due to the persistent tachycardia, ablative 
therapy to attempt to eliminate atrial fibrillation, or an 
AV junction ablation can be performed. The AV junc-
tion ablation must be coupled with the implantation of 
an activity sensor pacemaker to maintain a physiologic 
range of heart rates. Recent evidence that RV pacing can 
occasionally modestly depress LV function should be 
taken into consideration in identifying which patients 
are appropriate candidates for the “ablate and pace” 
treatment strategy. Occasionally, biventricular pacing 
may be used to minimize the degree of dyssynchroni-
zation that can occur with RV apical pacing alone. Rate 
control treatment options must be coupled with chronic 
anticoagulation therapy in all cases. Trials evaluating the 
Table 16-3
Commonly Used Antiarrhythmic Agents: Chronic Oral Dosing/Primary Indications
Drug
Dosing Oral, mg, 
Maintenance
Half-Life, h
Primary Route(s) of 
Metabolism/Elimination
Most Common 
Indication
Classa
Acebutolol
200–400 q12h
6–7
Renal/hepatic
AF rate control/SVT
Long QT/RVOT VT
II
Amiodarone
100–400 qd
40–55 d
Hepatic
AF/VT prevention
IIIb
Atenolol
25–100 per d
6–9
Renal
AF rate control/SVT
Long QT/RVOT VT
II
Digoxin
0.125–0.5 qd
38–48
Renal
AF rate control
—
Diltiazem
30–60 q6h
3–4.5
Hepatic
AF rate control/SVT
IV
Disopyramide
100–300 q6–8h
4–10
Renal 50%/hepatic
AF/SVT prevention
Ia
Dofetilide
0.125–0.5 q12h
10
Renal
AF prevention
III
Dronedarone
400 q12 hr
13–19
Hepatic
AF prevention
IIIb
Flecainide
50–200 q12h
7–22
Hepatic 75%/renal
AF/SVT/VT prevention
Ic
Metoprolol
25–100 q6h
3–8
Hepatic
AF rate control/SVT
Long QT/RVOT VT
II
Mexiletine
150–300 q8–12h
10–14
Hepatic
VT prevention
Ib
Moricizine
100–400 q8h
3–13
Hepatic 60%/renal
AF prevention
Ic
Nadolol
40–240 per d
10–24
Renal
Same as metoprolol
II
Procainamide
250–500 q3–6h
3–5
Hepatic/renal
AF/SVT/VT prevention
Ia
Propafenone
150–300 q8h
2–8
Hepatic
AF/SVT/VT prevention
Ic
Quinidine
300–600 q6h
6–8
Hepatic 75%/renal
AF/SVT/VT prevention
Ia
Sotalol
80–160 q12h
12
Renal
AF/VT prevention
III
Verapamil
80–120 q6–8h
4.5–12
Hepatic/renal
AF rate control/RVOT VT
  Idiopathic LV VT
IV
aClassification of antiarrhythmic drugs: Class I—agents that primarily block inward sodium current; class II—antisympathetic agents; class III—
agents that primarily prolong action potential duration; class IV—calcium channel-blocking agents.
bAmiodarone and dronedarone both are grouped in class III, but both also have class I, II, and IV properties.
Abbreviations: AF, atrial fibrillation; LV, left ventricular; RVOT, right ventricular outflow tract; SVT, supraventricular tachycardia; VT, ventricular 
tachycardia.
SECTION III
Heart Rhythm Disturbances
160
The surgical Cox-Maze procedure is designed to inter-
rupt all macroreentrant circuits that might potentially 
develop in the atria, thereby precluding the ability of 
the atria to fibrillate. In an attempt to simplify the oper-
ation, the multiple incisions of the traditional Cox-Maze 
procedure have been replaced with linear lines of abla-
tion and pulmonary vein isolation using a variety of 
energy sources.
Severity of AF symptoms and difficulties in rate 
and/or rhythm control with pharmacologic therapy 
pharmacologic treatment aimed at rhythm control in this 
setting. Elimination of AF in 50–80% of patients with a 
catheter-based ablation procedure should be anticipated, 
depending on the chronicity of the AF, with additional 
patients becoming responsive to previously ineffective 
medications.
Catheter ablative therapy also holds promise in 
patients with more persistent forms of AF and even 
those with severe atrial dilation. Its confirmed efficacy 
suggests an important alternative to His bundle abla-
tion and pacemaker insertion in many patients. Serious 
risks related to the left atrial ablation procedure, albeit 
low (overall 2–4%), include pulmonary vein stenosis, 
atrioesophageal fistula, systemic embolic events, perfo-
ration/tamponade, and phrenic nerve injury.
Surgical ablation of AF is typically performed at 
the time of other cardiac valve or coronary artery sur-
gery and, less commonly, as a stand-alone procedure. 
Table 16-4
Common Nonarrhythmic Toxicity of Most 
Frequently Used Antiarrhythmic Agents
Drug
Common Nonarrhythmic Toxicity
Amiodarone
Tremor, peripheral neuropathy, pulmonary 
inflammation, hypo- and hyperthyroid-
ism, photosensitivity
Adenosine
Cough, flushing
Digoxin
Anorexia, nausea, vomiting, visual 
changes
Disopyramide
Anticholinergic effects, decreased myo-
cardial contractility
Dofetilide
Nausea
Dronedarone
Gastrointestinal intolerance, exacerbation 
of heart failure
Flecainide
Dizziness, nausea, headache, decreased 
myocardial contractility
Ibutilide
Nausea
Lidocaine
Dizziness, confusion, delirium, seizures, 
coma
Mexiletine
Ataxia, tremor, gait disturbances, rash, 
nausea
Moricizine
Mood changes, tremor, loss of mental 
clarity, nausea
Procainamide
Lupus erythematosus-like syndrome 
(more common in slow acetylators), 
anorexia, nausea, neutropenia
Propafenone
Taste disturbance, dyspepsia, nausea, 
vomiting
Quinidine
Diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, cinchonism, 
thrombocytopenia
Sotalol
Hypotension, bronchospasm
Table 16-5
Proarrhythmic Manifestations of Most 
Frequently Used Antiarrhythmic Agents
Drug
Common Proarrhythmic Toxicity
Amiodarone
Sinus bradycardia, AV block, increase in 
defibrillation threshold
Rare: long QT and torsades des pointes, 
1:1 ventricular conduction with atrial 
flutter
Adenosine
All arrhythmias potentiated by profound 
pauses, atrial fibrillation
Digoxin
High-grade AV block, fascicular tachy-
cardia, accelerated junctional rhythm, 
atrial tachycardia
Disopyramide
Long QT and torsades des pointes, 
1:1 ventricular response to atrial flut-
ter; increased risk of some ventricular 
tachycardias in patients with structural 
heart disease
Dofetilide
Long QT and torsades des pointes
Dronedarone
Bradyarrhythmias and AV block, long QT 
and torsades des pointes
Flecainide
1:1 Ventricular response to atrial flut-
ter; increased risk of some ventricular 
tachycardias in patients with structural 
heart disease; sinus bradycardia
Ibutilide
Long QT and torsades des pointes
Procainamide
Long QT and torsades des pointes, 1:1 ven-
tricular response to atrial flutter; increased 
risk of some ventricular tachycardias in 
patients with structural heart disease
Propafenone
1:1 Ventricular response to atrial flut-
ter; increased risk of some ventricular 
tachycardias in patients with structural 
heart disease; sinus bradycardia
Quinidine
Long QT and torsades des pointes, 
1:1 ventricular response to atrial flut-
ter; increased risk of some ventricular 
tachycardias in patients with structural 
heart disease
Sotalol
Long QT and torsades des pointes, sinus 
bradycardia
Abbreviation: AV, atrioventricular.
 
CHAPTER 16
The Tachyarrhythmias
161
likely to demonstrate slower rates that overlap with 
those identified with focal atrial tachycardias.
Because lead V1 is frequently monitored in a hos-
pitalized patient, coarse AF may be misdiagnosed as 
AFL. This occurs because in both typical right AFL and 
coarse AF the crista terminalis in the right atrium may 
serve as an effective anatomic barrier. The free wall of 
the right atrium, whose electrical depolarization is best 
reflected on the body surface by lead V1, may demon-
strate a uniform wave front of atrial activation in both 
conditions. The timing of atrial activation is much more 
rapid in AF and always demonstrates variable atrial 
intervals with some intervals between defined P waves 
<200 ms (Fig. 16-6). A review of the other ECG leads 
demonstrates the disorganized atrial depolarization that 
is characteristic of AF. Frequently, an individual patient 
may alternate between AF and AFL or, less commonly, 
may manifest AF in one atrium and AFL in the other, 
making the distinction more difficult.
Treatment	
Atrial Flutter
Because of the anticipated rapid regular ventricular rate 
associated with AFL and the failure to respond to phar-
macologic therapy directed at slowing the ventricular 
rate, patients frequently are treated with DC cardiover-
sion. The organized atrial flutter activity frequently can 
be terminated with low-energy external cardioversion 
of 50–100 J. The risk of thromboembolic events asso-
ciated with typical AFL is high, and anticoagulation 
frequently dictate the optimum AF treatment strategy. 
Similar to the approach with pharmacologic rhythm 
control, a cautious approach to eliminating anticoagu-
lant therapy is recommended after catheter or surgi-
cal ablation. Careful ECG monitoring for asymptomatic 
AF, particularly in patients with multiple risk factors 
for stroke, should be considered until guidelines are 
firmly established. If the left atrial appendage has been 
removed surgically, the threshold for stopping antico-
agulation may be lowered. Antiarrhythmic therapy typi-
cally can be discontinued after catheter or surgical abla-
tion of AF. However, in selected patients, satisfactory AF 
control may require maintenance of previously ineffec-
tive drug therapy after the ablation intervention.
Atrial Flutter and Macroreentrant 
Atrial Tachycardias
Macroreentrant arrhythmias involving the atrial myo-
cardium are referred to collectively as AFL. The terms 
AFL and macroreentrant AT frequently are used inter-
changeably, with both denoting a nonfocal source of 
an atrial arrhythmia. The typical or most common 
AFL circuit rotates in a clockwise or counterclock-
wise direction in the right atrium around the tricuspid 
valve annulus. The posterior boundary of the right AFL 
circuit is defined by the crista terminalis, the eusta-
chian ridge, and the inferior and superior vena cavae. 
Counterclockwise right AFL represents ∼80% of all AFL 
with superiorly directed activation of the interatrial sep-
tum, which produces the saw-toothed appearance of 
the P waves in ECG leads II, III, and aVF. Clockwise 
rotation of the same right atrial circuit produces pre-
dominantly positive P waves in leads II, III, and aVF 
(Fig. 16-4). Macroreentrant left AFL also may develop, 
albeit much less commonly. This type of arrhythmia 
may be the sequela of surgical or catheter-based abla-
tion procedures that create large anatomic barriers or 
promote slowing of conduction in the left atrium, 
especially around the mitral valve annulus or partially 
disconnected pulmonary veins. Atypical AFL or macro-
reentrant AT can also develop around incisions created 
during surgery for valvular or congenital heart disease or 
in and/or around large areas of atrial fibrosis.
Classic or typical right AFL has an atrial rate of 260–
300 beats per minute with a ventricular response that 
tends to be 2:1, or typically 130–150 beats per minute. 
In the setting of severe atrial conduction disease and or 
antiarrhythmic drug therapy, the atrial rate can slow to 
<200 beats per minute. In this setting, a 1:1 rapid ven-
tricular response may occur, particularly with exertion, 
and produce adverse hemodynamic effects (Fig. 16-5). 
Atypical AFL or macroreentrant AT related to prior 
surgical incisions and atrial fibrosis demonstrates less 
predictability in terms of the atrial rate and is more 
VI
A
VI
B
VI
C
Figure 16-5 
Atrial fibrillation. A. Transitions to “slow” atrial flutter during 
antiarrhythmic drug therapy. B. A rapid ventricular response 
with 1:1 atrioventricular conduction occurred with exercise, 
leading to C. symptoms of dizziness.
SECTION III
Heart Rhythm Disturbances
162
Multifocal Atrial Tachycardia
Multifocal AT (MAT) is the signature tachycardia of 
patients with significant pulmonary disease. The atrial 
rhythm is characterized by at least three distinct P-wave 
morphologies and often at least three different PR 
intervals, and the associated atrial and ventricular rates 
are typically between 100 and 150 beats per minute. 
The presence of an isoelectric baseline distinguishes 
this arrhythmia from AF (Fig. 16-4). The absence of 
any intervening sinus rhythm distinguishes MAT from 
normal sinus rhythm with frequent multifocal APCs, 
although this distinction may be moot as these processes 
define an electrophysiologic continuum.
Treatment	
Multifocal Atrial Tachycardia
Therapy for MAT should be directed at improving 
the underlying medical condition, which is typically, 
although not invariably, chronic obstructive or restric-
tive lung disease. Treatment with the calcium channel 
blocker verapamil also may provide some benefit. The 
judicious use of flecainide or propafenone may also 
decrease atrial arrhythmias. Patients should be screened 
for the presence of significant ventricular dysfunction or 
CAD before these agents are started. Low-dose amioda-
rone therapy may also control the arrhythmia and mini-
mize the risk of pulmonary toxicity noted with the drug.
Focal Atrial Tachycardias  The two gen-
eral mechanisms for focal ATs can be distinguished by 
observations made at AT initiation and in response to 
adenosine. Automatic ATs start with a “warm-up” period 
over the first 3–10 complexes and, similarly, slow in rate 
before termination. They may respond to adenosine 
not only with evidence of AV block but also with  
gradual slowing of the atrial rhythm and termination. 
must be managed similarly to what was described for 
patients with AF.
Asymptomatic patients with AFL may develop heart 
failure symptoms with tachycardia-induced severe LV 
dysfunction. In all patients, an effort should be made to 
control the ventricular rate pharmacologically or restore 
sinus rhythm. Rate control with calcium antagonists (dil-
tiazem or verapamil), beta blockers, and/or digoxin may 
be difficult. Even higher-grade AV slowing, such as a 4:1 
AV response, may be only transient and is easily over-
come with activity or emotional stress. Owing to the 
typically faster ventricular rate, AFL tends to be poorly 
tolerated in comparison to AF.
In selected patients with high anesthestic risk, an 
attempt at pharmacologic cardioversion with procain-
amide, amiodarone, or ibutilide is appropriate. Antiar-
rhythmic drug therapy may also enhance the efficacy of 
DC cardioversion and the maintenance of sinus rhythm 
after cardioversion. Recurrence rates of AFL with pharma-
cologic attempts at rhythm control exceed 80% by 1 year.
Patients who manifest recurrent AFL appear to be 
effectively treated with catheter ablative therapy. For 
typical right AFL, an isthmus ablation line from the tri-
cuspid annulus to the opening of the inferior vena cava 
can permanently eliminate flutter, with an anticipated 
success rate of >90% in most experienced centers. In 
patients with macroreentrant atrial tachycardia or AFL 
involving prior surgical incisions or catheter ablation 
or in areas of atrial fibrosis, detailed mapping of the 
arrhythmia circuit is required to design the best abla-
tion strategy to interrupt the circuit. In selected patients 
with AF and typical right AFL, pharmacologic therapy 
may help prevent the AF but not the AFL. In this type of 
patient, hybrid therapy with antiarrhythmic agents cou-
pled with a right atrial isthmus ablation may produce AF 
and AFL control.
II
VI
A
II
VI
B
Figure 16-6 
Atrial flutter/atrial fibrillation. Coarse 
atrial fibrillation (A) contrasted with orga-
nized atrial flutter (B).
 
CHAPTER 16
The Tachyarrhythmias
163
appears to serve as the triggering mechanism for AF in 
most patients.
It is important to distinguish focal ATs from reen-
trant tachycardias that incorporate the AV node in the 
circuit (Fig. 16-7). The primary distinction is related to 
the persistence of the AT in the presence of AV block 
that occurs spontaneously or is created by carotid sinus 
massage or the administration of adenosine (Fig. 16-4). 
Atrial activity drives the ventricles in AT and all changes 
in the PP interval accompanied by correlative changes 
in the RR intervals; in addition, the V–A relationship 
changes when the atrial rate changes. The P wave in 
AT is characteristically distinct from the sinus P-wave 
morphology, and unless there is significant AV nodal 
conduction delay, the PR interval is shorter than the 
measured RP interval when there is a 1:1 relationship 
between atria and ventricles (Fig. 16-7).
The P wave for ATs depends on the anatomic site of 
origin. In addition to attempting to create an AV block 
to establish the diagnosis of AT, analysis of the P-wave 
morphology on the 12-lead ECG may help exclude AV 
nodal reentry, AV bypass tract–mediated reentrant 
The initiation of automatic ATs frequently can be pro-
voked by isoproterenol infusion. The first P wave of the 
tachycardia has the same morphology as the remaining 
waves. Some of the ATs may be triggered or provoked 
by burst atrial pacing but are not reliably initiated by 
programmed atrial stimulation.
In contrast, evidence supporting a focal reentrant 
AT includes the initiation of the tachycardia with pro-
grammed atrial stimulation or spontaneous premature 
beats. The P wave initiating the tachycardia will charac-
teristically have a different morphology than the P wave 
during the sustained AT. In response to adenosine, reen-
trant ATs will demonstrate AV block but typically do not 
slow and/or terminate. Most focal ATs in the absence 
of structural heart disease originate from specific  
anatomic locations. These anatomic locations appear to 
be associated with anatomic ridges, such as the crista 
terminalis, the valve annuli, and the limbus of the fossa 
ovalis. ATs also appear to originate from the muscular 
sleeves associated with the cardiac thoracic veins, i.e., 
the SVC, the coronary sinus, and the pulmonary veins. 
As was indicated, repetitive firing of these foci also 
II
II
II
II
VI
VI
VI
VI
Sinus
node
AV node
Slow
pathway
Fast
pathway
*
*
Atria
Ventricles
A
B
C
D
Figure 16-7 
Pattern of atrial and ventricular activation and character-
istic relationship of P-wave and QRS complex as recorded 
in leads II and V1 during regular supraventricular tachycardias. 
A. Sinus tachycardia. B. Atrial tachycardia from top of the 
atria. C. Atrioventricular nodal reentry. D. Accessory pathway–
mediated orthodromic supraventricular tachycardia.
SECTION III
Heart Rhythm Disturbances
164
arrhythmia. In the presence of hypertension or other 
forms of structural heart disease that limit ventricular 
filling, hypotension or syncope may occur.
Atrioventricular nodal reentrant tachycardia devel-
ops because of the presence of two electrophysiologi-
cally distinct pathways for conduction in the complex 
syncytium of muscle fibers that make up the AV node. 
The fast pathway in the more superior part of the node 
has a longer refractory period, whereas the pathway lower 
in the AV node region conducts more slowly but has a 
shorter refractory period. As a result of the inhomoge-
neities of conduction and refractoriness, a reentrant cir-
cuit can develop in response to premature stimulation. 
Although conduction occurs over both pathways during 
sinus rhythm, only the conduction over the fast pathway is 
manifest, and as a result, the PR interval is normal. APCs 
occurring at a critical coupling interval are blocked in the 
fast pathway because of the longer refractory period and 
are conducted slowly over the slow pathway. When suf-
ficient conduction slowing occurs, the blocked fast path-
way can recover excitability and atrial activation can occur 
over the fast pathway to complete the circuit. Repetitive 
activation down the slow and up the fast pathway results 
in typical AV nodal reentrant tachycardia (Fig. 16-7).
ECG Findings in AVNRT
The APC initiating AVNRT is characteristically followed 
by a long PR interval consistent with conduction via the 
slow pathway. AVNRT is manifest typically as a narrow 
QRS complex tachycardia at rates that range from 120 to 
250 beats/min. The QRS-P wave pattern associated with 
typical AVNRT is quite characteristic, with simultaneous 
activation of the atria and ventricles from the reentrant 
AV nodal circuit. The P wave frequently is buried inside 
the QRS complex and either will not be visible or will 
distort the initial or terminal portion of the QRS com-
plex (Fig. 16-7). Because atrial activation originates in the 
region of the AV node, a negative deflection will be gen-
erated by retrograde atrial depolarization when recording 
ECG leads II, III, or aVF.
Occasionally, AVNRT occurs with activation in 
the reverse direction, conducting down the fast path-
way and returning up the slow pathway. This form of 
AVNRT occurs much less commonly and produces a 
prolonged RP interval during the tachycardia with a 
negative P wave in leads II, III, and aVF. This atypical 
form of AVNRT is more easily precipitated by ventric-
ular stimulation.
Treatment	
Atrioventricular Nodal Reentrant Tachycardia
Acute Treatment  Treatment is directed at alter-
ing conduction within the AV node. Vagal stimulation, 
such as that which occurs with the Valsalva maneuver 
tachycardias, and physiologic or inappropriate sinus 
tachycardia (Fig. 16-7).
The ECG distinction between focal automatic or 
microreentrant and macroreentrant AT or atypical AFL is 
not always possible. Although sustained focal ATs tend 
to be slower, the atrial rates frequently overlap. Focal 
ATs, which are more common in the absence of struc-
tural heart disease, tend to demonstrate an isolectric 
baseline between P waves, whereas macroreentrant ATs 
represent atrial activation that is continuous and an iso-
electric baseline between P waves frequently is absent. 
In patients with a history of prior atrial surgery, one 
must suspect a macroreentrant mechanism. These dis-
tinctions are less important with respect to acute man-
agement but have importance related to ablation strat-
egies and anticipated outcome.
Treatment	
Atrial Tachycardia
Pharmacologic treatment of AT generally is approached 
in a similar fashion to that of AF and AFL. AV nodal 
blocking agents are administered in the setting of rapid 
ventricular rates. Acute IV administration of procain-
amide or amiodarone may terminate the tachycardia. 
Tachycardias that do not respond to pharmacologic 
therapy may be terminated with electrical cardiover-
sion. Typically, anticoagulation before treatment is not 
needed unless there is evidence of severe atrial dila-
tation, >5 cm left atrial diameter with a high risk of AF, 
and/or a history of coincident paroxysmal AF. Most focal 
ATs are readily amenable to catheter ablative therapy. In 
patients who fail to respond to medical therapy or who 
are reluctant to take chronic drug therapy, this option 
should be considered, with an anticipated 90% cure 
rate. A parahisian location for the AT and/or a focus that 
is located in the left atrium may modestly increase the 
risk related to the procedure, and for this reason, every 
effort should be made to determine the likely origin of 
the AT based on an analysis of the P-wave morphology 
on 12-lead ECG before the procedure.
AV Nodal Tachycardias
AV nodal reentrant tachycardia
Atrioventricular nodal reentrant tachycardia is the most 
common paroxysmal regular SVT. It is more com-
monly observed in women than in men and is typically 
manifest in the second to fourth decades of life. In gen-
eral, because AVNRT tends to occur in the absence of 
structural heart disease, it is usually well tolerated. Neck 
pulsations are usually felt because of the simultane-
ous atrial and ventricular contraction, and a “frog sign” 
can be identified on physical examination during the 
 
CHAPTER 16
The Tachyarrhythmias
165
Treatment	
Atrioventricular Junctional Tachycardias
Treatment of automatic/triggered junctional tachy-
cardias is directed at decreasing adrenergic stimula-
tion and reversing digoxin toxicity, if present. Digoxin 
therapy can be withheld if toxicity is suspected, and the 
administration of digoxin-specific antibody fragments 
can rapidly reverse digoxin toxicity if the tachycardia is 
producing significant symptoms and rapid termination 
is indicated. Junctional tachycardia due to abnormal 
automaticity can be treated pharmacologically with 
beta blockers. A trial of class IA or IC drugs may also be 
attempted. For incessant automatic junctional tachy-
cardia, focal catheter ablation can be performed but is 
associated with an increased risk of AV block.
Tachycardias Associated with 
Accessory AV Pathways
Tachycardias that involve accessory pathways (APs) 
between atria and ventricles commonly manifest a normal 
QRS complex with a short or long RP interval. They 
must be considered in the differential diagnosis of other 
narrow-complex tachycardias. Importantly, most tachy-
cardias associated with APs involve a large macroreentrant 
circuit that includes the ventricles (Fig. 16-7). Thus, iden-
tifying these arrhythmias as “supraventricular” is actually a 
misnomer, and they deserve separate consideration.
Accessory pathways are typically capable of con-
ducting rapidly in both an antegrade and a retrograde 
direction. In the absence of an AP, the sinus impulse 
normally activates the ventricles via the AV node and 
His-Purkinje system, resulting in a PR interval of 120–
200 ms. When an antegradely conducting AP is present, 
the sinus impulse bypasses the AV node and can activate 
the ventricles rapidly, resulting in ventricular preexcita-
tion. The resulting PR interval is shorter than antici-
pated. In addition, because the initial ventricular activa-
tion is due to muscle-to-muscle conduction, as opposed 
to rapid spread of activation via the His-Purkinje sys-
tem, the initial portion of the QRS complex is slurred, 
creating the characteristic “delta wave.” The remaining 
portion of the QRS complex in sinus rhythm is cre-
ated by a fusion of the ventricular activation wave front 
originating from the Purkinje network and the contin-
ued spread of activation from the site of insertion of the 
AP (Fig. 16-8). Evidence of ventricular preexcitation 
includes evidence in sinus rhythm of a short PR interval 
and a delta wave.
The most common AP connects the left atrium to 
the left ventricle, followed by posterior septal, right free 
wall, and anterior septal APs. APs typically insert from 
the atrium into the adjacent ventricular myocardium. 
However, occasionally pathways, particularly those 
originating from the right atrium, can have a ventricular 
or carotid sinus massage, can slow conduction in the AV 
node sufficiently to terminate AVNRT. In patients in whom 
physical maneuvers do not terminate the tachyarrhythmia, 
the administration of adenosine, 6–12 mg IV, frequently 
does so. Intravenous beta blockade or calcium channel 
therapy should be considered as second-line treatment. 
If hemodynamic compromise is present, R-wave synchro-
nous DC cardioversion using 100–200 J can terminate the 
tachyarrhythmia.
Prevention  Prevention may be achieved with 
drugs that slow conduction in the antegrade slow path-
way, such as digitalis, beta blockers, and calcium chan-
nel blockers. In patients who have a history of exercise-
precipitated AVNRT, the use of beta blockers frequently 
eliminates symptoms. In patients who do not respond 
to drug therapy directed at the antegrade slow pathway, 
treatment with class IA or IC agents directed at altering 
conduction of the fast pathway may be considered.
Catheter ablation, directed at elimination or modifi-
cation of slow pathway conduction, is very effective in 
permanently eliminating AVNRT. Patients with recur-
rent AVNRT that produces significant symptoms or heart 
rates >200 beats/min and patients reluctant to take 
chronic drug therapy should be considered for ablative 
therapy. Catheter ablation can cure AV nodal reentry in 
>95% of patients with a single procedure. The risk of AV 
block requiring a permanent pacemaker is ∼1% with the 
ablation procedure.
AV junctional tachycardias
These can also occur in the setting of enhanced normal 
automaticity, abnormal automaticity, or triggered activ-
ity. These tachycardias may or may not be associated with 
retrograde conduction to the atria, and the P waves may 
appear dissociated or produce intermittent conduction and 
early activation of the junction. These arrhythmias may 
occur as a manifestation of increased adrenergic tone or 
drug effect in patients with sinus node dysfunction or after 
surgical or catheter ablation. The arrhythmia may also be 
a manifestation of digoxin toxicity. The most common 
manifestation of digoxin intoxication is the sudden regu-
larization of the response to AF. A junctional tachycardia 
due to digoxin toxicity typically does not manifest retro-
grade conduction. Sinus activity may appear dissociated or 
result in intermittent capture beats with a long PR inter-
val. If the rate is >50 beats per minute and <100 beats per 
minute, the term accelerated junctional rhythm applies. Occa-
sionally, automatic rhythms are mimicked by AVNRT 
that fails to conduct to the atrium. The triggering events 
associated with the onset of the tachycardia may provide 
a clue to the appropriate diagnosis. Initiation of the tachy-
cardia without an atrial premature beat with a gradual 
acceleration in rate suggests an automatic focus.
SECTION III
Heart Rhythm Disturbances
166
to as an echo beat. If the pattern repeats itself, a tachy-
cardia develops. Uncommonly, the reentrant circuit 
can be reversed so that the impulse reaches the ven-
tricle via the AP and conducts retrogradely through to 
the atria via the His-Purkinje system and the AV node; 
this is referred to as antidromic AV reentry and/or preexci-
tation macroreentry, with the entire activation of the ven-
tricle originating from the site of insertion of the AP. 
Although it is uncommon, it is important to recognize 
antidromic SVT. The ECG pattern during the tachycar-
dia mimics VT originating from the site of ventricular 
insertion of the AP. The presence of manifest preexci-
tation in sinus rhythm provides a valuable clue to the 
diagnosis.
The second most common and potentially more 
serious arrhythmia associated with WPW syndrome 
is rapidly conducting AF. Nearly 50% of patients with 
evidence of APs are predisposed to episodes of AF. In 
patients who have rapid antegrade conduction from the 
atria to the ventricles over the AP, the AP can conduct 
rapidly in response to AF, resulting in a faster ventricu-
lar rate than would occur normally via the AV node. 
The rapid ventricular rates can result in hemodynamic 
compromise and even precipitate VF. The QRS pattern 
during AF in patients with manifest preexcitation can 
appear quite bizarre and change on a beat-to-beat basis 
due to the variability in the degree of fusion from acti-
vation over the AV node (Fig. 16-8).
Concealed APs
In ∼50% of patients with APs, there is no antegrade 
conduction over the AP; however, retrograde con-
duction is preserved. As a result, the AP is not mani-
fest in sinus rhythm and is manifest only during the 
sustained tachycardia. The presence of a concealed AP 
is suggested by the timing and pattern of atrial activa-
tion during the tachycardia: the P wave typically follows 
ventricular activation with a short RP wave interval 
(Fig. 16-7). Because many APs connect the left ven-
tricle to the left atrium, the pattern of atrial activation 
during the tachycardia frequently produces negative 
P waves in leads I and aVL. The tachycardia circuit and 
therefore its ECG manifestation during orthodromic 
tachycardia are identical both in patients with overt pre-
excitation in sinus rhythm and in those with concealed 
APs. Patients with concealed APs, although prone to 
episodes of AF, are not at risk for developing a rapid 
ventricular response to the AF.
Occasionally, APs conduct extremely slowly in a ret-
rograde fashion, resulting in longer retrograde conduc-
tion and the development of a long RP interval dur-
ing the tachycardia (long RP tachycardia). Because of the 
presence of this dramatically slowed conduction, addi-
tional conduction slowing created by premature atrial 
complexes is not required for tachycardia to ensue. 
insertion at a site distant from the AV groove in the 
fascicles. These pathways conduct more slowly and are 
referred to as atriofascicular accessory pathways. Atriofascic-
ular APs are unique in their tendency to demonstrate 
decremental antegrade conduction.
Other accessory pathway connections from the AV 
node to the fascicles may exist. These pathways are 
referred to as Mahaim fibers and typically manifest a nor-
mal PR interval with a delta wave.
Patients with manifest preexcitation and WPW syn-
drome are typically subject to both macroreentrant 
tachycardias and a rapid response to AF (Fig. 16-8). The 
most common macroreentrant tachycardia associated 
with WPW syndrome is referred to as orthodromic AV 
reentry. Ventricular activation occurs via the AV node 
and the His-Purkinje system. Conduction then returns 
or reenters the atria via retrograde conduction over the 
AP. The reentrant circuit develops because of the inho-
mogeneity in conduction and refractoriness in the AP 
and the normal AV node.
Characteristically, the AP has more rapid conduc-
tion but a longer refractory period than that of the AV 
node. Typical APs do not show evidence of antegrade 
decremental conduction. An APC can block in the AP 
and conduct sufficiently slowly or with decrement via 
the AV node to allow for retrograde recovery of activa-
tion of the AP and, in turn, of the atria (Fig. 16-7). This 
retrograde activation of the atria via the AP is referred 
V1
V2
V3
V2
V3
A
B
Figure 16-8 
A. Sinus rhythm tracing of leads V1–V3 showing evidence 
of Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome with short PR interval 
and delta wave. B. During atrial fibrillation, rapid conduction 
to the ventricles is observed producing a wide QRS com-
plex tachycardia with marked irregularity of the ventricular 
response and morphology of the QRS complex.
 
CHAPTER 16
The Tachyarrhythmias
167
considered for catheter ablation. Catheter ablation ther-
apy has been demonstrated to be successful in >95% of 
patients with documented WPW syndrome and appears 
effective regardless of age. The risk of catheter ablative 
therapy is low and is dictated primarily by the location 
of the AP. Ablation of parahisian APs is associated with 
a risk of heart block, and ablation in the left atrium is 
associated with a small but definite risk of thrombo-
embolic phenomenon. These risks must be weighed 
against the potential serious complications associated 
with hemodynamic compromise, the risk of VF, and the 
severity of the patient’s symptoms with AP-mediated 
tachycardias.
Patients who demonstrate evidence of ventricular 
preexcitation in the absence of any prior arrhythmia 
history merit special consideration. The first arrhythmia 
manifestation can be a rapid SVT or, albeit of low risk 
(<1%), a life-threatening rapid response to AF. Patients 
who demonstrate intermittent preexcitation during ECG 
monitoring or an abrupt loss of AP conduction during 
exercise testing are at low risk of a life-threatening rapid 
response to AF. All other patients should be advised of 
their risks and therapeutic options in advance of a docu-
mented arrhythmia event.
Ventricular Tachyarrhythmias
Ventricular Premature Complexes
The origin of premature beats in the ventricle at sites 
remote from the Purkinje network produces slow ven-
tricular activation and a wide QRS complex that is 
typically >140 ms in duration. Ventricular premature 
complexes are common and increase with age and the 
presence of structural heart disease. VPCs can occur 
with a certain degree of periodicity that has become 
incorporated into the lexicon of electrocardiography. 
Ventricular premature complexes may occur in pat-
terns of bigeminy, in which every sinus beat is followed 
by a VPC, or trigeminy, in which two sinus beats are 
followed by a VPC. VPCs may have different mor-
phologies and are thus referred to as multiformed. Two 
successive VPCs are termed pairs or couplets. Three or 
more consecutive VPCs are termed VT when the rate is 
>100 beats per minute. If the repetitive VPCs terminate 
spontaneously and are more than three beats in dura-
tion, the arrhythmia is referred to as nonsustained VT.
APCs with aberrant ventricular conduction may also 
create a wide and early QRS complex. The premature 
P wave can occasionally be difficult to discern when 
it falls on the preceding T wave, and other clues must 
be used to make the diagnosis. The QRS pattern for a 
VPC does not appear to follow a typical right or left 
bundle branch block pattern as the QRS morphology 
These patients are more prone to frequent episodes of 
tachycardia and can present with “incessant” tachycar-
dias and tachycardia-induced LV cardiomyopathy. The 
correct diagnosis of a long RP tachycardia may be sug-
gested by the pattern of initiation and the P-wave mor-
phology. Frequently, however, an electrophysiologic 
evaluation is required to establish the diagnosis.
Treatment	
Accessory Pathway–Mediated Tachycardias
Acute treatment of AP-mediated macroreentrant 
orthodromic tachycardias is similar to that for AV nodal 
reentry and is directed at altering conduction in the 
AV node. Vagal stimulation with the Valsalva maneu-
ver and carotid sinus pressure may create sufficient 
AV nodal slowing to terminate the AVRT. Intravenous 
administration of adenosine, 6–12 mg, is first-line phar-
macologic therapy; IV, the calcium channel blockers 
verapamil and diltiazem or beta blockers may also be 
effective. In patients who manifest preexcitation and 
AF, therapy should be aimed at preventing a rapid 
ventricular response. In life-threatening situations, DC 
cardioversion should be used to terminate the AF. In 
nonlife-threatening situations, procainamide at a dose 
of 15 mg/kg administered IV over 20–30 min will slow 
the ventricular response and may organize and termi-
nate AF. Ibutilide can also be used to facilitate termina-
tion of AF. During AF there may be rapid conduction 
over the AV node as well as the AP. Caution should be 
used in attempting to slow AV nodal conduction with 
the use of digoxin or verapamil; when administered IV, 
these drugs may actually result in an acute increase in 
rate over the AP, placing the patient at risk for develop-
ment of VF. Digoxin appears to shorten the refractory 
period of the AP directly and thus increases the ven-
tricular rate. Verapamil appears to shorten the refractory 
period indirectly by causing vasodilation and a reflex 
increase in sympathetic tone.
Chronic oral administration of beta blockers and/or 
verapamil or diltiazem may be used to prevent recur-
rent supraventricular reentrant tachycardias associated 
with APs. In patients with evidence of AF and a rapid 
ventricular response and in those with recurrences of 
SVT on AV nodal blocking drugs, strong consideration 
should be given to the administration of a class IA or 
IC antiarrhythmic drug such as quinidine, flecainide, or 
propafenone because these drugs slow conduction and 
increase refractoriness in the AP.
Patients with a history of recurrent symptomatic SVT 
episodes, incessant SVT, and heart rates >200 beats/
min with SVT should be given strong consideration for 
undergoing catheter ablation. Patients who have dem-
onstrated rapid antegrade conduction over their AP 
or the potential for rapid conduction should also be 
SECTION III
Heart Rhythm Disturbances
168
drug therapies that slow myocardial conduction and/
or enhance dispersion of refractoriness can actually 
increase the risk of life-threatening arrhythmias (drug-
induced QT prolongation and TDP) despite being effec-
tive at eliminating VPCs.
Accelerated Idioventricular 
Rhythm (AIVR)
AIVR refers to a ventricular rhythm that is character-
ized by three or more complexes at a rate >40 beats 
per minute and <120 beats per minute. The arrhyth-
mia mechanism causing AIVR is thought to be due to 
abnormal automaticity. By definition, there is an over-
lap between AIVR and “slow” VT; both rhythms can 
manifest rates between 90 and 120 beats per minute. 
Because AIVR tends to be a benign rhythm with differ-
ent therapeutic implications, it is worthwhile to attempt 
to distinguish it from “slow” VT. AIVR has a charac-
teristic gradual onset and offset and more variability in 
cycle length. It is typically a brief, self-limiting arrhyth-
mia. AIVR can be seen in the absence of any structural 
heart disease, but it is frequently present in the setting 
of acute myocardial infarction (MI), cocaine intoxica-
tion, acute myocarditis, digoxin intoxication, and post-
operative cardiac surgery. Sustained forms of AIVR can 
exist, particularly in the setting of acute MI and post-
operatively. In the setting of sustained AIVR, hemo-
dynamic compromise can occur because of the loss 
of AV synchrony. Patients with RV infarction associ-
ated with proximal right coronary artery occlusion are 
most susceptible to associated bradyarrhythmias and the 
hemodynamic consequences of AIVR. In these patients, 
acceleration of the atrial rate either by the cautious 
administration of atropine or by atrial pacing may be an 
important treatment consideration.
Ventricular Tachycardia
VT originates below the bundle of His at a rate 
>100 beats per minute; most VT patients have rates 
>120 beats per minute. Sustained VT at rates <120 
beats per minute and even <100 beats per minute can 
be observed, particularly in association with the admin-
istration of antiarrhythmic agents that can slow the rate. 
Because of the overlap in rates with AIVR, the arrhyth-
mia ECG characteristics and the clinical circumstance 
sometimes can be used to distinguish the two forms of 
tachycardia. Slow sustained VT is less likely to show a 
marked warm-up in rate and the marked cycle-length 
oscillations seen with AIVR, and it is more likely to 
occur in the setting of chronic infarction or cardiomy-
opathy and less likely with acute infarction or myo-
carditis. Obviously, significant overlap may exist. 
Typically, slow VT will be initiated with programmed 
is associated with aberrant atrial conduction and can 
be quite bizarre. On occasion, VPCs can arise from 
the Purkinje network of the ventricles, in which case 
the QRS pattern mimics aberration. The 12-lead ECG 
recording of the VPC may be required to identify sub-
tle morphologic clues regarding the QRS complex to 
confirm its ventricular origin. Most commonly, VPCs 
are associated with a “fully compensatory pause” (i.e., 
the duration between the last QRS before the PVC and 
the next QRS complex is equal to twice the sinus rate 
[Fig. 16-3]). The VPC typically does not conduct to 
the atrium. If the VPC does conduct to the atrium, it 
may not be sufficiently early to reset the sinus node. As 
a result, sinus activity will occur and the antegrade wave 
front from the sinus node may encounter some delay in 
the AV node or His-Purkinje system from the blocked 
VPC wave front, or it may collide with the retrograde 
atrial wave front. Sinus activity will continue undis-
turbed, resulting in a delay to the next QRS complex 
(Fig. 16-3). Occasionally, the VPC can occur early 
enough and conduct retrograde to the atrium to reset 
the sinus node; the pause that results will be less than 
compensatory. VPCs that fail to influence the oncoming 
sinus impulse are termed interpolated VPCs. A ventric-
ular focus that fires repetitively at a fixed interval may 
produce variably coupled VPCs, depending on the sinus 
rate. This type of focus is referred to as a parasystolic focus 
because its firing does not appear to be modulated by 
sinus activity and the conducted QRS complex. The 
ventricular ectopy will occur at a characteristic fixed 
integer or multiple of these intervals. The variability in 
coupling relative to the underlying QRS complex and a 
fixed interval between complexes of ventricular origin 
provide the diagnostic information necessary to identify 
a parasystolic focus.
Treatment	
Ventricular Premature Complexes
The threshold for treatment of VPCs is high, and the 
treatment is directed primarily at eliminating severe 
symptoms associated with palpitations. VPCs of suf-
ficient frequency can cause a reversible cardiomyopa-
thy. Depressed LV function in the setting of ventricular 
bigeminy and/or frequent nonsustained VT should 
raise the possibility of a cardiomyopathy that is revers-
ible with control of the ventricular arrhythmia. In the 
absence of structural heart disease, VPCs do not appear 
to have prognostic significance. In patients with struc-
tural heart disease, frequent VPCs and runs of nonsus-
tained VT have prognostic significance and may por-
tend an increased risk of SCD. However, no study has 
documented that elimination of VPCs with antiarrhyth-
mic drug therapy reduces the risk of arrhythmic death 
in patients with severe structural heart disease. In fact, 
 
CHAPTER 16
The Tachyarrhythmias
169
ventricular arrhythmias, ventricular flutter, and VF 
always produce hemodynamic collapse if allowed to 
continue. The hemodynamic stability of a unimorphic 
VT depends on the presence and severity of the under-
lying structural heart disease, the location of the site of 
origin of the arrhythmia, and the heart rate.
It is important to distinguish monomorphic VT from 
SVT with aberrant ventricular conduction due to right 
or left bundle branch block.
Importantly, the sinus or baseline 12-lead ECG 
tracing can provide important clues that help estab-
lish the correct diagnosis of a wide complex tachy-
cardia. The presence of an aberrant QRS pattern that 
matches exactly that of the wide complex rhythm 
strongly supports the diagnosis of SVT. A right or 
left bundle branch block QRS pattern that does not 
match the QRS and/or that is wider in duration than 
the QRS during the wide complex tachycardia sup-
ports the diagnosis of VT. Most patients with VT have 
structural heart disease and show evidence of a prior 
Q wave MI during sinus rhythm. Important excep-
tions to this rule are discussed. Finally, the presence 
of a preexcited QRS pattern on the 12-lead ECG in 
sinus rhythm suggests that the wide complex rhythm 
represents an atrial arrhythmia, such as AFL or a focal 
AT, with rapid conduction over an AP or antidromic 
macroreentrant tachycardia (Fig. 16-8). If the arrhyth-
mia is irregular with changing QRS complexes, the 
diagnosis of AF with ventricular preexcitation should 
be considered.
With the exception of some idiopathic outflow tract 
tachycardias, most VTs do not respond to vagal stimu-
lation provoked by carotid sinus massage, the Valsalva 
maneuver, or adenosine administration. The IV admin-
istration of verapamil and/or adenosine is not recom-
mended as a diagnostic test. Verapamil has been associ-
ated with hemodynamic collapse when administered to 
patients with structural heart disease and VT.
Patients with VT frequently demonstrate AV disso-
ciation. Findings on physical examination of intermit-
tent cannon a waves and variability of the first heart 
sound are consistent with AV dissociation. The presence of 
AV dissociation is characteristically marked by the presence 
of sinus capture or fusion beats. The presence of 1:1 
ventriculoatrial conduction does not preclude a diag-
nosis of VT.
Additional characteristics of the 12-lead ECG during 
the tachycardia that suggest VT include (1) the presence 
of a QRS duration >140 ms in the absence of drug 
therapy, (2) a superior and rightward QRS frontal plane 
axis, (3) a bizarre QRS complex that does not mimic 
the characteristic QRS pattern associated with left or 
right bundle branch block, and (4) slurring of the initial 
portion of the QRS (Fig. 16-10). Table 16-6 provides 
a useful summary of ECG criteria that have evolved 
based on the described characteristics of VT.
stimulation and is found to represent a large macroreen-
trant circuit in chronically diseased myocardium capable 
of supporting markedly slow conduction.
The QRS complex during VT may be uniform 
(monomorphic) or may vary from beat to beat (poly-
morphic). Polymorphic VT in patients who demon-
strate a long QT interval during their baseline rhythm 
typically is referred to as torsades des pointes. The poly-
morphic VT associated with QT prolongation dramati-
cally oscillates around the baseline on most of the moni-
tored ECG leads, mimicking the “turning of the points” 
stitching pattern (Fig. 16-9).
Monomorphic VT suggests a stable tachycardia focus 
in the absence of structural heart disease or a fixed ana-
tomic abnormality that can create the substrate for a 
stable reentrant VT circuit when structural disease is 
present. Monomorphic VT tends to be a reproducible 
and recurrent phenomenon and may be initiated with 
pacing and programmed ventricular stimulation. In con-
trast, polymorphic VT suggests a more dynamic and/or 
unstable process and, by its very nature, is less reproduc-
ible. Polymorphic VT may be produced by acute isch-
emia, myocarditis, or dynamic changes in the QT inter-
val and enhanced dispersion of ventricular refractoriness. 
Polymorphic VTs are not reliably initiated with pacing 
or programmed stimulation.
A time duration of 30 s frequently is used to distin-
guish sustained from nonsustained VT. Hemodynami-
cally unstable VT that requires termination before 30 s 
or VT that is terminated by therapy from an implant-
able defibrillator is also typically classified as sustained. 
Ventricular flutter appears as a sine wave on the ECG 
and has a rate of >250 beats per minute. A rapid rate 
coupled with the sine wave nature of the arrhythmia 
makes it impossible to identify a discrete QRS mor-
phology. When antiarrhythmic drugs are being admin-
istered, a sine wave appearance of the QRS complex 
can be observed, even at rates as low as 200 beats per 
minute. VF is characterized by completely disorganized 
ventricular activation on the surface ECG. Polymorphic 
II
II
Figure 16-9 
Sinus rhythm with long QT interval and the polymorphic 
ventricular arrhythmia torsades des pointes. Dramatic T 
wave alternans are present in sinus rhythm.
SECTION III
Heart Rhythm Disturbances
170
successful resuscitation. Intravenous lidocaine and/or 
amiodarone should be administered but should not 
delay repeated attempts at defibrillation.
For any monomorphic wide complex rhythm that 
results in hemodynamic compromise, a prompt R-wave 
synchronous shock is required. Conscious sedation 
should be provided if the hemodynamic status permits. 
For patients with a well-tolerated wide complex tachy-
cardia, the appropriate diagnosis should be established 
on the basis of strict ECG criteria (Table 16-6). Pharma-
cologic treatment to terminate monomorphic VT is not 
Treatment	
Ventricular Tachycardia/Fibrillation
Sustained polymorphic VT, ventricular flutter, and 
VF all lead to immediate hemodynamic collapse. 
Emergency asynchronous defibrillation is therefore 
required, with at least 200-J monophasic or 100-J 
biphasic shock. The shock should be delivered asyn-
chronously to avoid delays related to sensing of the 
QRS complex. If the arrhythmia persists, repeated 
shocks with the maximum energy output of the 
defibrillator are essential to optimize the chance of  
I
aVR
V1
V4
II
aVL
V2
V5
III
VI
aVF
V3
V6
Figure 16-10 
Ventricular tachycardia. ECG showing AV dissociation (arrows 
mark P waves), wide QRS >200 ms, superior frontal plane axis, 
slurring of the initial portion of the QRS, and large S wave in 
V6—all clues to the diagnosis of ventricular tachycardia.
Table 16-6
ECG Clues Supporting the Diagnosis of Ventricular Tachycardia
AV dissociation (atrial capture, fusion beats)
QRS duration >140 ms for RBBB type V1 morphology; V1 >160 ms for LBBB type V1 morphology
Frontal plane axis −90° to 180°
Delayed activation during initial phase of the QRS complex
  LBBB pattern—R wave in V1, V2 >40 ms
  RBBB pattern—onset of R wave to nadir of S >100 ms
Bizarre QRS pattern that does not mimic typical RBBB or LBBB QRS complex
  Concordance of QRS complex in all precordial leads
  RS or dominant S in V6 for RBBB VT
  Q wave in V6 with LBBB QRS pattern
  Monophasic R or biphasic qR or R/S in V1 with RBBB pattern
Abbreviations: AV, atrioventricular; RBBB/LBBB, right/left bundle branch block.
 
CHAPTER 16
The Tachyarrhythmias
171
which might not normally be used in patients with 
structural heart disease because of the risk of proar-
rhythmia, may be considered in patients with an ICD 
and recurrent VT.
Catheter ablative therapy for VT in patients with-
out structural heart disease results in cure rates >90%. 
In patients with structural heart disease, catheter abla-
tion that includes a strategy for eliminating unmap-
pable/rapid VT and one that incorporates endocar-
dial as well as epicardial mapping and ablation should 
be employed. In most patients, catheter ablation can 
reduce or eliminate the requirement for toxic drug ther-
apy and should be considered in any patient with recur-
rent VT. The utilization of ablative therapy to reduce the 
incidence of ICD shocks for VT in patients who receive 
the ICD as part of primary prevention for VT is being 
actively investigated.
Management of VT Storm  Repeated VT 
episodes requiring external cardioversion/defibrilla-
tion or repeated appropriate ICD shock therapy are 
referred to as VT storm. Although a definition of more 
than two episodes in 24 h is used, most patients with 
VT storm will experience many more episodes. In the 
extreme form of VT storm, the tachycardia becomes 
incessant and the baseline rhythm cannot be restored 
for any extended period. In patients with recurrent 
polymorphic VT in the absence of the long QT interval, 
one should have a high suspicion of active ischemic 
disease or fulminant myocarditis. Intravenous lidocaine 
or amiodarone administration should be coupled with 
prompt assessment of the status of the coronary anat-
omy. Endomyocardial biopsy, if indicated by clinical 
typically successful (<30%). Intravenous procainamide, 
lidocaine, or amiodarone can be utilized. If the arrhyth-
mia persists, synchronous R-wave cardioversion after 
the administration of conscious sedation is appropri-
ate. Selected patients with focal outflow tract tachycar-
dias who demonstrate triggered or automatic VT may 
respond to IV beta blocker administration. Idiopathic LV 
septal VT appears to respond uniquely to IV verapamil 
administration.
VT in patients with structural heart disease is now 
almost always treated with the implantation of an ICD 
to manage anticipated VT recurrence. The ICD can pro-
vide rapid pacing and shock therapy to treat most VTs 
effectively (Fig. 16-11).
Prevention of VT remains important, and >50% 
of patients with a history of VT and an ICD may need 
to be treated with adjunctive antiarrhythmic drug 
therapy to prevent VT recurrences or to manage atrial 
arrhythmias. Because of the presence of an ICD, there 
is more flexibility with respect to the selection of anti-
arrhythmic drug therapy. The use of sotalol or amio-
darone represents first-line therapy for patients with a 
history of structural heart disease and life-threatening 
monomorphic or polymorphic VT not due to long QT 
syndrome. Importantly, sotalol has been associated 
with a decrease in the defibrillation threshold, which 
reflects the amount of energy necessary to terminate 
VF. Amiodarone may be better tolerated in patients 
with a more marginal hemodynamic status and systolic 
blood pressure. The risk of end-organ toxicity from 
amiodarone must be weighed against the ease of use and 
general efficacy. Antiarrhythmic drug therapy with agents 
such as quinidine, procainamide, and propafenone,  
Figure 16-11 
Ventricular tachycardia (VT) (*) during atrial fibrillation 
stopped by pacing (#) from an implantable cardioverter defi-
brillator (ICD) from recording stored by ICD. The atrial elec-
trogram shows characteristic fibrillatory waves through the 
tracing. The ventricular electrogram shows an irregularly 
irregular response consistent with atrial fibrillation at the 
beginning of the tracing. The ventricular electrogram sud-
denly changes in morphology (*) and becomes regular, con-
sistent with the diagnosis of VT. Pacing transiently acceler-
ates the rate and interrupts the rapid VT. The patient was 
unaware of the life-threatening event.
AF
Chart speed 25.0 mm/sec
Atria
Ventricle
AF
VT
Pacing
SECTION III
Heart Rhythm Disturbances
172
ventricle just beneath the pulmonic valve, the aortic 
valve region, and then the anterior/superior margin 
of the mitral valve annulus. These arrhythmias appear 
more commonly in women. Importantly, these ven-
tricular arrhythmias are rarely associated with SCD 
unless manifest by very short coupled premature com-
plexes that trigger VF. Patients manifest symptoms of 
palpitations with exercise, stress, and caffeine inges-
tion. In women, the arrhythmia is more commonly 
associated with hormonal triggers and can frequently 
be timed to the premenstrual period, gestation, and 
menopause. Uncommonly, the VPCs and VTs can 
be of sufficient frequency and duration to cause a 
tachycardia-induced cardiomyopathy.
The pathogenesis of outflow tract VT remains 
unknown, and there is no definite anatomic abnor-
mality identified with these VTs. Vagal maneuvers, 
adenosine, and beta blockers tend to terminate the 
VTs, whereas catecholamine infusion, exercise, and 
stress tend to potentiate the outflow tract VTs. Based 
on these observations, the mechanism of the arrhyth-
mia is most likely calcium-dependent triggered activity. 
Preliminary data suggest that at least in some patients, 
a somatic mutation of the inhibitory G protein (Gαi2) 
may serve as the genetic basis for the VT. In con-
trast to VT in patients with CAD, outflow tract VTs 
are uncommonly initiated with programmed stimula-
tion but are able to be initiated by rapid-burst atrial or 
ventricular pacing, particularly when coupled with the 
infusion of isoproterenol.
Outflow tract VT typically produces large monopha-
sic R waves in the inferior frontal plane leads II, III, and 
aVF, and typically occurs as nonsustained bursts of VT 
and/or frequent premature beats. Cycle length oscilla-
tions during the tachycardia are common. Since most 
VT originates in the RV outflow tract, the VT typically 
has a left bundle branch block (LBBB) pattern in lead 
V1 (negative QRS vector) (Fig. 16-12). Outflow tract 
VTs, originating in the left ventricle, particularly those 
associated with an origin from the mitral valve annulus, 
have a right bundle branch block (RBBB) pattern in 
lead V1 (positive QRS vector).
Treatment	
Idiopathic Outflow Tract Ventricular 
Tachycardia
Acute medical therapy for idiopathic outflow tract VT is 
rarely required because the VT is hemodynamically tol-
erated and is typically nonsustained. Intravenous beta 
blockers frequently terminate the tachycardia. Chronic 
therapy with beta or calcium channel blockers frequently 
prevents recurrent episodes of the tachycardia. The 
arrhythmia also appears to respond to treatment with 
class IA or IC agents or with sotalol. Catheter ablative 
circumstances, may be used to confirm the diagnosis 
of myocarditis, although the diagnostic yield is low. In 
patients who demonstrate QT prolongation and recur-
rent pause-dependent polymorphic VT (TDP), removal 
of an offending QT-prolonging drug, correction of 
potassium or magnesium deficiencies, and emergency 
pacing to prevent pauses should be considered. Intra-
venous beta blockade therapy should be considered for 
polymorphic VT storm. A targeted treatment strategy 
should be employed if the diagnosis of the polymorphic 
VT syndrome can be established. For example, quinidine 
or isoproterenol can be used in the treatment of Brugada 
syndrome. Intraaortic balloon counterpulsation or acute 
coronary angioplasty may be needed to stop recur-
rent polymorphic VT precipitated by acute ischemia. In 
selected patients with a repeating VPC trigger for their 
polymorphic VT, the VPC can be targeted for ablation to 
prevent recurrent VT.
In patients with recurrent monomorphic VT, acute 
IV administration of lidocaine, procainamide, or amio-
darone can prevent recurrences. The use of such therapy 
is empirical, and a clinical response is not certain. Pro-
cainamide and amiodarone are more likely to slow the 
tachycardia and make it hemodynamically tolerated. 
Unfortunately, antiarrhythmic drugs, especially those 
that slow conduction (e.g., amiodarone, procainamide), 
can also facilitate recurrent VT or even result in incessant 
VT. VT catheter ablation can eliminate frequent recurrent 
or incessant VT and frequent ICD shocks. Such therapy 
should be deployed earlier in the course of arrhythmia 
events to prevent adverse consequences of recurrent VT 
episodes and adverse effects from antiarrhythmic drugs.
Unique VT Syndromes
Although most ventricular arrhythmias occur in the set-
ting of CAD with prior MI, a significant number of 
patients develop VT in other settings. A brief discussion 
of each unique VT syndrome is warranted. Informa-
tion that illustrates a unique pathogenesis and enhances 
the ability to make the correct diagnosis and institute 
appropriate therapy will be highlighted.
Idiopathic outflow tract VT
VT in the absence of structural heart disease is referred 
to as idiopathic VT. There are two major varieties of 
these VTs. Outflow tachycardias originate in the RV 
and LV outflow tract regions. Approximately 80% 
of outflow tract VTs originate in the RV and ∼20% 
in the LV outflow tract regions. Outflow tract VTs 
appear to originate from anatomic sites that form 
an arc that begins just above the tricuspid valve and 
extends along the roof of the outflow tract region 
to include the free wall and septal aspect of the right 
 
CHAPTER 16
The Tachyarrhythmias
173
Idiopathic LV septal/fascicular VT
The second most common idiopathic VT is linked ana-
tomically to the Purkinje system in the left ventricle. 
The arrhythmia mechanism appears to be macroreentry 
involving calcium-dependent slow response fibers that 
are part of the Purkinje network, although automatic 
tachycardias have also been observed. A 12-lead ECG 
morphology of the VT shows a narrow RBBB pattern 
and a superior leftward axis or an inferior rightward axis, 
depending on whether the VT originates from the poste-
rior or anterior fascicles (Fig. 16-12). Idiopathic LV sep-
tal VT is unique in its suppression with verapamil. Beta 
blockers also have been used with some success as pri-
mary or effective adjunctive therapy. Catheter ablation 
is very effective therapy for VT resistant to drug therapy 
or in patients reluctant to take daily therapy, with antici-
pated successful elimination of VT in >90% of patients.
VT associated with LV dilated cardiomyopathy
Monomorphic and polymorphic VTs may occur in 
patients with nonischemic dilated cardiomyopathy 
(Chap. 21). Although the myopathic process may be 
diffuse, there appears to be a predilection for the devel-
opment of fibrosis around the mitral and aortic valvular 
regions. Most uniform sustained VT can be mapped to 
these regions of fibrosis. Drug therapy is usually ineffec-
tive in preventing VT, and empirical trials of sotalol or 
amiodarone are usually initiated only for recurrent VT 
episodes after ICD implantation. VT associated with 
nonischemic dilated cardiomyopathy appears to be less 
amenable to catheter ablative therapy from the endo-
cardium; frequently, the VT originates from epicardial 
areas of fibrosis and catheter access to the epicardium 
can be gained via a percutaneous pericardial puncture to 
improve the outcome of ablation techniques. In patients 
with a history of depressed myocardial dysfunction due 
to a nonischemic cardiomyopathy with an LV ejection 
fraction <30%, data now support the implantation of 
a prophylactic ICD device to reduce the risk of SCD 
from the first VT/VF episode effectively.
Bundle branch reentrant VT
Monomorphic VT in patients with idiopathic nonischemic 
cardiomyopathy or valvular cardiomyopathy is frequently 
due to a large macroreentrant circuit involving the vari-
ous elements of the His-Purkinje network. The arrhyth-
mia usually occurs in the presence of underlying disease of 
the His-Purkinje system. In sinus rhythm, an incomplete 
left bundle block is typically present and the time it takes 
to traverse the His-Purkinje network is delayed; this slow 
conduction serves as the substrate for reentry. Character-
istically, the VT circuit rotates in an antegrade direction 
down the right bundle and retrograde up the left poste-
rior or anterior fascicles and left bundle branch. As a result, 
therapy has been utilized successfully to eliminate the 
tachycardia with success rates >90%. Because of the 
absence of structural heart disease and the focal nature 
of these arrhythmias, the 12-lead ECG pattern during VT 
can help localize the site of origin of the arrhythmia and 
help facilitate catheter ablation. Efficacy of therapy is 
assessed with treadmill testing and/or ECG monitoring, 
and electrophysiologic study is performed only when the 
diagnosis is in question or to perform catheter ablation.
RVOT-VT
I
Idiopathic IV
Septal VT
I
II
II
VI
VI
Figure 16-12 
Common idiopathic ventricular tachycardia (VT) ECG pat-
terns. Right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT) VT with typical 
left bundle QRS pattern in V1 and inferiorly directed frontal 
plane axis, and left ventricular septal VT from the inferior 
septum with a narrow QRS RBBB pattern in V1 and superior 
and leftward front plane QRS axis.
SECTION III
Heart Rhythm Disturbances
174
VT. Experience with ablative therapy is limited because 
of the infrequency with which the VT is tolerated hemo-
dynamically. Ablation procedures that target the substrate 
for VT/VF and ablate areas of low voltage consistent with 
fibrosis, which frequently are located in apical aneurysms, 
appear to have promise in this setting. WPW syndrome 
has been observed in patients with hypertrophic cardio-
myopathy associated with PRKAG2 mutations.
VT associated with other infiltrative 
cardiomyopathies and neuromuscular disorders
An increased arrhythmia risk has been identified when car-
diac involvement occurs in a variety of infiltrative diseases 
and neuromuscular disorders (Table 16-7). Many patients 
manifest AV conduction disturbances and may require per-
manent pacemaker insertion. The decision to implant an 
ICD device should follow current established guidelines for 
patients with nonischemic cardiomyopathy, which include 
an LV ejection fraction <35% or a history of unexplained 
syncope with significant LV dysfunction. A recent report 
identified AF, PR interval >240 ms, QRS 120 ms, or 
heart block and type 1 myotonic dystrophy as predicting 
a risk of sudden death. Additional study will be required 
to determine if patients with lesser degrees of LV dysfunc-
tion or other more diffuse myopathic disease processes also 
have identifiable risk and warrant primary ICD implanta-
tion. A potential proarrhythmic risk of antiarrhythmic drug 
therapy should be acknowledged, and drug therapy should 
be reserved for symptomatic arrhythmias and limited to 
amiodarone or sotalol if an ICD is not present.
Arrhythmogenic RV cardiomyopathy/dysplasia 
(ARVCM/D)
(See also Chap. 21) ARVCM/D due to a genetically 
determined dysplastic process or after a suspected viral 
myocarditis is also associated with VT/VF. The sporadic 
nonfamilial/nondysplastic form of RV cardiomyopathy 
bundle branch reentrant VT typically has a QRS morphol-
ogy with a left bundle branch block type of pattern and a 
leftward superior axis (Fig. 16-13). The circuit for bun-
dle branch (LBB) reentrant VT can occasionally rotate in 
the opposite direction, antegrade through the left bundle 
and retrograde through the right bundle, in which case an 
RBBB pattern during VT will be manifest.
It is important to recognize bundle branch reentrant 
VT because it is readily amenable to ablative therapy 
that targets a component of the His-Purkinje system, 
typically the right bundle, to block the VT circuit. Less 
commonly, bundle branch reentry may occur in the 
absence of structural heart disease or in the setting of 
CAD. The use of adjunctive ICD therapy is dictated 
by the ability to eliminate the VT successfully and the 
severity of the LV dysfunction.
VT associated with hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy
(See also Chap. 21) VT and VF have also been associ-
ated with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. In patients with 
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and a history of sustained 
VT/VF, unexplained syncope, a strong family his-
tory of SCD, LV septal thickness >30 mm, or nonsus-
tained spontaneous VT, the risk of SCD is high and ICD 
implantation is usually indicated. Amiodarone, sotalol, 
and beta blockers have been used to control recurrent 
Table 16-7
Infiltrative/Inflammatory and 
Neuromuscular Disorders Associated With 
an Increased Ventricular Arrhythmia Risk
Sarcoidosisa
Emery-Dreyfuss muscular 
dystrophya
Chagas’ diseasea
Limb-girdle muscular 
dystrophya
Amyloidosisa
Duchenne muscular 
dystrophy
Fabry disease
Becker muscular dystrophy
Hemochromatosis
Kearn-Sayre syndromea
Myotonic muscular 
dystrophya
Friedreich’s ataxia
aHigh frequency of ventricular arrhythmias noted.
His
LAF
LPF
RB
LB
His
LAF
LPF
RB
LB
*
RV site of 
stimulation
LV site of 
stimulation
LBBB VT
RBBB VT
I
I
II
III
aVR
aVL
aVF
V1
V2
V3
V4
V5
V6
II
III
aVR
aVL
aVF
V1
V2
V3
V4
V5
V6
*
Figure 16-13 
Bundle branch reentrant ventricular tachycardia (VT) 
showing typical QRS morphologies when VT is initiated with 
stimulation from the right ventricle (left bundle branch block 
[LBBB] VT pattern) or left ventricle (right bundle branch block 
[RBBB] VT pattern) and schema for circuit involving the His-
Purkinje network.
 
CHAPTER 16
The Tachyarrhythmias
175
not identify the presence of fatty replacement or fibrosis 
unless directed to the basal RV free wall. The familial 
forms of this syndrome have been linked to a number of 
desmosomal protein mutations. A distinct genetic form 
of this syndrome, Naxos disease, consists of arrhythmo-
genic RV dysplasia coupled with palmar-plantar kerato-
sis and woolly hair and is associated with a high risk of 
SCD in adolescents and young adults.
Treatment	
Arrhythmogenic Right Ventricular 
Cardiomyopathy/Dysplasia
The threshold for ICD implantation in patients with an 
established diagnosis of ARVCM/D is low. An ICD typically 
is implanted in patients deemed to have a persistent VT 
risk, those who have had spontaneous or inducible rapid 
VTs, and those who show concomitant LV cardiomyopa-
thy. Treatment options for recurrent VT in patients with 
ARVCM/D include the use of the antiarrhythmic agent 
sotalol. Beta blockers serve as useful adjunctive therapy 
when coupled with other antiarrhythmic agents. Cath-
eter ablative therapy directed at mappable sustained 
ventricular arrhythmias is also highly successful in con-
trolling recurrent VT. In selected patients with multiple 
VT morphologies and unstable VT, linear ablation lesions 
directed at endocardial scars and, if required, targeting 
late potentials in epicardial scars, defined by catheter-
based bipolar voltage mapping, provide significant ame-
lioration of the recurrent VT episodes.
appears to be more common; however, this may vary 
with ethnicity. In patients predisposed to VT, there 
appears to be a predominance of perivalvular fibrosis 
involving mostly the free wall of the right ventricle in 
proximity to the tricuspid and pulmonic valves. The 
surface ECG leads that reflect RV activation, includ-
ing V1−V3, may show terminal notching of the QRS 
complex and inverted T waves in sinus rhythm. When 
the terminal notching is distinct and appears separated 
from the QRS complex, it is referred to as an epsilon 
wave (Fig. 16-14). Epsilon waves are consistent with 
markedly delayed ventricular activation in the region of 
the RV free wall near the base of the tricuspid and pul-
monic valves in areas of extensive fibrosis.
In patients with ARVCM/D, echocardiography 
demonstrates RV enlargement with RV wall motion 
abnormalities and RV apical aneurysm formation. MRI 
may show fatty replacement of the ventricle, thinning of 
the RV free wall with increased fibrosis, and associated 
wall motion abnormalities. Because of the presence of 
extensive amounts of fat normally covering the epicar-
dium in the region of the RV, caution must be used to 
avoid overinterpreting the MRI in trying to determine 
the appropriate diagnosis. Patients tend to have multiple 
VT morphologies. The VT will typically have an LBBB 
type QRS pattern in V1 and tend to have poor R-wave 
progression in V1 through V6, consistent with an RV 
free-wall origin. Areas of low electrogram voltage that 
are identified during RV catheter endocardial sinus 
rhythm voltage mapping may be helpful in confirm-
ing the diagnosis. Importantly, endocardial biopsy may 
A
V3
V2
V1
C
V3
V2
V1
B
V3
V2
V1
Figure 16-14 
Leads V1 to V3 in sinus rhythm from a normal subject (A), from 
a patient with arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomy-
opathy showing epsilon waves (arrow) and T-wave inversion 
(B), and from a patient with Brugada syndrome with ST-
segment elevation in V1 and V2 (C).
SECTION III
Heart Rhythm Disturbances
176
the plateau phase of the action potential lengthen action 
potential duration and, hence, the QT interval. Of the 
eight genetic mutations identified to date, five affect the 
α or β subunits of the three different potassium chan-
nels involved with repolarization (Table 16-8). Since 
many patients with QT prolongation do not have one of 
the defined mutations, it is anticipated that other genetic 
abnormalities affecting repolarization channel function 
will be identified.
The triggers for the ventricular arrhythmias are 
thought to be due to early afterdepolarizations potenti-
ated by intracellular calcium accumulation from a pro-
longed action potential plateau. Heterogeneity of myo-
cardial repolarization indexed by a longer QT interval 
predisposes to polymorphic ventricular arrhythmias in 
response to the triggers (Fig. 16-9).
In most patients with LQTS, the QT interval cor-
rected for heart rate using Bazett’s formula is >460 ms 
in men and >480 ms in women with LQTS. Marked 
lengthening of the QT interval to >500 ms is clearly 
VT after operative tetralogy of Fallot repair
VT may also occur after surgical repair of tetralogy of 
Fallot. Patients typically develop VT many years after the 
surgery. VT tends to occur in patients with evidence of 
RV systolic dysfunction. The VT mechanism and loca-
tion are typically a macroreentrant circuit around the 
right ventriculotomy scar to the valve annuli. Catheter 
ablation creating linear lesions that extend from either 
the pulmonic or the tricuspid annulus to the ventricu-
lotomy scar is typically effective in preventing arrhyth-
mia recurrences. An ICD is usually implanted in patients 
who manifest rapid VT, have persistent inducible VT 
after ablation, or have concomitant LV dysfunction.
Fascicular tachycardia caused 
by digoxin toxicity
Digoxin toxicity can produce increased ventricu-
lar ectopy and, when coupled with bradyarrhythmias 
caused by digoxin toxicity, may predispose to sustained 
polymorphic ventricular arrhythmias and VF. The sig-
nature VT associated with digoxin toxicity is bidi-
rectional VT (Fig. 16-15). This unique VT is due to 
triggered activity associated with calcium overload 
resulting from the inhibition of Na+, K+-ATPase by 
digoxin. Bidirectional VT originates from the left ante-
rior and posterior fascicles, creating a relatively narrow 
QRS right bundle branch (RBB) configuration with 
a beat-to-beat alternating right and left frontal plane 
QRS axis. This VT seldom is observed in the absence 
of digoxin toxicity. Treatment for bidirectional VT or 
other hemodynamically significant arrhythmias due to 
digoxin excess includes correction of electrolyte disor-
ders and IV infusion of digoxin-specific Fab fragments. 
The antibody fragments will, over the course of 1 h, 
bind digoxin and eliminate toxic effects. In the setting of 
normal renal function, the bound complex is secreted.
Genetically Determined 
Abnormalities That Predispose 
to Polymorphic Ventricular 
Arrhythmias
Ion channel defects that affect cardiac depolarization 
and repolarization may predispose to life-threatening 
polymorphic VT and SCD. These defects frequently 
produce unique ECG characteristics during sinus 
rhythm that facilitate the diagnosis.
Long QT syndrome
The congenital form of LQTS consists of defects in car-
diac ion channels that are responsible for cardiac repolar-
ization. Defects that enhance sodium or calcium inward 
currents or inhibit outward potassium currents during 
Figure 16-15 
Digoxin toxic bidirectional fascicular tachycardia.
 
CHAPTER 16
The Tachyarrhythmias
177
LQT2 is the second most common genotypic abnor-
mality. The T wave tends to be notched and bifid. In 
LQT2 patients, the most common precipitant is emo-
tional stress, followed by sleep or auditory stimulation. 
Despite the occurrence during sleep, patients typically 
respond to beta blocker therapy.
LQT3 is due to a mutation in the gene that encodes 
the cardiac sodium channel on chromosome 3. Prolon-
gation of the action potential duration occurs because 
of failure to inactivate this channel. LQT3 patients have 
either late-onset peaked biphasic T waves or asymmet-
ric peaked T waves. The arrhythmia events tend to be 
more life threatening, and thus the prognosis for LQT3 
is the poorest of all the LQTs. Male patients appear to 
have the worst prognosis among patients with LQT3. 
Most events in LQT3 patients occur during sleep, sug-
gesting that they are at higher risk during periods of 
slow heart rates. Beta blockers are not recommended, 
and exercise is not restricted in LQT3.
Treatment	
Long QT Syndrome
The institution of ICD therapy should be strongly con-
sidered in any patient with LQTS who has demonstrated 
any life-threatening arrhythmia. Patients with syncope 
with a confirmed diagnosis based on unequivocal ECG 
criteria or positive genetic testing should also be given 
the same strong consideration. Primary prevention with 
associated with a greater arrhythmia risk in patients with 
LQTS. Many affected individuals may have QT inter-
vals that intermittently measure within a normal range 
or fail to shorten appropriately with exercise. Some 
individuals manifest the syndrome only when exposed 
to a drug, such as sotalol, that alters channel function.
The genotype associated with LQTS appears to 
influence prognosis, and identification of the genotype 
appears to help optimize clinical management. The first 
three genotypic designations of the mutations identified, 
LQT1, LQT2, and LQT3, appear to account for >99% 
of patients with clinically relevant LQTSs. Surface ECG 
characteristics may be helpful in distinguishing the three 
most common genotypes, with genetic testing being 
definitive.
LQT1 represents the most common genotypic 
abnormality. Patients with LQT1 fail to shorten or 
actually prolong their QT interval with exercise. The 
T wave in patients with LQT1 tends to be broad and 
constitutes the majority of the prolonged QT inter-
val. The most common trigger for potentiating cardiac 
arrhythmias in patients with LQT1 is exercise, followed 
by emotional stress.
More than 80% of male patients have their first car-
diac event by age 20, so competitive exercise should 
be restricted and swimming avoided for these patients. 
Patients tend to respond to beta blocker therapy. Patients 
with two LQT1 alleles have Jervell and Lange-Nielsen 
syndrome, with more dramatic QT prolongation and 
deafness and a worse arrhythmia prognosis.
Table 16-8
Inherited Arrhythmia Disorders: “Channelopathies” With High Risk of Ventricular Arrhythmias
Disorder
Gene
Protein/Channel Affected
LQT1
KCNQ1
Iks channel α subunit
LQT2
KCNH2 (HERG)
IKr channel α subunit
LQT3
SCN5A
Ina channel α subunit
LQT4
ANK2
Ankyrin-B
LQT5
KCNE1
IKs channel β subunit
LQT6
KCNE2
IKr channel β subunit
LQT7
KCNJ2
IK1 channel α subunit
LQT8
CACNA1C
ICa channel α subunit
Jervell LN1
KCNQ1
IKs channel β subunit
Jervell LN2
KCNE1
IKr channel β subunit
Brugada syndrome
SCN5A
INa channel
Catecholaminergic VT
Ry R2
Ryanodine receptor, calsequestrin 
receptor
SQTS1
KCNH2 (HERG)
IKr channel α subunit
SQTS2
KCNQ1(KvLQT1)
IKs channel α subunit
SQTS3
KCNJ2
IK1 channel
Abbreviations: LQT, long QT (interval); SQT, short QT (interval).
SECTION III
Heart Rhythm Disturbances
178
Double counting of QRS and T waves may lead to 
inappropriate ICD shocks. Drug therapy with quinidine 
has been used to lengthen the QT interval and reduce 
the amplitude of the T wave. This therapy is being 
evaluated to determine long-term efficacy in preventing 
arrhythmias in this syndrome.
Brugada syndrome
The major clinical features of Brugada syndrome 
include manifest, transient, or concealed ST segment 
elevation in V1 to V3 that typically can be provoked 
with the sodium channel-blocking drugs ajmaline, fle-
cainide, and procainamide and a risk of polymorphic 
ventricular arrhythmias. It appears that a diminished 
inward sodium current in the region of the RV out-
flow tract epicardium is responsible for Brugada syn-
drome (Table 16-8). A loss of the action potential dome 
in the RV epicardium due to unopposed ITo potassium 
outward current results in dramatic shortening of the 
action potential. The large potential difference between 
the normal endocardium and rapidly depolarized RV 
outflow epicardium gives rise to ST-segment elevation 
in V1−V3 in sinus rhythm and predisposes to local ven-
tricular reentry (Fig. 16-14). The majority of genetic 
abnormalities responsible for the syndrome have not 
been described; however, in ∼20% of patients, muta-
tions of SCN5A genes have been identified. Although 
identified in both genders and all races with an auto-
somal dominant inheritance pattern, the arrhythmia 
syndrome is most common in young male patients 
(∼75%) and is thought to be responsible for the sud-
den and unexpected nocturnal death syndrome (SUDS) 
described in Southeast Asian men. The ventricular 
arrhythmia characteristically occurs with rest or during 
sleep. Fever and other sodium channel-blocking drugs 
have also precipitated ventricular arrhythmias.
The presence of spontaneous coved-type ST eleva-
tion in the right precordial leads and a history of syn-
cope or aborted sudden cardiac death are predictors of 
an adverse outcome. Because of the overlap in SCN5A 
mutations, the association of Brugada syndrome with 
phenotypic LQT3 and conduction disturbances has 
been noted.
Treatment	
Brugada Syndrome
A drug challenge with procainamide may be important 
to establish the diagnosis and the probable cause of 
unexplained syncope when the surface ECG is equivocal 
(saddleback ST elevation pattern). Ajmaline and intra-
venous flecainide, which are not available in the United 
States, may have higher sensitivities for identifying the 
syndrome. Successful acute management of recurrent 
prophylactic ICD implantation should be considered in 
male patients with LQT3 and in all patients with marked 
QT prolongation (>500 ms), particularly when coupled 
with an immediate family history of SCD. Future epide-
miologic investigation may provide firmer guidelines 
to sort patients further on the basis of risks such as age, 
gender, arrhythmia history, and genetic characteristics. 
In all patients with documented or suspected LQTS, 
drugs that prolong the QT interval must be avoided. For 
an updated list of drugs, see www.qtdrugs.org.
Acquired LQTS
Patients with a genetic predisposition related to what 
appear to be sporadic mutations and/or single nucleo-
tide polymorphisms can develop marked QT prolon-
gation in response to drugs that alter repolarization 
currents. The QT prolongation and associated poly-
morphic ventricular tachycardia (TDP) are seen more 
frequently in women and may be a manifestation of 
subclinical LQTS. Drug-induced long QT and TDP 
frequently are potentiated by the development of hypo-
kalemia and bradycardia. The offending drugs typically 
block the potassium IKr channel (Table 16-5). Since 
most drug effects are dose dependent, important drug-
drug interactions that alter metabolism and/or altera-
tions in elimination kinetics because of hepatic or renal 
dysfunction frequently contribute to the arrhythmias.
Treatment	
Acquired Long QT Syndrome
Acute therapy for acquired LQTS is directed at eliminat-
ing the offending drug therapy, reversing metabolic 
abnormalities by the infusion of magnesium and/or 
potassium, and preventing pause-dependent arrhyth-
mias by temporary pacing or the cautious infusion of 
isoproterenol. Class IB antiarrhythmic agents (e.g., lido-
caine) that do not cause QT prolongation may also be 
used, though they are frequently ineffective. Supportive 
therapy to allay anxiety and prevent pain with required 
DC shock therapy for sustained arrhythmias and efforts 
to facilitate drug elimination are important.
Short QT syndrome
A gain in function of repolarization currents can result 
in a shortening of atrial and ventricular refractori-
ness and marked QT shortening on the surface ECG 
(Table 16-8). The T wave tends to be tall and peaked. 
A QT interval <320 ms is required to establish the 
diagnosis of this uncommon syndrome. Mutations in 
the HERG, KvLQT1, and KCNJ2 genes have been 
identified. Patients with the syndrome are predisposed 
to both AF and VF. ICD implantation is recommended. 
 
CHAPTER 16
The Tachyarrhythmias
179
shocks by proper ICD programming is essential to pre-
vent VT storm from endogenous catecholamine release.
Special Consideration: Approach 
to Tachyarrhythmias in Athletes
The first manifestation of a tachyarrhythmia, whether 
benign or malignant, may occur during athletic activity. 
Fortunately, successful cardiopulmonary resuscitation 
of life-threatening ventricular arrhythmias has increased 
with the use of automatic external defibrillators at major 
sporting events and schools. Rarely, VF may be precipi-
tated by blunt precordial blows without structural injury 
to the heart or chest wall (commotio cordis).
The approach to the athlete should begin with an 
assessment of the severity and significance of symptoms. 
Syncope with exertion should be assumed to be caused 
by a potentially lethal arrhythmia. A thorough cardiac 
evaluation and restricted participation in competitive 
sports are in order until a less life-threatening diagno-
sis can be established. ECG recording at the time of the 
symptomatic events usually can establish the diagnosis, 
although it may be difficult to obtain.
In patients with syncope and no ECG-documented 
arrhythmia, a systematic attempt to define a cardiac 
structural or primarily electrical abnormality with a rou-
tine ECG and a transthoracic echocardiogram is in order. 
Common structural abnormalities associated with fatal or 
life-threatening ventricular arrhythmias include hyper-
trophic cardiomyopathy, arrhythmogenic cardiomyopa-
thy, and acute myocarditis. Coronary anomalies should 
be suspected if the arrhythmia symptoms are preceded 
in onset by chest pain. The 12-lead ECG should be 
screened for the presence of preexcitation, QT prolon-
gation, a Brugada-type ECG pattern or epsilon waves, 
and T-wave inversions consistent with a nonischemic 
RV or LV cardiomyopathy or myocarditis. Additional 
ECG monitoring may be required. A stress test may be 
appropriate to provoke arrhythmias, especially if there 
are recurrent symptoms. It is critical to achieve the level 
of exercise that precipitated the arrhythmia, which for 
some athletes may be a challenge for the exercise lab.
Management of an athlete with cardiac arrhyth-
mias may be a challenge, with a tendency to discour-
age participation in competitive sports and institute 
treatment whenever there is a perception of increased 
risk. Guidelines for restricting athletic activity have 
VT has been reported with isoproterenol or quinidine 
administration, although experience has been limited. 
Patients who do not benefit from beta blockers and 
chronic suppression with quinidine, which may lengthen 
epicardial action potential duration by blocking ITO cur-
rent, may be considered for ICD implantation. ICD treat-
ment to manage recurrences and prevent sudden death 
is recommended for all patients who have had docu-
mented arrhythmia episodes and patients with syncope 
and positive spontaneous or provoked coved-type ECG 
ST-segment changes in V1−V3. Family members should 
undergo ECG screening for the presence of the abnor-
mality. The role of programmed cardiac stimulation and 
the use of ICD therapy in asymptomatic patients with 
the Brugada-type ECG pattern remain somewhat contro-
versial, as is provocative drug infusion and programmed 
stimulation in patients with borderline abnormalities 
and no arrhythmia symptoms. Longer-term follow-up in 
a larger group of these relatively low-risk patients may 
be required before definitive recommendations can be 
provided. Counseling on controversies that exist, the 
potential risk of fever, and inadvertent administration of 
tricyclic antidepressants should be considered. Genetic 
testing may be helpful in confirming the presence of the 
genetic abnormality in family members of patients who 
manifest the arrhythmia syndrome.
Catecholaminergic polymorphic VT
A mutation of the myocardial ryanodine release chan-
nel, which effectively creates a “leak” in calcium 
from the sarcoplasmic reticulum, has been identified 
in patients with catecholaminergic VT (Table 16-8). 
The accumulation of intracellular calcium potenti-
ates delayed afterdepolarizations and triggered activity. 
Patients can manifest bidirectional VT, nonsustained 
polymorphic VT, or recurrent VF. Both an autosomal 
dominant familial form and sporadic forms of the dis-
ease have been described. More recently, an autosomal 
recessive variant associated with a mutation in the sarco-
plasmic reticulum calcium-buffering protein calseques-
trin has also been identified. The arrhythmias are pre-
cipitated by exercise and emotional stress (Fig. 16-16). 
Exercise restriction is warranted. Treatment with beta 
blockers and ICD implantation has been recommended. 
Prevention of inappropriate or easily triggered ICD 
Figure 16-16 
Catecholaminergic polymorphic ven-
tricular tachycardia noted during an 
exercise stress test.
II
SECTION III
Heart Rhythm Disturbances
180
required, is incompatible with contact sports because of 
the potential for blunt trauma and consequent damage 
to the device. Although ICDs are effective, their psy-
chosocial impact, the potential for inappropriate shocks 
for sinus tachycardia, and lead-related complications 
must be recognized.
been promulgated on the basis of expert consensus 
and evidence-based data and can facilitate management 
once a diagnosis has been established (Table 16-9). 
Treatment should be based on standards established for 
each arrhythmia syndrome. Curative catheter ablative 
therapy should be applied if indicated. ICD therapy, if 
Table 16-9
Recommendations for Competitive Athletes With Selected Cardiovascular Abnormalities
Clinical Entity
Clinical Criteria
Sports Permitted
Gene carriers for arrhythmia syndromes 
without phenotype VT
All sports
Long QT syndrome
>0.47 s in men, >0.48 s in women
Low-intensity competitive sports
Brugada syndrome
Low-intensity competitive sports
Catecholaminergic polymorphic VT
No competitive sports
Asymptomatic Wolff-Parkinson-White 
syndrome
Electrophysiological study not 
mandatory
All sports except restriction in dangerous 
environments
Premature ventricular complexes
All competitive sports when no increase in 
PVCs or symptoms occur with exercise
Nonsustained ventricular tachycardia
No structural heart disease
All competitive sports
Nonsustained ventricular tachycardia
Structural heart disease
Only low-intensity competitive sports
Source: Adapted from ACC Bethesda Conference #36 from Pelliccia et al: J Am Coll Cardiol 52:1990–1996, 2008.
SECTION IV
Disorders  
of the heart
182
 Douglas L. Mann   I   Murali Chakinala 
182
 HEART FAILURE AND COR PULMONALE 
 CHaPTer 17 
 HearT FaIlure 
 DEfINITION 
 Heart failure (HF) is a clinical syndrome that occurs 
in patients who, because of an inherited or acquired 
abnormality of cardiac structure and/or function, 
develop a constellation of clinical symptoms (dyspnea 
and fatigue) and signs (edema and rales) that lead to 
frequent hospitalizations, a poor quality of life, and a 
shortened life expectancy. 
 EPIDEmIOlOgY 
 HF is a burgeoning problem worldwide, with 
more than 20 million people affected. The over-
all prevalence of HF in the adult population in 
developed countries is 2%. HF prevalence follows an 
exponential pattern, rising with age, and affects 6–10% 
of people over age 65. Although the relative incidence 
of HF is lower in women than in men, women consti-
tute at least one-half the cases of HF because of their 
longer life expectancy. In North America and Europe, 
the lifetime risk of developing HF is approximately 
one in fi ve for a 40-year-old. The overall prevalence 
of HF is thought to be increasing, in part because cur-
rent therapies for cardiac disorders, such as myocardial 
infarction (MI), valvular heart disease, and arrhyth-
mias, are allowing patients to survive longer. Very little 
is known about the prevalence or risk of developing 
HF in emerging nations because of the lack of popu-
lation-based studies in those countries. Although HF 
once was thought to arise primarily in the setting of a 
depressed left ventricular (LV) ejection fraction (EF), 
epidemiologic studies have shown that approximately 
one-half of patients who develop HF have a normal or 
preserved EF (EF ≥40–50%). Accordingly, HF patients 
are now broadly categorized into one of two groups: 
(1) HF with a depressed EF (commonly referred to as 
systolic failure ) or (2) HF with a preserved EF (com-
monly referred to as  diastolic failure ). 
 ETIOlOgY 
 As shown in  Table 17-1 , any condition that leads to 
an alteration in LV structure or function can predispose 
a patient to developing HF. Although the etiology of 
HF in patients with a preserved EF differs from that of 
patients with depressed EF, there is considerable over-
lap between the etiologies of these two conditions. In 
industrialized countries, coronary artery disease (CAD) 
has become the predominant cause in men and women 
and is responsible for 60–75% of cases of HF. Hyperten-
sion contributes to the development of HF in 75% of 
patients, including most patients with CAD. Both CAD 
and hypertension interact to augment the risk of HF, as 
does diabetes mellitus. 
 In 20–30% of the cases of HF with a depressed EF, 
the exact etiologic basis is not known. These patients are 
referred to as having nonischemic, dilated, or  idiopathic 
cardiomyopathy if the cause is unknown  ( Chap. 21 ). 
Prior viral infection or toxin exposure (e.g., alcoholic 
or chemotherapeutic) also may lead to a dilated cardio-
myopathy. Moreover, it is becoming increasingly clear 
that a large number of cases of dilated cardiomyopathy 
are secondary to specifi c genetic defects, most notably 
those in the cytoskeleton. Most forms of familial dilated 
cardiomyopathy are inherited in an autosomal dominant 
fashion. Mutations of genes that encode cytoskeletal 
proteins (desmin, cardiac myosin, vinculin) and nuclear 
membrane proteins (laminin) have been identifi ed thus 
far. Dilated cardiomyopathy also is associated with 
Duchenne’s, Becker’s, and limb-girdle muscular dys-
trophies. Conditions that lead to a high cardiac output 
(e.g., arteriovenous fi stula, anemia) are seldom respon-
sible for the development of HF in a normal heart; 
 
CHAPTER 17
Heart Failure and Cor Pulmonale
183
Table 17-1
Etiologies of Heart Failure
Depressed Ejection Fraction (<40%)
Coronary artery disease
Nonischemic dilated  
cardiomyopathy
  Myocardial infarctiona
  Familial/genetic disorders
  Myocardial ischemiaa
  Infiltrative disordersa
Chronic pressure overload
Toxic/drug-induced damage
  Hypertensiona
  Metabolic disordera
  Obstructive valvular  
  diseasea
  Viral
Chronic volume overload
Chagas’ disease
  Regurgitant valvular  
  disease
Disorders of rate and rhythm
  Intracardiac (left-to-right) 
  shunting
  Chronic bradyarrhythmias
  Extracardiac shunting
  Chronic tachyarrhythmias
Preserved Ejection Fraction (>40–50%)
Pathologic hypertrophy
Restrictive cardiomyopathy
  Primary (hypertrophic  
  cardiomyopathies)
  Infiltrative disorders 
  (amyloidosis, ­sarcoidosis)
  Secondary (hypertension)
  Storage diseases  
  (hemochromatosis)
Aging
Fibrosis
Endomyocardial disorders
Pulmonary Heart Disease
Cor pulmonale
Pulmonary vascular  
disorders
High-Output States
Metabolic disorders
Excessive blood-flow 
requirements
  Thyrotoxicosis
  Systemic arteriovenous 
  shunting
  Nutritional disorders 
  (beriberi)
  Chronic anemia
aIndicates conditions that can also lead to heart failure with a pre-
served ejection fraction.
however, in the presence of underlying structural heart 
­disease, these conditions can lead to overt HF.
Global Considerations
Rheumatic heart disease remains a major cause 
of HF in Africa and Asia, especially in the 
young. Hypertension is an important cause of 
HF in the African and African-American populations. 
Chagas’ disease is still a major cause of HF in South 
America. Not surprisingly, anemia is a frequent con-
comitant factor in HF in many developing nations. As 
developing nations undergo socioeconomic develop-
ment, the epidemiology of HF is becoming similar to 
that of Western Europe and North America, with CAD 
emerging as the single most common cause of HF. 
Although the contribution of diabetes mellitus to HF is 
not well understood, diabetes accelerates atherosclerosis 
and often is associated with hypertension.
Prognosis
Despite many recent advances in the evaluation and 
management of HF, the development of symptomatic 
HF still carries a poor prognosis. Community-based 
studies indicate that 30–40% of patients die within 
1 year of diagnosis and 60–70% die within 5 years, 
mainly from worsening HF or as a sudden event (prob-
ably because of a ventricular arrhythmia). Although it is 
difficult to predict prognosis in an individual, patients 
with symptoms at rest (New York Heart Association 
[NYHA] class IV) have a 30–70% annual mortality rate, 
whereas patients with symptoms with moderate activ-
ity (NYHA class II) have an annual mortality rate of 
5–10%. Thus, functional status is an important predictor 
of patient outcome (Table 17-2).
Table 17-2
New York Heart Association Classification
Functional Capacity
Objective Assessment
Class I
Patients with cardiac disease 
but without resulting limitation 
of physical activity. Ordinary 
physical activity does not 
cause undue fatigue, palpita-
tions, dyspnea, or anginal pain.
Class II
Patients with cardiac disease 
resulting in slight limitation of 
physical activity. They are com-
fortable at rest. Ordinary physi-
cal activity results in fatigue, 
palpitation, dyspnea, or anginal 
pain.
Class III
Patients with cardiac disease 
resulting in marked limitation 
of physical activity. They are 
comfortable at rest. Less than 
ordinary activity causes fatigue, 
palpitation, dyspnea, or anginal 
pain.
Class IV
Patients with cardiac disease 
resulting in inability to carry on 
any physical activity without 
discomfort. Symptoms of heart 
failure or the anginal syndrome 
may be present even at rest. If 
any physical activity is under-
taken, discomfort is increased.
Source: Adapted from New York Heart Association, Inc., Diseases of 
the Heart and Blood Vessels: Nomenclature and Criteria for Diagno-
sis, 6th ed. Boston, Little Brown, 1964, p. 114.
SECTION IV
Disorders of the Heart
184
Asymptomatic
Symptomatic
Time, years
Ejection fraction
60%
20%
Compensatory
mechanisms
Secondary
damage
Index event
Figure 17-1
Pathogenesis of heart failure with a depressed ejection 
fraction. Heart failure begins after an index event produces 
an initial decline in the heart’s pumping capacity. After this 
initial decline in pumping capacity, a variety of compensatory 
mechanisms are activated, including the adrenergic nervous 
system, the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, and the 
cytokine system. In the short term, these systems are able 
to restore cardiovascular function to a normal homeostatic 
range with the result that the patient remains asymptomatic. 
However, with time the sustained activation of these systems 
can lead to secondary end-organ damage within the ven-
tricle, with worsening left ventricular remodeling and subse-
quent cardiac decompensation. (From D Mann: Circulation 
100:999, 1999.)
Pathogenesis
Figure 17-1 provides a general conceptual framework 
for considering the development and progression of HF 
with a depressed EF. As shown, HF may be viewed as a 
progressive disorder that is initiated after an index event 
either damages the heart muscle, with a resultant loss 
of functioning cardiac myocytes, or, alternatively, dis-
rupts the ability of the myocardium to generate force, 
thereby preventing the heart from contracting normally. 
This index event may have an abrupt onset, as in the 
case of a myocardial infarction (MI); it may have a grad-
ual or insidious onset, as in the case of hemodynamic 
pressure or volume overloading; or it may be heredi-
tary, as in the case of many of the genetic cardiomyopa-
thies. Regardless of the nature of the inciting event, the 
feature that is common to each of these index events 
is that they all in some manner produce a decline in 
the pumping capacity of the heart. In most instances, 
patients remain asymptomatic or minimally symptom-
atic after the initial decline in pumping capacity of the 
heart or develop symptoms only after the dysfunction 
has been present for some time.
Although the precise reasons why patients with LV 
dysfunction may remain asymptomatic is not certain, 
one potential explanation is that a number of compen-
satory mechanisms become activated in the presence of 
cardiac injury and/or LV dysfunction allowing patients 
to sustain and modulate LV function for a period of 
months to years. The list of compensatory mechanisms 
that have been described thus far include (1) activation 
of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone (RAA) and adren-
ergic nervous systems, which are responsible for main-
taining cardiac output through increased retention of 
salt and water (Fig. 17-2), and (2) increased myocardial 
contractility. In addition, there is activation of a family 
of countervailing vasodilatory molecules, including the 
atrial and brain natriuretic peptides (ANP and BNP), 
prostaglandins (PGE2 and PGI2), and nitric oxide (NO), 
that offsets the excessive peripheral vascular vasocon-
striction. Genetic background, sex, age, or environment 
may influence these compensatory mechanisms, which 
are able to modulate LV function within a physiologic/
homeostatic range so that the functional capacity of 
the patient is preserved or is depressed only minimally. 
Thus, patients may remain asymptomatic or minimally 
symptomatic for a period of years; however, at some 
point patients become overtly symptomatic, with a resul-
tant striking increase in morbidity and mortality rates. 
Although the exact mechanisms that are responsible 
for this transition are not known, as will be discussed 
later in this chapter, the transition to symptomatic HF 
is accompanied by increasing activation of neurohor-
monal, adrenergic, and cytokine systems that lead to a 
series of adaptive changes within the myocardium col-
lectively referred to as LV remodeling.
In contrast to our understanding of the pathogenesis 
of HF with a depressed EF, our understanding of the 
mechanisms that contribute to the development of HF 
with a preserved EF is still evolving. That is, although 
diastolic dysfunction (see later in this chapter) was 
thought to be the only mechanism responsible for the 
development of HF with a preserved EF, community-
based studies suggest that additional extracardiac mecha-
nisms may be important, such as increased vascular stiffness 
and impaired renal function.
Basic Mechanisms of Heart Failure
Systolic dysfunction
LV remodeling develops in response to a series of com-
plex events that occur at the cellular and molecular lev-
els (Table 17-3). These changes include (1) myocyte 
hypertrophy, (2) alterations in the contractile proper-
ties of the myocyte, (3) progressive loss of myocytes 
through necrosis, apoptosis, and autophagic cell death, 
(4) β-adrenergic desensitization, (5) abnormal myo-
cardial energetics and metabolism, and (6) reorganiza-
tion of the extracellular matrix with dissolution of the 
 
CHAPTER 17
Heart Failure and Cor Pulmonale
185
Figure 17-2
Activation of neurohormonal systems in heart failure. 
The decreased cardiac output in HF patients results in an 
“unloading” of high-pressure baroceptors (circles) in the 
left ventricle, carotid sinus, and aortic arch. This unloading 
of the peripheral baroreceptors leads to a loss of inhibitory 
parasympathetic tone to the central nervous system (CNS), 
with a resultant generalized increase in efferent sympathetic 
tone, and nonosmotic release of arginine vasopressin (AVP) 
from the pituitary. AVP (or antidiuretic hormone [ADH]) is a 
powerful vasoconstrictor that increases the permeability of 
the renal collecting ducts, leading to the reabsorption of free 
water. These afferent signals to the CNS also activate effer-
ent sympathetic nervous system pathways that innervate the 
heart, kidney, peripheral vasculature, and skeletal muscles.
Sympathetic stimulation of the kidney leads to the release 
of renin, with a resultant increase in the circulating levels of 
­angiotensin II and aldosterone. The activation of the renin-
angiotensin-aldosterone system promotes salt and water reten-
tion and leads to vasoconstriction of the peripheral vasculature, 
myocyte hypertrophy, myocyte cell death, and myocardial fibro-
sis. Although these neurohormonal mechanisms facilitate short-
term adaptation by maintaining blood pressure, and hence 
­perfusion to vital organs, the same neurohormonal mechanisms 
are believed to contribute to end-organ changes in the heart 
and the circulation and to the excessive salt and water reten-
tion in advanced HF. (Modified from A Nohria et al: Neurohor-
monal, renal and vascular adjustments, in Atlas of Heart Failure: 
­Cardiac Function and Dysfunction, 4th ed, WS Colucci [ed]. 
Philadelphia, Current Medicine Group 2002, p. 104.)
Baroreceptor
dysfunction
Sympathetic nervous
system activity
   Vasopressin
secretion
 Renin
secretion
Angiotensin II
Afferent
inhibitory signals
Limb blood flow
Renal blood flow
Aldosterone
Sodium reabsorption
H2O reabsorption
Vasomotor center
organized structural collagen weave surrounding myo-
cytes and subsequent replacement by an interstitial col-
lagen matrix that does not provide structural support to 
the myocytes. The biologic stimuli for these profound 
changes include mechanical stretch of the myocyte, cir-
culating neurohormones (e.g., norepinephrine, angio-
tensin II), inflammatory cytokines (e.g., tumor necrosis 
factor [TNF]), other peptides and growth factors (e.g., 
endothelin), and reactive oxygen species (e.g., superoxide). 
The sustained overexpression of these biologically active 
molecules is believed to contribute to the progression 
of HF by virtue of the deleterious effects they exert on 
the heart and circulation. Indeed, this insight forms the 
clinical rationale for using pharmacologic agents that 
antagonize these systems (e.g., angiotensin-converting 
enzyme [ACE] inhibitors and beta blockers) in treating 
patients with HF.
In order to understand how the changes that occur 
in the failing cardiac myocyte contribute to depressed 
LV systolic function in HF, it is instructive first to 
review the biology of the cardiac muscle cell (Chap. 1). 
Sustained neurohormonal activation and mechani-
cal overload result in transcriptional and posttranscrip-
tional changes in the genes and proteins that ­regulate 
­excitation-contraction coupling and cross-bridge inter-
action (see Figs. 1-6 and 1-7). The changes that regu-
late excitation-contraction include decreased function 
Table 17-3
Overview of Left Ventricular Remodeling
Alterations in Myocyte Biology
Excitation-contraction coupling
Myosin heavy chain (fetal) gene expression
β-adrenergic desensitization
Hypertrophy
Myocytolysis
Cytoskeletal proteins
Myocardial Changes
Myocyte loss
  Necrosis
  Apoptosis
  Autophagy
Alterations in Extracellular Matrix
  Matrix degradation
  Myocardial fibrosis
Alterations in Left Ventricular Chamber Geometry
Left ventricular (LV) dilation
Increased LV sphericity
LV wall thinning
Mitral valve incompetence
Source: Adapted from D Mann: Pathophysiology of heart failure, in 
Braunwald’s Heart Disease, 8th ed, PL Libby et al (eds). Philadelphia, 
Elsevier, 2008, p. 550.
SECTION IV
Disorders of the Heart
186
of sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca2+ adenosine triphosphatase 
(SERCA2A), resulting in decreased calcium uptake into 
the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR), and hyperphosphory-
lation of the ryanodine receptor, leading to calcium 
leakage from the SR. The changes that occur in the 
cross-bridges include decreased expression of α-myosin 
heavy chain and increased expression of β-myosin heavy 
chain, myocytolysis, and disruption of the cytoskel-
etal links between the sarcomeres and the extracellular 
matrix. Collectively, these changes impair the ability 
of the myocyte to contract and therefore contribute to 
the depressed LV systolic function observed in patients 
with HF.
Diastolic dysfunction
Myocardial relaxation is an adenosine triphosphate 
(ATP)-dependent process that is regulated by uptake of 
cytoplasmic calcium into the SR by SERCA2A and extru-
sion of calcium by sarcolemmal pumps (see Fig. 1-7). 
Accordingly, reductions in ATP concentration, as 
occurs in ischemia, may interfere with these processes 
and lead to slowed myocardial relaxation. Alternatively, 
if LV filling is delayed because LV compliance is reduced 
(e.g., from hypertrophy or fibrosis), LV filling pres-
sures will similarly remain elevated at end diastole (see 
Fig. 1-11). An increase in heart rate disproportionately 
shortens the time for diastolic filling, which may lead 
to elevated LV filling pressures, particularly in non-
compliant ventricles. Elevated LV end-diastolic filling 
pressures result in increases in pulmonary capillary pres-
sures, which can contribute to the dyspnea experienced 
by patients with diastolic dysfunction. In addition to 
impaired myocardial relaxation, increased myocardial 
stiffness secondary to cardiac hypertrophy and increased 
myocardial collagen content may contribute to diastolic 
failure. Importantly, diastolic dysfunction can occur 
alone or in combination with systolic dysfunction in 
patients with HF.
Left ventricular remodeling
Ventricular remodeling refers to the changes in LV mass, 
volume, and shape and the composition of the heart 
that occur after cardiac injury and/or abnormal hemo-
dynamic loading conditions. LV remodeling may con-
tribute independently to the progression of HF by vir-
tue of the mechanical burdens that are engendered by 
the changes in the geometry of the remodeled LV. In 
addition to the increase in LV end-diastolic volume, 
LV wall thinning occurs as the left ventricle begins to 
dilate. The increase in wall thinning, along with the 
increase in afterload created by LV dilation, leads to a 
functional afterload mismatch that may contribute fur-
ther to a decrease in stroke volume. Moreover, the high 
end-diastolic wall stress might be expected to lead to 
(1) hypoperfusion of the subendocardium, with resul-
tant worsening of LV function, (2) increased oxidative 
stress, with the resultant activation of families of genes 
that are sensitive to free radical generation (e.g., TNF and 
interleukin 1β), and (3) sustained expression of stretch-
activated genes (angiotensin II, endothelin, and TNF) 
and/or stretch activation of hypertrophic signaling path-
ways. Increasing LV dilation also results in ­tethering of 
the papillary muscles with resulting incompetence of the 
mitral valve apparatus and functional mitral regurgita-
tion, which in turn leads to further hemodynamic over-
loading of the ventricle. Taken together, the mechanical 
burdens that are engendered by LV remodeling contrib-
ute to the progression of HF.
Clinical Manifestations
Symptoms
The cardinal symptoms of HF are fatigue and short-
ness of breath. Although fatigue traditionally has been 
ascribed to the low cardiac output in HF, it is likely 
that skeletal-muscle abnormalities and other noncar-
diac comorbidities (e.g., anemia) also contribute to 
this symptom. In the early stages of HF, dyspnea is 
observed only during exertion; however, as the disease 
progresses, dyspnea occurs with less strenuous activity, 
and it ultimately may occur even at rest. The origin 
of dyspnea in HF is probably multifactorial (Chap. 5). 
The most important mechanism is pulmonary conges-
tion with accumulation of interstitial or intraalveolar 
fluid, which activates juxtacapillary J receptors, which 
in turn stimulate the rapid, shallow breathing char-
acteristic of cardiac dyspnea. Other factors that con-
tribute to dyspnea on exertion include reductions in 
pulmonary compliance, increased airway resistance, 
respiratory muscle and/or diaphragm fatigue, and 
anemia. Dyspnea may become less frequent with the 
onset of right ventricular (RV) failure and tricuspid 
regurgitation.
Orthopnea
Orthopnea, which is defined as dyspnea occurring in 
the recumbent position, is usually a later manifesta-
tion of HF than is exertional dyspnea. It results from 
redistribution of fluid from the splanchnic circulation 
and lower extremities into the central circulation dur-
ing recumbency, with a resultant increase in pulmo-
nary capillary pressure. Nocturnal cough is a common 
manifestation of this process and a frequently over-
looked symptom of HF. Orthopnea generally is relieved 
by sitting upright or sleeping with additional pillows. 
Although orthopnea is a relatively specific symptom of 
HF, it may occur in patients with abdominal obesity or 
ascites and patients with pulmonary disease whose lung 
mechanics favor an upright posture.
 
CHAPTER 17
Heart Failure and Cor Pulmonale
187
Paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea (PND)
This term refers to acute episodes of severe shortness 
of breath and coughing that generally occur at night 
and awaken the patient from sleep, usually 1–3 h after 
the patient retires. PND may be manifest by coughing 
or wheezing, possibly because of increased pressure in 
the bronchial arteries leading to airway compression, 
along with interstitial pulmonary edema that leads to 
increased airway resistance. Whereas orthopnea may be 
relieved by sitting upright at the side of the bed with 
the legs in a dependent position, patients with PND 
often have persistent coughing and wheezing even after 
they have assumed the upright position. Cardiac asthma 
is closely related to PND, is characterized by wheez-
ing secondary to bronchospasm, and must be differen-
tiated from primary asthma and pulmonary causes of 
wheezing.
Cheyne-Stokes respiration
Also referred to as periodic respiration or cyclic respi-
ration, Cheyne-Stokes respiration is present in 40% of 
patients with advanced HF and usually is associated with 
low cardiac output. Cheyne-Stokes respiration is caused 
by a diminished sensitivity of the respiratory center to 
arterial Pco2. There is an apneic phase, during which 
arterial Po2 falls and arterial Pco2 rises. These changes in 
the arterial blood gas content stimulate the depressed 
respiratory center, resulting in hyperventilation and 
hypocapnia, followed by recurrence of apnea. Cheyne-
Stokes respirations may be perceived by the patient or 
the patient’s family as severe dyspnea or as a transient 
cessation of breathing.
Acute pulmonary edema
See Chap. 28.
Other symptoms
Patients with HF also may present with gastrointesti-
nal symptoms. Anorexia, nausea, and early satiety asso-
ciated with abdominal pain and fullness are common 
complaints and may be related to edema of the bowel 
wall and/or a congested liver. Congestion of the liver 
and stretching of its capsule may lead to right-upper-
quadrant pain. Cerebral symptoms such as confusion, 
disorientation, and sleep and mood disturbances may be 
observed in patients with severe HF, particularly elderly 
patients with cerebral arteriosclerosis and reduced cere-
bral perfusion. Nocturia is common in HF and may 
contribute to insomnia.
Physical Examination
A careful physical examination is always warranted in 
the evaluation of patients with HF. The purpose of the 
examination is to help determine the cause of HF as 
well as to assess the severity of the syndrome. ­Obtaining 
additional information about the hemodynamic pro-
file and the response to therapy and determining the 
prognosis are important additional goals of the physical 
examination.
General appearance and vital signs
In mild or moderately severe HF, the patient appears 
to be in no distress at rest except for feeling uncom-
fortable when lying flat for more than a few minutes. 
In more severe HF, the patient must sit upright, may 
have labored breathing, and may not be able to finish a 
sentence because of shortness of breath. Systolic blood 
pressure may be normal or high in early HF, but it gen-
erally is reduced in advanced HF because of severe LV 
dysfunction. The pulse pressure may be diminished, 
reflecting a reduction in stroke volume. Sinus tachy-
cardia is a nonspecific sign caused by increased adrener-
gic activity. Peripheral vasoconstriction leading to cool 
peripheral extremities and cyanosis of the lips and nail 
beds is also caused by excessive adrenergic activity.
Jugular veins
(See also Chap. 9) Examination of the jugular veins 
provides an estimation of right atrial pressure. The jugu-
lar venous pressure is best appreciated with the patient 
lying recumbent, with the head tilted at 45°. The jugu-
lar venous pressure should be quantified in centimeters 
of water (normal ≤8 cm) by estimating the height of the 
venous column of blood above the sternal angle in cen-
timeters and then adding 5 cm. In the early stages of 
HF, the venous pressure may be normal at rest but may 
become abnormally elevated with sustained (∼1 min) 
pressure on the abdomen (positive abdominojugular 
reflux). Giant v waves indicate the presence of tricuspid 
regurgitation.
Pulmonary examination
Pulmonary crackles (rales or crepitations) result from 
the transudation of fluid from the intravascular space 
into the alveoli. In patients with pulmonary edema, 
rales may be heard widely over both lung fields and 
may be accompanied by expiratory wheezing (cardiac 
asthma). When present in patients without concomi-
tant lung disease, rales are specific for HF. Importantly, 
rales are frequently absent in patients with chronic HF, 
even when LV filling pressures are elevated, because 
of increased lymphatic drainage of alveolar fluid. Pleu-
ral effusions result from the elevation of pleural capil-
lary pressure and the resulting transudation of fluid into 
the pleural cavities. Since the pleural veins drain into 
both the systemic and the pulmonary veins, pleural 
SECTION IV
Disorders of the Heart
188
effusions occur most commonly with biventricular fail-
ure. Although pleural effusions are often bilateral in HF, 
when they are unilateral, they occur more frequently in 
the right pleural space.
Cardiac examination
Examination of the heart, although essential, frequently 
does not provide useful information about the severity 
of HF. If cardiomegaly is present, the point of maximal 
impulse (PMI) usually is displaced below the fifth inter-
costal space and/or lateral to the midclavicular line, and 
the impulse is palpable over two interspaces. Severe LV 
hypertrophy leads to a sustained PMI. In some patients, 
a third heart sound (S3) is audible and palpable at the 
apex. Patients with enlarged or hypertrophied right 
ventricles may have a sustained and prolonged left para-
sternal impulse extending throughout systole. An S3 (or 
protodiastolic gallop) is most commonly present in patients 
with volume overload who have tachycardia and tachy-
pnea, and it often signifies severe hemodynamic com-
promise. A fourth heart sound (S4) is not a specific 
indicator of HF but is usually present in patients with 
diastolic dysfunction. The murmurs of mitral and tricus-
pid regurgitation are frequently present in patients with 
advanced HF.
Abdomen and extremities
Hepatomegaly is an important sign in patients with 
HF. When it is present, the enlarged liver is frequently 
­tender and may pulsate during systole if tricuspid regur-
gitation is present. Ascites, a late sign, occurs as a con-
sequence of increased pressure in the hepatic veins and 
the veins draining the peritoneum. Jaundice, also a late 
finding in HF, results from impairment of hepatic func-
tion secondary to hepatic congestion and hepatocellu-
lar hypoxemia and is associated with elevations of both 
direct and indirect bilirubin.
Peripheral edema is a cardinal manifestation of HF, 
but it is nonspecific and usually is absent in patients 
who have been treated adequately with diuretics. 
Peripheral edema is usually symmetric and dependent 
in HF and occurs predominantly in the ankles and the 
pretibial region in ambulatory patients. In bedridden 
patients, edema may be found in the sacral area (presa-
cral edema) and the scrotum. Long-standing edema may 
be associated with indurated and pigmented skin.
Cardiac cachexia
With severe chronic HF, there may be marked weight 
loss and cachexia. Although the mechanism of cachexia 
is not entirely understood, it is probably multifacto-
rial and includes elevation of the resting metabolic 
rate; anorexia, nausea, and vomiting due to congestive 
hepatomegaly and abdominal fullness; elevation of cir-
culating concentrations of cytokines such as TNF; and 
impairment of intestinal absorption due to congestion 
of the intestinal veins. When present, cachexia augurs a 
poor overall prognosis.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of HF is relatively straightforward when 
the patient presents with classic signs and symptoms of 
HF; however, the signs and symptoms of HF are nei-
ther specific nor sensitive. Accordingly, the key to mak-
ing the diagnosis is to have a high index of suspicion, 
particularly for high-risk patients. When these patients 
present with signs or symptoms of HF, additional 
­laboratory testing should be performed.
Routine laboratory testing
Patients with new-onset HF and those with chronic 
HF and acute decompensation should have a complete 
blood count, a panel of electrolytes, blood urea nitro-
gen, serum creatinine, hepatic enzymes, and a urinaly-
sis. Selected patients should have assessment for diabetes 
mellitus (fasting serum glucose or oral glucose toler-
ance test), dyslipidemia (fasting lipid panel), and thyroid 
abnormalities (thyroid-stimulating hormone level).
Electrocardiogram (ECG)
A routine 12-lead ECG is recommended. The major 
importance of the ECG is to assess cardiac rhythm and 
determine the presence of LV hypertrophy or a prior 
MI (presence or absence of Q waves) as well as to deter-
mine QRS width to ascertain whether the patient may 
benefit from resynchronization therapy (see later). A 
normal ECG virtually excludes LV systolic dysfunction.
Chest x-ray
A chest x-ray provides useful information about car-
diac size and shape, as well as the state of the pulmo-
nary vasculature, and may identify noncardiac causes of 
the patient’s symptoms. Although patients with acute 
HF have evidence of pulmonary hypertension, inter-
stitial edema, and/or pulmonary edema, the majority 
of patients with chronic HF do not. The absence of 
these findings in patients with chronic HF reflects the 
increased capacity of the lymphatics to remove intersti-
tial and/or pulmonary fluid.
Assessment of LV function
Noninvasive cardiac imaging (Chap. 12) is essen-
tial for the diagnosis, evaluation, and management of 
 
CHAPTER 17
Heart Failure and Cor Pulmonale
189
HF. The most useful test is the two-dimensional (2-D) 
echocardiogram/Doppler, which can provide a semi-
quantitative assessment of LV size and function as well 
as the presence or absence of valvular and/or regional 
wall motion abnormalities (indicative of a prior MI). 
The presence of left atrial dilation and LV hypertro-
phy, together with abnormalities of LV diastolic fill-
ing provided by pulse-wave and tissue Doppler, is 
useful for the assessment of HF with a preserved EF. 
The 2-D echocardiogram/Doppler is also invaluable 
in assessing RV size and pulmonary pressures, which 
are critical in the evaluation and management of cor 
pulmonale (see later). Magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) also provides a comprehensive analysis of car-
diac anatomy and function and is now the gold stan-
dard for assessing LV mass and volumes. MRI also 
is emerging as a useful and accurate imaging modal-
ity for evaluating patients with HF, both in terms of 
assessing LV structure and for determining the cause 
of HF (e.g., amyloidosis, ischemic cardiomyopathy, 
hemochromatosis).
The most useful index of LV function is the EF 
(stroke volume divided by end-diastolic volume). 
Because the EF is easy to measure by noninvasive 
testing and easy to conceptualize, it has gained wide 
acceptance among clinicians. Unfortunately, the EF has 
a number of limitations as a true measure of contrac-
tility, since it is influenced by alterations in afterload 
and/or preload. Nonetheless, with the exceptions indi-
cated above, when the EF is normal (≥50%), systolic 
function is usually adequate, and when the EF is sig-
nificantly depressed (<30–40%), contractility is usually 
depressed.
Biomarkers
Circulating levels of natriuretic peptides are useful 
adjunctive tools in the diagnosis of patients with HF. 
Both B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) and N-terminal 
pro-BNP, which are released from the failing heart, are 
relatively sensitive markers for the presence of HF with 
depressed EF; they also are elevated in HF patients with 
a preserved EF, albeit to a lesser degree. However, it is 
important to recognize that natriuretic peptide levels 
increase with age and renal impairment, are more ele-
vated in women, and can be elevated in right HF from 
any cause. Levels can be falsely low in obese patients 
and may normalize in some patients after appropriate 
treatment. At present, serial measurements of BNP are 
not recommended as a guide to HF therapy. Other bio-
markers, such as troponin T and I, C-reactive protein, 
TNF receptors, and uric acid, may be elevated in HF 
and provide important prognostic information. Serial 
measurements of one or more biomarkers ultimately 
may help guide therapy in HF, but they are not cur-
rently recommended for this purpose.
Exercise testing
Treadmill or bicycle exercise testing is not routinely 
advocated for patients with HF, but either is useful for 
assessing the need for cardiac transplantation in patients 
with advanced HF (Chap. 18). A peak oxygen uptake 
(Vo2) <14 mL/kg per min is associated with a relatively 
poor prognosis. Patients with a Vo2 <14 mL/kg per min 
have been shown, in general, to have better survival 
when transplanted than when treated medically.
Differential Diagnosis
HF resembles but should be distinguished from (1) con-
ditions in which there is circulatory congestion second-
ary to abnormal salt and water retention but in which 
there is no disturbance of cardiac structure or function 
(e.g., renal failure) and (2) noncardiac causes of pulmo-
nary edema (e.g., acute respiratory distress syndrome). 
In most patients who present with classic signs and 
symptoms of HF, the diagnosis is relatively straightfor-
ward. However, even experienced clinicians have diffi-
culty differentiating the dyspnea that arises from cardiac 
and pulmonary causes (Chap. 5). In this regard, nonin-
vasive cardiac imaging, biomarkers, pulmonary function 
testing, and chest x-ray may be useful. A very low BNP 
or N-terminal pro-BNP may be helpful in excluding 
a cardiac cause of dyspnea in this setting. Ankle edema 
may arise secondary to varicose veins, obesity, renal 
disease, or gravitational effects. When HF develops 
in patients with a preserved EF, it may be difficult to 
determine the relative contribution of HF to the dys-
pnea that occurs in chronic lung disease and/or obesity.
Treatment	
Heart Failure
HF should be viewed as a continuum that is composed 
of four interrelated stages. Stage A includes patients 
who are at high risk for developing HF but do not have 
structural heart disease or symptoms of HF (e.g., patients 
with diabetes mellitus or hypertension). Stage B includes 
patients who have structural heart disease but do not 
have symptoms of HF (e.g., patients with a previous MI 
and asymptomatic LV dysfunction). Stage C includes 
patients who have structural heart disease and have 
developed symptoms of HF (e.g., patients with a pre-
vious MI with dyspnea and fatigue). Stage D includes 
patients with refractory HF requiring special interven-
tions (e.g., patients with refractory HF who are awaiting 
cardiac transplantation). In this continuum, every effort 
should be made to prevent HF not only by treating the 
preventable causes of HF (e.g., hypertension) but also 
by treating the patient in stages B and C with drugs that 
prevent disease progression (e.g., ACE inhibitors and 
beta blockers) and by symptomatic management of 
patients in stage D.
SECTION IV
Disorders of the Heart
190
Table 17-4
Factors That May Precipitate Acute 
Decompensation in Patients With Chronic 
Heart Failure
Dietary indiscretion
Myocardial ischemia/infarction
Arrhythmias (tachycardia or bradycardia)
Discontinuation of HF therapy
Infection
Anemia
Initiation of medications that worsen HF
  Calcium antagonists (verapamil, diltiazem)
  Beta blockers
  Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
  Antiarrhythmic agents (all class I agents,  
  sotalol [class III])
  Anti-TNF antibodies
Alcohol consumption
Pregnancy
Worsening hypertension
Acute valvular insufficiency
Abbreviations: HF, heart failure; TNF, tumor necrosis factor.
Defining an Appropriate Therapeutic 
Strategy for Chronic HF  Once patients 
have developed structural heart disease, their ther-
apy depends on their NYHA functional classification  
(Table 17-2). Although this classification system is noto-
riously subjective and has large interobserver variabil-
ity, it has withstood the test of time and continues to 
be widely applied to patients with HF. For patients who 
have developed LV systolic dysfunction but remain 
asymptomatic (class I), the goal should be to slow disease 
progression by blocking neurohormonal systems that 
lead to cardiac remodeling (see later). For patients who 
have developed symptoms (class II–IV), the primary goal 
should be to alleviate fluid retention, lessen disability, and 
reduce the risk of further disease progression and death. 
These goals generally require a strategy that combines 
diuretics (to control salt and water retention) with neuro-
hormonal interventions (to minimize cardiac remodeling).
Management of HF with Depressed 
Ejection Fraction (<40%)
General 
Measures  Clinicians should aim to 
screen for and treat comorbidities such as hypertension, 
CAD, diabetes mellitus, anemia, and sleep-disordered 
breathing, as these conditions tend to exacerbate HF. HF 
patients should be advised to stop smoking and to limit 
alcohol consumption to two standard drinks per day in 
men or one per day in women. Patients suspected of 
having an alcohol-induced cardiomyopathy should be 
urged to abstain from alcohol consumption indefinitely. 
Extremes of temperature and heavy physical exertion 
should be avoided. Certain drugs are known to make HF 
worse and should be avoided (Table 17-4). For exam-
ple, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, including 
cyclooxygenase 2 inhibitors, are not recommended in 
patients with chronic HF because the risk of renal failure 
and fluid retention is markedly increased in the pres-
ence of reduced renal function or ACE inhibitor therapy. 
Patients should receive immunization with influenza 
and pneumococcal vaccines to prevent respiratory 
infections. It is equally important to educate the patient 
and family about HF, the importance of proper diet, 
and the importance of compliance with the medical 
regimen. Supervision of outpatient care by a specially 
trained nurse or physician assistant and/or in specialized 
HF clinics has been found to be helpful, particularly in 
patients with advanced disease.
Activity  Although heavy physical labor is not recom-
mended in HF, routine modest exercise has been shown 
to be beneficial in patients with NYHA class I–III HF. For 
euvolemic patients, regular isotonic exercise such as 
walking or riding a stationary-bicycle ergometer, as tol-
erated, should be encouraged. Exercise training results 
in reduced HF symptoms, increased exercise capacity, 
and improved quality of life.
Diet  Dietary restriction of sodium (2–3 g daily) is rec-
ommended in all patients with HF and preserved or 
depressed EF. Further restriction (<2 g daily) may be 
considered in moderate to severe HF. Fluid restriction is 
generally unnecessary unless the patient develops hypo-
natremia (<130 meq/L), which may develop because 
of activation of the renin-angiotensin system, excessive 
secretion of antidiuretic hormone, or loss of salt in excess 
of water from diuretic use. Fluid restriction (<2 L/day) 
should be considered in hyponatremic patients or those 
whose fluid retention is difficult to control despite high 
doses of diuretics and sodium restriction. Vasopressin 
antagonists also may be useful in severe hyponatremia. 
Caloric supplementation is recommended for patients 
with advanced HF and unintentional weight loss or mus-
cle wasting (cardiac cachexia); however, anabolic steroids 
are not recommended for these patients because of the 
potential problems with volume retention. The use of 
dietary supplements (“nutriceuticals”) should be avoided 
in the management of symptomatic HF because of the 
lack of proven benefit and the potential for significant 
(adverse) interactions with proven HF therapies.
Diuretics  Many of the clinical manifestations of 
moderate to severe HF result from excessive salt and 
water retention that leads to volume expansion and con-
gestive symptoms. Diuretics (Table 17-5) are the only 
pharmacologic agents that can adequately control fluid 
retention in advanced HF, and they should be used to 
restore and maintain normal volume status in patients 
with 
congestive 
symptoms 
(dyspnea, 
orthopnea, 
 
CHAPTER 17
Heart Failure and Cor Pulmonale
191
Table 17-5
Drugs for the Treatment of Chronic Heart 
Failure (EF <40%)
Initiating Dose
Maximal Dose
Diuretics
Furosemide
20–40 mg qd  
or bid
400 mg/da
Torsemide
10–20 mg qd bid
200 mg/da
Bumetanide
0.5–1 mg qd  
or bid
10 mg/da
Hydrochlorthiazide
25 mg qd
100 mg/da
Metolazone
2.5–5 mg  
qd or bid
20 mg/da
Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Inhibitors
Captopril
6.25 mg tid
50 mg tid
Enalapril
2.5 mg bid
10 mg bid
Lisinopril
2.5–5 mg qd
20–35 mg qd
Ramipril
1.25–2.5 mg bid
2.5–5 mg bid
Trandolapril
0.5 mg qd
4 mg qd
Angiotensin Receptor Blockers
Valsartan
40 mg bid
160 mg bid
Candesartan
4 mg qd
32 mg qd
Irbesartan
75 mg qd
300 mg qdb
Losartan
12.5 mg qd
50 mg qd
a Receptor Blockers
Carvedilol
3.125 mg bid
25–50 mg bid
Bisoprolol
1.25 mg qd
10 mg qd
Metoprolol  
succinate CR
12.5–25 mg qd
Target dose 
200 mg qd
Additional Therapies
Spironolactone
12.5–25 mg qd
25–50 mg qd
Eplerenone
25 mg qd
50 mg qd
Combination of 
hydralazine/­
isosorbide 
­dinitrate
10–25 mg/ 
10 mg tid
75 mg/ 
40 mg tid
Fixed dose of 
hydralazine/­
isosorbide 
­dinitrate
37.5 mg/20 mg 
(one tablet) tid
75 mg/40 mg 
(two tablets) 
tid
Digoxin
0.125 mg qd
≤0.375 mg/db
aDose must be titrated to reduce the patient’s congestive symptoms.
bTarget dose not established.
Although all diuretics increase sodium excretion and 
urinary volume, they differ in their potency and phar-
macologic properties. Whereas loop diuretics increase 
the fractional excretion of sodium by 20–25%, thia-
zide diuretics increase it by only 5–10% and tend to lose 
their effectiveness in patients with moderate or severe 
renal insufficiency (creatinine >2.5 mg/dL). Hence, loop 
diuretics generally are required to restore normal vol-
ume status in patients with HF. Diuretics should be initi-
ated in low doses (Table 17-5) and then carefully titrated 
upward to relieve signs and symptoms of fluid overload 
in an attempt to obtain the patient’s “dry weight.” This 
typically requires multiple dose adjustments over many 
days and occasionally weeks in patients with severe 
fluid overload. Intravenous administration of diuret-
ics may be necessary to relieve congestion acutely and 
can be done safely in the outpatient setting. Once the 
congestion has been relieved, treatment with diuretics 
should be continued to prevent the recurrence of salt 
and water retention.
Refractoriness to diuretic therapy may represent 
patient nonadherence, a direct effect of chronic diuretic 
use on the kidney, or progression of underlying HF. 
The addition of thiazides or metolazone, once or twice 
daily, to loop diuretics may be considered in patients 
with persistent fluid retention despite high-dose loop 
diuretic therapy. Metolazone is generally more potent 
and much longer-acting than the thiazides in this set-
ting as well as in patients with chronic renal insuffi-
ciency. However, chronic daily use, especially of meto-
lazone, should be avoided if possible because of the 
potential for electrolyte shifts and volume depletion. 
Ultrafiltration and dialysis may be used in cases of 
refractory fluid retention that are unresponsive to high 
doses of diuretics and have been shown to be helpful in 
the short term.
Adverse 
Effects  Diuretics have the potential 
to produce electrolyte and volume depletion as well 
as worsening azotemia. In addition, they may lead to 
worsening neurohormonal activation and disease pro-
gression. One of the most important adverse conse-
quences of diuresis is alterations in potassium homeo-
stasis (hypokalemia or hyperkalemia), which increase 
the risk of life-threatening arrhythmias. In general, both 
loop- and thiazide-type diuretics lead to hypokalemia, 
whereas spironolactone, eplerenone, and triamterene 
lead to hyperkalemia.
Preventing 
Disease 
Progression 
(Table 17-5)  Drugs that interfere with excessive activa-
tion of the RAA system and the adrenergic nervous sys-
tem can relieve the symptoms of HF with a depressed 
EF by stabilizing and/or reversing cardiac remodeling. 
In this regard, ACE inhibitors and beta blockers have 
edema) or signs of elevated filling pressures (rales, jugu-
lar venous distention, peripheral edema). Furosemide, 
torsemide, and bumetanide act at the loop of Henle 
(loop diuretics) by reversibly inhibiting the reabsorption 
of Na+, K+, and Cl− in the thick ascending limb of Henle’s 
loop; thiazides and metolazone reduce the reabsorption 
of Na+ and Cl− in the first half of the distal convoluted 
tubule; and potassium-sparing diuretics such as spirono-
lactone act at the level of the collecting duct.
SECTION IV
Disorders of the Heart
192
emerged as the cornerstones of modern therapy for HF 
with a depressed EF.
ACE Inhibitors  There is overwhelming evidence 
that ACE inhibitors should be used in symptomatic and 
asymptomatic patients (Figs. 17-3 and 17-4) with a 
depressed EF (<40%). ACE inhibitors interfere with the 
renin-angiotensin system by inhibiting the enzyme 
that is responsible for the conversion of angiotensin I 
to angiotensin II. However, because ACE inhibitors also 
inhibit kininase II, they may lead to the upregulation of 
bradykinin, which may further enhance the beneficial 
effects of angiotensin suppression. ACE inhibitors stabi-
lize LV remodeling, improve symptoms, reduce hospi-
talization, and prolong life. Because fluid retention can 
attenuate the effects of ACE inhibitors, it is preferable 
to optimize the dose of diuretic before starting the ACE 
inhibitor. However, it may be necessary to reduce the 
dose of diuretic during the initiation of ACE inhibition to 
prevent symptomatic hypotension. ACE inhibitors should 
be initiated in low doses, followed by gradual increments 
if the lower doses have been well tolerated. The doses of 
ACE inhibitors should be increased until they are similar 
to those which have been shown to be effective in clini-
cal trials (Table 17-5). Higher doses are more effective 
than lower doses in preventing hospitalization.
Adverse Effects  The majority of adverse effects 
are related to suppression of the renin-angiotensin sys-
tem. The decreases in blood pressure and mild azotemia 
that may occur during the initiation of therapy gener-
ally are well tolerated and do not require a decrease in 
the dose of the ACE inhibitor. However, if hypotension 
is accompanied by dizziness or if the renal dysfunction 
becomes severe, it may be necessary to reduce the dose 
of the inhibitor. Potassium retention may also become 
problematic if the patient is receiving potassium sup-
plements or a potassium-sparing diuretic. Potassium 
retention that is not responsive to these measures may 
require a reduction in the dose of an ACE inhibitor.
0
1
2
3
4
5
40
30
20
10
0
Cumulative mortality, %
ACE inhibitor
Placebo
A
0
1
2
3
4
5
40
30
20
10
0
Cumulative mortality, %
B
Time since randomization, years
OR = 0.74
p<.001
OR = 0.80
p<.0001
Figure 17-3
Meta-analysis of angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) 
inhibitors in heart failure patients with a depressed ejec-
tion fraction. A. The Kaplan-Meier curves for mortality for 
5966 HF patients with a depressed EF treated with an ACE 
inhibitor after acute myocardial infarction (three trials). B. 
The Kaplan-Meier curves for mortality for 12,763 HF patients 
with a depressed EF treated with an ACE inhibitor in five 
clinical trials, including postinfarction trials. The benefits of 
ACE inhibitors were observed early and persisted long term. 
(Modified from MD Flather et al: Lancet 355:1575, 2000.)
Figure 17-4
Treatment algorithm for chronic heart failure patients with 
a depressed ejection fraction. After the clinical diagnosis 
of HF is made, it is important to treat the patient’s fluid reten-
tion before starting an ACE inhibitor (or an ARB if the patient is 
ACE-intolerant). Beta blockers should be started after the fluid 
retention has been treated and/or the ACE inhibitor has been 
uptitrated. If the patient remains symptomatic, an ARB, an aldo-
sterone antagonist, or digoxin can be added as “triple therapy.” 
The fixed-dose combination of hydralazine/isosorbide dinitrate 
should be added to an ACE inhibitor and a beta blocker in Afri-
can-American patients with NYHA class II–IV HF. Device ther-
apy should be considered in addition to pharmacologic therapy 
in appropriate patients. HF, heart failure; ACE, angiotensin-
converting enzyme; ARB, angiotensin receptor blocker; NYHA, 
New York Heart Association; CRT, cardiac resynchronization 
therapy; ICD, implantable cardiac defibrillator.
ALGORITHM FOR TREATMENT OF CHF
Diagnosis of HF confirmed
Assess for fluid retention
Fluid retention
No fluid retention
Diuretic
ACE inhibitor*
ICD if NYHA class II–III
Beta blocker
CRT if NYHA class III–IV
and QRS >120 ms
*ARB if ACE-intolerant
ARB
Aldosterone antagonist
Hydralazine/isosorbide
digoxin
NYHA I–IV
Persistent 
symptoms 
or special 
populations
 
CHAPTER 17
Heart Failure and Cor Pulmonale
193
The side effects of ACE inhibitors related to kinin 
potentiation include a nonproductive cough (10–15% of 
patients) and angioedema (1% of patients). In patients 
who cannot tolerate ACE inhibitors because of cough 
or angioedema, angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) 
are the recommended first line of therapy (see later). 
Patients intolerant of ACE inhibitors because of hyperka-
lemia or renal insufficiency are likely to experience the 
same side effects with ARBs. In these cases, the combi-
nation of hydralazine and an oral nitrate should be con-
sidered (Table 17-5).
Angiotensin Receptor Blockers  These drugs 
are well tolerated in patients who are intolerant of ACE 
inhibitors because of cough, skin rash, and angioedema. 
ARBs should be used in symptomatic and asymptomatic 
patients with an EF <40% who are ACE-intolerant for 
reasons other than hyperkalemia or renal insufficiency 
(Table 17-5). Although ACE inhibitors and ARBs inhibit 
the renin-angiotensin system, they do so by different 
mechanisms. Whereas ACE inhibitors block the enzyme 
responsible for converting angiotensin I to angiotensin 
II, ARBs block the effects of angiotensin II on the angio-
tensin type 1 receptor. Some clinical trials have dem-
onstrated a therapeutic benefit from the addition of 
an ARB to an ACE inhibitor in patients with chronic HF. 
When given in concert with beta blockers, ARBs reverse 
the process of LV remodeling, improve patient symp-
toms, prevent hospitalization, and prolong life.
Adverse Effects  Both ACE inhibitors and ARBs 
have similar effects on blood pressure, renal function, 
and potassium. Therefore, the problems of symptomatic 
hypotension, azotemia, and hyperkalemia are similar for 
both of these agents.
a-Adrenervgic 
Receptor 
Blockers  Beta-
blocker therapy represents a major advance in the treat-
ment of patients with a depressed EF (Fig. 17-5). These 
drugs interfere with the harmful effects of sustained 
activation of the adrenergic nervous system by compet-
itively antagonizing one or more adrenergic receptors 
(α1, β1, and β2). Although there are a number of poten-
tial benefits to blocking all three receptors, most of the 
deleterious effects of adrenergic activation are medi-
ated by the β1 receptor. When given in concert with 
ACE inhibitors, beta blockers reverse the process of LV 
remodeling, improve patient symptoms, prevent hospi-
talization, and prolong life. Therefore, beta blockers are 
indicated for patients with symptomatic or asymptom-
atic HF and a depressed EF <40%.
Analogous to the use of ACE inhibitors, beta block-
ers should be initiated in low doses (Table 17-5), fol-
lowed by gradual increments in the dose if lower doses 
have been well tolerated. The dose of beta blocker 
should be increased until the doses used are similar to 
those which have been reported to be effective in clini-
cal trials (Table 17-5). However, unlike ACE inhibitors, 
which may be titrated upward relatively rapidly, the 
Figure 17-5 
Meta-analysis of beta blockers on mortality rates in 
HF patients with a depressed EF. Effect of beta block-
ers vs. placebo in patients who were not (A) or who were 
(B) receiving an angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibi-
tor or an angiotensin receptor blocker (ARB) at baseline in 
six clinical trials. There was a similar impact of beta-blocker 
therapy on the endpoints of all-cause mortality as well as 
death and heart failure hospitalization in both the presence 
BEST
CIBIS-I
CIBIS-II
COPERNICUS
MERIT-HF
US carvedilol
Overall (95% CI)
BEST
CIBIS-I
CIBIS-II
COPERNICUS
MERIT-HF
US carvedilol
Overall (95% CI)
0.84 (0.51, 1.39)
0.43 (0.08, 2.16)
1.28 (0.57, 2.85)
0.53 (0.22, 1.26)
0.62 (0.28, 1.39)
0.10 (0.00, 1.89)
0.73 (0.53, 1.02)
0.92 (0.82, 1.03)
0.83 (0.59, 1.15)
0.66 (0.54, 0.80)
0.68 (0.55, 0.84)
0.67 (0.55, 0.83)
0.44 (0.26, 0.75)
0.76 (0.71, 0.83)
38.1
6.6
13.2
17.0
20.0
5.2
37.6
5.5
19.5
16.0
18.1
3.3
Study
Study
Risk ratio
(95% CI)
Risk ratio
(95% CI)
%
Weight
%
Weight
0.1
1
10
Risk ratio
0.1
1
10
Risk ratio
No background ACE-inhibitor/ARB
Background ACE-inhibitor/ARB
A
B
and the absence of ACE inhibitor or ARB at baseline. BEST, 
Beta-Blocker Evaluation of Survival Trial (bucindolol); CIBIS, 
Cardiac Insufficiency Bisoprolol Study (bisoprolol); COPER-
NICUS, Carvedilol prOsPEctive RaNdomIzed Cumulative 
Survival (carvedilol); MERIT-HF, Metoprolol CR/XL Random-
ized Intervention Trial in Heart Failure (metoprolol CR/XL). 
(Modified from H Krum et al: Eur Heart J 26:2154, 2005.)
SECTION IV
Disorders of the Heart
194
­titration of beta blockers should proceed no more rap-
idly than at 2-week intervals, because the initiation and/
or increased dosing of these agents may lead to wors-
ening fluid retention consequent to the withdrawal 
of adrenergic support to the heart and the circulation. 
Thus, it is important to optimize the dose of diuretics 
before starting therapy with beta blockers. If worsen-
ing fluid retention does occur, it is likely to do so within 
3–5 days of the initiation of therapy, and it will be mani-
fest as an increase in body weight and/or symptoms of 
worsening HF. The increased fluid retention usually can 
be managed by increasing the dose of diuretics. In some 
patients the dose of the beta blocker may have to be 
reduced.
Contrary to early reports, the aggregate results of 
clinical trials suggest that beta-blocker therapy is well 
tolerated by the great majority (≥85%) of HF patients, 
including patients with comorbid conditions such as 
diabetes mellitus, chronic obstructive lung disease, and 
peripheral vascular disease. Nonetheless, there is a sub-
set of patients (10–15%) who remain intolerant to beta 
blockers because of worsening fluid retention or symp-
tomatic hypotension or bradycardia.
Adverse Effects  The adverse effects of beta-
blocker use generally are related to the predictable 
complications that arise from interfering with the adren-
ergic nervous system. These reactions generally occur 
within several days of the initiation of therapy and 
generally are responsive to adjustments of concomi-
tant medications, as described earlier in this chapter. 
Therapy with beta blockers can lead to bradycardia and/or 
exacerbate heart block. Accordingly, the dose of beta 
blocker should be reduced if the heart rate decreases 
to <50  beats/min and/or second- or third-degree heart 
block or symptomatic hypotension develops. Beta block-
ers are not recommended for patients who have asthma 
with active bronchospasm. Beta blockers that also block 
the α1 receptor can lead to vasodilatory side effects.
Aldosterone Antagonists  Although classified as 
potassium-sparing diuretics, drugs that block the effects 
of aldosterone (spironolactone or eplerenone) have 
beneficial effects that are independent of the effects of 
these agents on sodium balance. Although ACE inhibi-
tion may transiently decrease aldosterone secretion, 
with chronic therapy there is a rapid return of aldoste-
rone to levels similar to those before ACE inhibition. 
Accordingly, the administration of an aldosterone antag-
onist is recommended for patients with NYHA class IV 
or class III (previously class IV) HF who have a depressed 
EF (<35%) and are receiving standard therapy, including 
diuretics, ACE inhibitors, and beta blockers. The dose of 
aldosterone antagonist should be increased until the 
doses used are similar to those which have been shown 
to be effective in clinical trials (Table 17-5).
Adverse Effects  The major problem with the use 
of aldosterone antagonists is the development of life-
threatening hyperkalemia, which is more prone to occur 
in patients who are receiving potassium supplements 
or who have underlying renal insufficiency. Aldosterone 
antagonists are not recommended when the serum cre-
atinine is >2.5 mg/dL (or creatinine clearance is <30 mL/
min) or when the serum potassium is >5 mmol/L. Pain-
ful gynecomastia may develop in 10–15% of patients 
who use spironolactone, in which case eplerenone may 
be substituted.
Special Populations  The combination of 
hydralazine and isosorbide dinitrate (Table 17-5) is rec-
ommended as part of standard therapy in addition to 
beta blockers and ACE inhibitors for African Americans 
with NYHA class II–IV HF. Although the exact mechanism 
for the effects of this combination is not known, it is 
believed to be secondary to the beneficial effects of NO 
on the peripheral circulation.
Management of Patients WHO Remain 
Symptomatic  Additional pharmacologic ther-
apy should be considered in patients who have persis-
tent symptoms or progressive worsening despite opti-
mized therapy with an ACE inhibitor and a beta blocker. 
Agents that may be considered as part of additional 
therapy include an ARB, spironolactone, the combina-
tion of hydralazine and isosorbide dinitrate, and digi-
talis. The optimal choice of additional drug therapy to 
improve the outcome further has not been firmly estab-
lished. Thus, the choice of a specific agent will be influ-
enced by clinical considerations, including renal func-
tion, serum potassium concentration, blood pressure, 
and race. The triple combination of an ACE inhibitor, an 
ARB, and an aldosterone antagonist should not be used 
because of the high risk of hyperkalemia.
Digoxin is recommended for patients with symp-
tomatic LV systolic dysfunction who have concomi-
tant atrial fibrillation, and it should be considered for 
patients who have signs or symptoms of HF while 
receiving standard therapy, including ACE inhibi-
tors and beta blockers. Therapy with digoxin is com-
monly initiated and maintained at a dose of 0.125–0.25 
mg daily. For the great majority of patients, the dose 
should be 0.125 mg daily, and the serum digoxin level 
should be <1 ng/mL, especially in elderly patients, 
patients with impaired renal function, and patients 
with a low lean body mass. Higher doses (and serum 
concentrations) appear to be less beneficial. There is no 
indication for using loading doses of digoxin to initiate 
therapy in patients with HF.
Anticoagulation 
and 
Antiplatelet 
Therapy  Patients with HF have an increased risk 
for arterial or venous thromboembolic events. In ­clinical 
 
CHAPTER 17
Heart Failure and Cor Pulmonale
195
HF trials, the rate of stroke ranges from 1.3% to 2.4% per 
year. Depressed LV function is believed to promote rela-
tive stasis of blood in dilated cardiac chambers with 
increased risk of thrombus formation. Treatment with 
warfarin (goal international normalized ratio [INR] 2–3) 
is recommended for patients with HF and chronic or 
paroxysmal atrial fibrillation or with a history of systemic 
or pulmonary emboli, including stroke or transient 
ischemic attack. Patients with symptomatic or asymp-
tomatic ischemic cardiomyopathy and documented 
recent large anterior MI or recent MI with documented 
LV thrombus should be treated with warfarin (goal INR 
2–3) for the initial 3 months after the MI unless there are 
contraindications to its use.
Aspirin is recommended in HF patients with ischemic 
heart disease for the prevention of MI and death. How-
ever, lower doses of aspirin (75 or 81 mg) may be pref-
erable because of the concern of worsening of HF at 
higher doses.
Management of Cardiac Arrhyth-
mias  (See also Chap. 16) Atrial fibrillation occurs 
in 15–30% of patients with HF and is a common cause 
of cardiac decompensation. Most antiarrhythmic 
agents, with the exception of amiodarone and dofeti-
lide, have negative inotropic effects and are proar-
rhythmic. Amiodarone is a class III antiarrhythmic 
that has few or no negative inotropic and/or proar-
rhythmic effects and is effective against most supra-
ventricular arrhythmias. Amiodarone is the preferred 
drug for restoring and maintaining sinus rhythm, and 
it may improve the success of electrical cardiover-
sion in patients with HF. Amiodarone increases the 
level of phenytoin and digoxin and prolongs the INR 
in patients taking warfarin. Therefore, it is often nec-
essary to reduce the dose of these drugs by as much 
as 50% when initiating therapy with amiodarone. The 
risk of adverse events such as hyperthyroidism, hypo-
thyroidism, pulmonary fibrosis, and hepatitis is rela-
tively low, particularly when lower doses of amioda-
rone are used (100–200 mg/d).
Implantable cardiac defibrillators (ICDs; see later)  
are highly effective in treating recurrences of sustained 
ventricular tachycardia and/or ventricular fibrillation in 
HF patients with recurrent arrhythmias and/or cardiac 
syncope, and they may be used as stand-alone ther-
apy or in combination with amiodarone and/or a beta 
blocker (Chap. 16). There is no role for treating ventric-
ular arrhythmias with an antiarrhythmic agent without 
an ICD.
Device Therapy
Cardiac Resynchronization  Approxi­mately one-
third of patients with a depressed EF and symptomatic HF 
(NYHA class III–IV) manifest a QRS duration >120 ms. 
This ECG finding of abnormal inter- or ­intraventricular 
conduction has been used to identify patients with 
dyssynchronous ventricular contraction. The mechani-
cal consequences of ventricular dyssynchrony include 
suboptimal ventricular filling, a reduction in LV con-
tractility, prolonged duration (and therefore greater 
severity) of mitral regurgitation, and paradoxical septal 
wall motion. Biventricular pacing, also termed cardiac 
resynchronization therapy (CRT), stimulates both ven-
tricles nearly simultaneously, thereby improving the 
coordination of ventricular contraction and reducing 
the severity of mitral regurgitation. When CRT is added 
to optimal medical therapy in patients in sinus rhythm, 
there is a significant decrease in patient mortality rates 
and hospitalization and a reversal of LV remodeling, as 
well as improved quality of life and exercise capacity. 
Accordingly, CRT is recommended for patients in sinus 
rhythm with an EF <35% and a QRS >120 ms and those 
who remain symptomatic (NYHA III–IV) despite opti-
mal medical therapy. The benefits of CRT in patients 
with atrial fibrillation have not been clearly estab-
lished.
Implantable Cardiac Defibrillators  (See also 
Chap. 16) The prophylactic implantation of ICDs in 
patients with mild to moderate HF (NYHA class II–III) 
has been shown to reduce the incidence of sudden 
cardiac death in patients with ischemic or nonisch-
emic cardiomyopathy. Accordingly, implantation of 
an ICD should be considered for patients in NYHA 
class II–III HF with a depressed EF of <35% who are 
already on optimal background therapy, including an 
ACE inhibitor (or ARB), a beta blocker, and an aldoste-
rone antagonist. An ICD may also be combined with a 
biventricular pacemaker in patients with NYHA class 
III–IV HF.
Management of hf with a Preserved 
Ejection Fraction (>40–50%)  Despite the 
wealth of information with respect to the evaluation 
and management of HF with a depressed EF, there are 
no proven and/or approved pharmacologic or device 
therapies for the management of patients with HF and 
a preserved EF. Therefore, it is recommended that initial 
treatment efforts should be focused, wherever possi-
ble, on the underlying disease process (e.g., myocardial 
ischemia, hypertension) associated with HF with pre-
served EF. Precipitating factors such as tachycardia and 
atrial fibrillation should be treated as quickly as possible 
through rate control and restoration of sinus rhythm 
when appropriate. Dyspnea may be treated by reduc-
ing total blood volume (dietary sodium restriction and 
diuretics), decreasing central blood volume (nitrates), 
or blunting neurohormonal activation with ACE inhibi-
tors, ARBs, and/or beta blockers. Treatment with diuret-
ics and nitrates should be initiated at low doses to avoid 
hypotension and fatigue.
SECTION IV
Disorders of the Heart
196
Figure 17-6
Hemodynamic profiles in patients with acute heart fail-
ure. Most patients can be categorized into one of the four 
hemodynamic profiles by performing a brief bedside exami-
nation that includes examination of the neck veins, lungs, 
and peripheral extremities. More definitive hemodynamic 
information may be obtained by performing invasive hemo-
dynamic monitoring, particularly if the patient is gravely ill 
or if the clinical presentation is unclear. This hemodynamic 
classification provides a useful guide for selecting the ini-
tial optimal therapies for the management of acute HF. LV, 
left ventricular; CO, cardiac output; SVR, systemic vas-
cular resistance. (Modified from KL Grady et al: Circulation 
102:2443, 2000.)
Profile A
“Warm and dry”
Profile B
“Warm and wet”
No
Yes
Profile L
“Cold and dry”
No
Yes
Profile C
“Cold and wet”
↓ CO?
↑ SVR?
Elevated LV filling pressures?
Acute Decompensated HF
Defining 
an 
Appropriate 
Therapeutic 
Strategy  The therapeutic goals for the manage-
ment of acute decompensated HF (ADHF) therapy are 
to (1) stabilize the hemodynamic derangements that 
provoked the symptoms responsible for the hospital-
ization, (2) identify and treat the reversible factors that 
precipitated decompensation, and (3) reestablish an 
effective outpatient medical regimen that will prevent 
disease progression and relapse. In most instances this 
will require hospitalization, often in an intensive care 
unit (ICU) setting. Every effort should be made to iden-
tify the precipitating causes, such as infection, arrhyth-
mias, dietary indiscretion, pulmonary embolism, infec-
tive endocarditis, occult myocardial ischemia/infarction, 
and environmental and/or emotional stress (Table 17-4), 
since removal of these precipitating events is critical to 
the success of treatment.
The two primary hemodynamic determinants of 
ADHF are elevated LV filling pressures and a depressed 
cardiac output. Frequently, the depressed cardiac out-
put is accompanied by an increase in systemic vascular 
resistance (SVR) as a result of excessive neurohormonal 
activation. Because these hemodynamic derangements 
may occur singly or together, patients with acute HF 
generally present with one of four basic hemodynamic 
profiles (Fig. 17-6): normal LV filling pressure with nor-
mal perfusion (Profile A), elevated LV filling pressure 
with normal perfusion (Profile B), elevated LV filling 
pressures with decreased perfusion (Profile C), and nor-
mal or low LV filling pressure with decreased tissue per-
fusion (Profile L).
Accordingly, the therapeutic approach to treat-
ing patients with acute HF should be tailored to reflect 
the patient’s hemodynamic presentation. The goal 
should be, whenever possible, to restore the patient 
to a normal hemodynamic profile (Profile A). In many 
instances, the patient’s hemodynamic presentation can 
be approximated from the clinical examination. For 
example, patients with elevated LV filling pressures may 
have signs of fluid retention (rales, elevated neck veins, 
peripheral edema) and are referred to as being “wet,” 
whereas patients with a depressed cardiac output and 
an elevated SVR generally have poor tissue perfusion 
manifested by cool distal extremities and are referred 
to as being “cold.” Nonetheless, it should be emphasized 
that patients with chronic heart failure may not have 
rales or evidence of peripheral edema at the time of the 
initial presentation with acute decompensation, and 
this may lead to the underrecognition of elevated fill-
ing pressures. In these patients, it may be appropriate to 
perform invasive hemodynamic monitoring.
Patients who are not congested and have normal tis-
sue perfusion are referred to as being “dry” and “warm,” 
respectively. When acute HF patients present to the 
hospital with Profile A, their symptoms are often due 
to conditions other than HF (e.g., pulmonary or hepatic 
disease or transient myocardial ischemia). More com-
monly, however, acute HF patients present with con-
gestive symptoms (“warm and wet” [Profile B]), in which 
case treatment of the elevated filling pressures with 
diuretics and vasodilators is warranted to reduce LV 
filling pressures. Profile B includes most patients with 
acute pulmonary edema. The treatment of this life-
threatening condition is described in Chap. 28.
Patients also may present with congestion and a 
significantly elevated SVR and reduction of cardiac out-
put (“cold and wet” [Profile C]). In these patients, car-
diac output can be increased and LV filling pressures 
reduced by using intravenous vasodilators. Intravenous 
inotropic agents with vasodilating action (dobutamine, 
low-dose dopamine, milrinone [Table 17-6]) augment 
cardiac output by stimulating myocardial contractility as 
well as by functionally unloading the heart.
Patients who present with Profile L (“cold and dry”) 
should be carefully evaluated by right-heart catheteriza-
tion for the presence of an occult elevation of LV filling 
pressures. If LV filling pressures are low (pulmonary cap-
illary wedge pressure [PCWP] <12 mmHg), a cautious 
trial of fluid repletion may be considered. The goals of 
further therapy depend on the clinical situation. Ther-
apy to reach the aforementioned goals may not be pos-
sible in some patients, particularly if they have dispro-
portionate RV dysfunction or if they develop cardiorenal 
 
CHAPTER 17
Heart Failure and Cor Pulmonale
197
Table 17-6
Drugs for the Treatment for Acute Heart 
Failure
Initiating Dose
Maximal Dose
Vasodilators
Nitroglycerin
20 μg/min
40–400 μg/min
Nitroprusside
10 μg/min
30–350 μg/min
Nesiritide
Bolus 2 μg/kg
0.01–0.03 μg/kg per 
mina
Inotropes
Dobutamine
1–2 μg/kg 
per min
2–10 μg/kg per minb
Milrinone
Bolus 50 μg/kg
0.1–0.75 μg/kg 
per minb
Dopamine
1–2 μg/kg 
per min
2–4 μg/kg per minb
Levosimendan
Bolus 12 μg/kg
0.1–0.2 μg/kg 
per minc
Vasoconstrictors
Dopamine for 
hypotension
5 μg/kg per min
5–15 μg/kg per min
Epinephrine
0.5 μg/kg per min
50 μg/kg per min
Phenylephrine
0.3 μg/kg per min
3 μg/kg per min
Vasopressin
0.05 units/min
0.1–0.4 units/min
aUsually <4 μg/kg/min.
bInotropes will also have vasodilatory properties.
cApproved outside the United States for management of acute 
heart failure.
syndrome, in which renal function deteriorates during 
aggressive diuresis. Worsening renal dysfunction occurs 
in approximately 25% of patients hospitalized with HF 
and is associated with prolonged hospital stays and 
higher mortality rates after discharge.
Pharmacologic Management of Acute HF
(Table 17-6)
Vasodilators  After diuretics, intravenous vasodila-
tors are the most useful medications for the manage-
ment of acute HF. By stimulating guanylyl cyclase within 
smooth-muscle cells, nitroglycerin, nitroprusside, and 
nesiritide exert dilating effects on arterial resistance and 
venous capacitance vessels, which results in a lowering 
of LV filling pressure, a reduction in mitral regurgitation, 
and improved forward cardiac output without increas-
ing heart rate or causing arrhythmias. Hypotension is 
the most common side effect of all vasodilating agents.
Intravenous nitroglycerin generally is begun at 
20  μg/min and is increased in 20-μg increments until 
patient symptoms are improved or PCWP is decreased 
to 16  mmHg without reducing systolic blood pressure 
below 80 mmHg. The most common side effect of IV or 
oral nitrates is headache, which, if mild, can be treated 
with analgesics and often resolves during continued 
therapy. Nitroprusside generally is initiated at 10 μg/min 
and increased by 10–20 μg every 10–20 min as toler-
ated, with the same hemodynamic goals as described 
above. The rapidity of onset and offset, with a half-life 
of approximately 2 min, facilitates early establishment 
of an individual patient’s optimal level of vasodilation 
in the ICU. The major limitation of nitroprusside is side 
effects from cyanide toxicity, which manifests predomi-
nantly as gastrointestinal and central nervous system 
manifestations and is most likely to occur in patients 
receiving >250 μg/min for over 48 h.
Nesiritide, the newest vasodilator, is a recombinant 
form of brain-type natriuretic peptide, which is an 
endogenous peptide secreted primarily from the LV in 
response to an increase in wall stress. Nesiritide is given 
as a bolus (2 μg/kg) followed by a fixed-dose infusion 
(0.01–0.03 μg/kg per min). Nesiritide effectively lowers 
LV filling pressures and improves symptoms during the 
treatment of acute HF. Headache is less common with 
nesiritide than with nitroglycerin. Although termed a 
natriuretic peptide, nesiritide has not been associated 
with major diuresis when used alone in clinical trials. It 
does, however, appear to potentiate the effect of con-
comitant diuretics such that the total required diuretic 
dose may be slightly lower. There have, however, been 
recent concerns about the adverse effects of neseritide 
on renal function in acute decompensated HF which 
may be related to the initial bolus.
Inotropic Agents  Positive inotropic agents pro-
duce direct hemodynamic benefits by stimulating car-
diac contractility as well as by producing peripheral 
vasodilation. Collectively, these hemodynamic effects 
result in an improvement in cardiac output and a fall in 
LV filling pressures.
Dobutamine, which is the most commonly used ino-
tropic agent for the treatment of acute HF, exerts its 
effects by stimulating β1 and β2 receptors, with little 
effect on α1 receptors. Dobutamine is given as a con-
tinuous infusion at an initial infusion rate of 1–2 μg/kg 
per min. Higher doses (>5 μg/kg per min) are frequently 
necessary for severe hypoperfusion; however, there is 
little added benefit to increasing the dose above 10 μg/
kg per min. Patients maintained on chronic infusions 
for >72 h generally develop tachyphylaxis and require 
increasing doses.
Milrinone is a phosphodiesterase III inhibitor that leads 
to increased cyclic AMP by inhibiting its breakdown. 
Milrinone may act synergistically with β-adrenergic ago-
nists to achieve a greater increase in cardiac output than 
is achieved with either agent alone, and it may also be 
more effective than dobutamine in increasing cardiac 
output in the presence of beta blockers. Milrinone may 
SECTION IV
Disorders of the Heart
198
be administered as a bolus dose of 50 μg/kg per min, 
followed by a continuous infusion rate of 0.1–0.75 μg/kg 
per min. If the patient has a low blood pressure, many 
clinicians will omit the bolus dose. Because milrinone is a 
more effective vasodilator than dobutamine, it produces 
a greater reduction in LV filling pressures, albeit with a 
greater risk of hypotension.
Although short-term use of inotropes provides 
hemodynamic benefits, these agents are more prone 
to cause tachyarrhythmias and ischemic events than 
vasodilators are. Therefore, inotropes are most appropri-
ately used in clinical settings in which vasodilators and 
diuretics are not helpful, such as in patients with poor 
systemic perfusion and/or cardiogenic shock, patients 
requiring short-term hemodynamic support after an MI 
or surgery, and patients awaiting cardiac transplanta-
tion, or palliative care as in patients with advanced HF. 
If patients require sustained use of intravenous inotro-
pes, strong consideration should be given to the use of 
an ICD to safeguard against the proarrhythmic effects of 
these agents.
Vasoconstrictors  Vasoconstrictors are used to 
support systemic blood pressure in patients with HF. Of 
the three agents that are commonly used (Table 17-6), 
dopamine is generally the first choice for therapy in 
situations in which modest inotropy and pressor sup-
port are required. Dopamine is an endogenous cat-
echolamine that stimulates β1 and α1 receptors and 
dopaminergic receptors (DA1 and DA2) in the heart 
and circulation. The effects of dopamine are dose-
dependent. Low doses of dopamine (<2 μg/kg per 
min) stimulate the DA1 and DA2 receptors and cause 
vasodilation of the splanchnic and renal vasculature. 
Moderate doses (2–4 μg/kg per min) stimulate the β1 
receptors and cause an increase in cardiac output with 
little or no change in heart rate or SVR. At higher doses 
(≥5 μg/kg per min) the effects of dopamine on the α1 
receptors overwhelm the dopaminergic receptors, 
and vasoconstriction ensues, leading to an increase 
in SVR, LV filling pressures, and heart rate. Significant 
additional inotropic and blood pressure support can 
be provided by epinephrine, phenylephrine, and vaso-
pressin (Table 17-6); however, prolonged use of these 
agents can lead to renal and hepatic failure and can 
cause gangrene of the limbs. Therefore, these agents 
should not be administered except in true emergency 
situations.
Vasopressin Antagonists  Vasopressin levels are 
often elevated in patients with HF and LV dysfunction 
and may contribute to the hyponatremia that develops 
in HF patients. Vasopressin antagonists reduce body 
weight and edema and normalize serum sodium in 
patients with hyponatremia but have not been associ-
ated with improved patient outcomes in clinical ­trials. 
Tolvaptan (oral) and conivaptan (IV) are currently 
approved for the treatment of hyponatremia but are 
not approved for the treatment of HF.
Mechanical and Surgical Interventions  If 
pharmacologic interventions fail to stabilize a patient 
with refractory HF, mechanical and surgical interven-
tions may provide effective circulatory support. These 
interventions include intraaortic balloon counter pulsa-
tion, percutaneous and surgically implanted LV assist 
devices, and cardiac transplantation (Chap. 18).
Planning 
for 
Hospital 
Discharge  Patient 
education should take place during the entire hospi-
talization, with a specific focus on salt and fluid status 
and obtaining daily weights, in addition to medication 
schedules. Although the majority of patients hospital-
ized with HF can be stabilized and returned to a good 
level of function on an oral regimen designed to main-
tain stability, 30–50% of patients discharged with a 
diagnosis of HF are rehospitalized within 3–6 months. 
Although there are multiple reasons for rehospitaliza-
tion, failure to meet criteria for discharge is perhaps the 
most common. Criteria for discharge should include 
at least 24 h of stable fluid status, blood pressure, and 
renal function on the oral regimen planned for home. 
Before discharge, patients should be free of dyspnea or 
symptomatic hypotension while at rest, washing, and 
walking on the ward.
Cor Pulmonale
Definition
Cor pulmonale, often referred to as pulmonary heart dis-
ease, is defined as dilation and hypertrophy of the right 
ventricle in response to diseases of the pulmonary vas-
culature and/or lung parenchyma. Historically, this 
definition has excluded congenital heart disease and 
those diseases in which the right heart fails secondary to 
dysfunction of the left side of the heart.
Etiology and Epidemiology
Cor pulmonale develops in response to acute or chronic 
changes in the pulmonary vasculature and/or the lung 
parenchyma that are sufficient to cause pulmonary 
hypertension. The true prevalence of cor pulmonale 
is difficult to ascertain for two reasons. First, not all 
patients with chronic lung disease will develop cor pul-
monale, and second, our ability to diagnose pulmonary 
hypertension and cor pulmonale by routine physical 
examination and laboratory testing is relatively insensi-
tive. However, advances in 2-D echo/Doppler imaging 
and biomarkers (BNP) make it easier to screen for and 
detect cor pulmonale.
 
CHAPTER 17
Heart Failure and Cor Pulmonale
199
Table 17-7
Etiology of Chronic Cor Pulmonale
Diseases Leading to Hypoxemic Vasoconstriction
Chronic bronchitis
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Cystic fibrosis
Chronic hypoventilation
  Obesity
  Neuromuscular disease
  Chest wall dysfunction
Living at high altitudes
Diseases That Cause Occlusion of the Pulmonary 
Vascular Bed
Thromboembolic disease, acute or chronic
Pulmonary arterial hypertension
Pulmonary venoocclusive disease
Diseases That Lead to Parenchymal Disease
Chronic bronchitis
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Bronchiectasis
Cystic fibrosis
Pneumoconiosis
Sarcoidosis
Interstitial lung disease
Once patients with chronic pulmonary or pul-
monary vascular disease develop cor pulmonale, the 
prognosis worsens. Although chronic obstructive pul-
monary disease (COPD) and chronic bronchitis are 
responsible for approximately 50% of the cases of cor 
pulmonale in North America, any disease that affects 
the pulmonary vasculature (Chap. 40) or parenchyma 
can lead to cor pulmonale. Table 17-7 provides a list 
of common diseases that may lead to cor pulmonale. 
In contrast to COPD, the elevation in pulmonary 
artery pressure appears to be substantially higher 
in the interstitial lung diseases, in which there is an 
inverse correlation between pulmonary artery pres-
sure and the diffusion capacity for carbon monox-
ide, as well as patient survival. When cor pulmonale 
occurs in conjunction with obstructive sleep apnea, 
typically COPD or a hypoventilation syndrome (e.g., 
obesity hypoventilation syndrome [OHS]) is present 
concurrently.
Pathophysiology and Basic 
Mechanisms
Although many conditions can lead to cor pulmonale, 
the common pathophysiologic mechanism in each case 
is pulmonary hypertension that is sufficient to lead to 
RV dilation, with or without the development of con-
comitant RV hypertrophy. The systemic consequences 
of cor pulmonale relate to alterations in cardiac output 
as well as salt and water homeostasis. Anatomically, the 
RV is a thin-walled, compliant chamber that is better 
suited to handle volume overload than pressure over-
load. Thus, the sustained pressure overload imposed by 
pulmonary hypertension and increased pulmonary vas-
cular resistance eventually causes the RV to fail.
The response of the RV to pulmonary hypertension 
depends on the acuteness and severity of the pressure 
overload. Acute cor pulmonale occurs after a sudden 
and severe stimulus (e.g., massive pulmonary embolus), 
with RV dilatation and failure but no RV hypertro-
phy. Chronic cor pulmonale, however, is associated 
with a more slowly evolving and progressive pulmonary 
hypertension that leads to initial modest RV hypertro-
phy and subsequent RV dilation.
Decompensation of chronic cor pulmonale can be 
aggravated by intermittent events that induce pulmo-
nary vasoconstriction and RV afterload, such as hypox-
emia and especially hypercarbia-induced respiratory aci-
dosis (e.g., OHS), as well as sustained events, including 
COPD exacerbations, acute pulmonary emboli, and 
positive-pressure (mechanical) ventilation. RV fail-
ure also can be precipitated by alterations in RV vol-
ume that occur in various settings, including increased 
salt and fluid retention, atrial arrhythmias, polycythe-
mia, sepsis, and a large left-to-right (extracardiac) shunt. 
The most common mechanisms that lead to pulmonary 
hypertension, are vasoconstriction, activation of the 
clotting cascade, and obliteration of pulmonary arterial 
vessels, are discussed in Chap. 40.
Clinical Manifestations
Symptoms
The symptoms of chronic cor pulmonale generally are 
related to the underlying pulmonary disorder. Dyspnea, 
the most common symptom, is usually the result of 
the increased work of breathing secondary to changes 
in elastic recoil of the lung (fibrosing lung diseases), 
altered respiratory mechanics (e.g., overinflation with 
COPD), or inefficient ventilation (e.g., primary pulmo-
nary ­vascular disease). Orthopnea and paroxysmal noc-
turnal dyspnea are rarely symptoms of isolated right HF 
and usually point toward concurrent left heart dysfunc-
tion. Rarely, these symptoms reflect increased work of 
breathing in the supine position resulting from compro-
mised diaphragmatic excursion. Tussive or effort-related 
syncope may occur because of the inability of the RV 
to deliver blood adequately to the left side of the heart. 
Abdominal pain and ascites that occur with cor pulmo-
nale are similar to the right-heart failure that ensues in 
chronic HF. Lower-extremity edema may occur sec-
ondary to neurohormonal activation, elevated RV fill-
ing pressures, or increased levels of carbon dioxide and 
hypoxemia, which can lead to peripheral vasodilation 
and edema formation.
SECTION IV
Disorders of the Heart
200
Signs
Many of the signs encountered in cor pulmonale are 
also present in HF patients with a depressed EF, includ-
ing tachypnea, elevated jugular venous pressures, hepa-
tomegaly, and lower-extremity edema. Patients may 
have prominent v waves in the jugular venous pulse as 
a result of tricuspid regurgitation. Other cardiovascular 
signs include an RV heave palpable along the left sternal 
border or in the epigastrium. The increase in intensity 
of the holosystolic murmur of tricuspid regurgitation 
with inspiration (“Carvallo’s sign”) may be lost eventu-
ally as RV failure worsens. Cyanosis is a late finding in 
cor pulmonale and is secondary to a low cardiac output 
with systemic vasoconstriction and ventilation-perfusion 
mismatches in the lung.
Diagnosis
The most common cause of right-heart failure is not 
pulmonary parenchymal or vascular disease but left 
heart failure. Therefore, it is important to evaluate 
the patient for LV systolic and diastolic dysfunction. 
The ECG in severe pulmonary hypertension shows P 
pulmonale, right axis deviation, and RV hypertrophy. 
Radiographic examination of the chest may show 
enlargement of the main pulmonary artery, the hilar 
vessels, and the descending right pulmonary artery. 
­Spirometry and lung volumes can identify obstruc-
tive and/or restrictive defects indicative of parenchy-
mal lung diseases; arterial blood gases can demonstrate 
hypoxemia and/or hypercapnia. Spiral computed 
tomography (CT) scans of the chest are useful in 
diagnosing acute thromboembolic disease; however, 
ventilation-perfusion lung scanning remains best 
suited for diagnosing chronic thromboembolic disease. 
A high-resolution CT scan of the chest can identify 
interstitial lung disease.
Two-dimensional echocardiography is useful for 
measuring RV thickness and chamber dimensions as 
well as the anatomy of the pulmonary and tricuspid 
valves. Location of the RV behind the sternum and its 
crescent shape challenge assessment of RV function by 
echocardiography, especially when parenchymal lung 
disease is present. Calculated measures of RV function 
(e.g., tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion [TAPSE] 
or the Tei Index) supplement more subjective assess-
ments of RV function. The interventricular septum 
may move paradoxically during systole in the presence 
of pulmonary hypertension. As noted, Doppler echo-
cardiography can be used to assess pulmonary artery 
pressures. MRI is also useful for assessing RV struc-
ture and function, particularly in patients who are dif-
ficult to image with 2-D echocardiography because of 
severe lung disease. Right-heart catheterization is use-
ful for confirming the diagnosis of pulmonary hyper-
tension and for excluding elevated left-heart pressures 
(measured as the PCWP) as a cause for right-heart fail-
ure. BNP and N-terminal BNP levels are elevated in 
patients with cor pulmonale secondary to RV stretch 
and may be dramatically elevated in acute pulmonary 
embolism.
Treatment	
Cor Pulmonale
The primary treatment goal of cor pulmonale is to tar-
get the underlying pulmonary disease, since this will 
decrease pulmonary vascular resistance and lessen RV 
afterload. Most pulmonary diseases that lead to chronic 
cor pulmonale are advanced and therefore are less ame-
nable to treatment. General principles of treatment 
include decreasing work of breathing by using nonin-
vasive mechanical ventilation and bronchodilation, as 
well as treating any underlying infection. Adequate oxy-
genation (oxygen saturation ≥90–92%) and correcting 
respiratory acidosis are vital for decreasing pulmonary 
vascular resistance and reducing demands on the RV. 
Patients should be transfused if they are anemic, and 
phlebotomy may be considered in extreme cases of 
polycythemia.
Diuretics are effective in RV failure, and indications 
are similar to those for chronic HF. One caveat of chronic 
diuretic use is to avoid inducing contraction alkalosis 
and worsening hypercapnia. Digoxin is of uncertain 
benefit in the treatment of cor pulmonale and may lead 
to arrhythmias in the setting of tissue hypoxemia and 
acidosis. Therefore, if digoxin is administered, it should 
be given at low doses and monitored carefully.
Pulmonary vasodilators can effectively improve 
symptoms through modest reduction of pulmonary 
pressures and RV afterload when isolated pulmo-
nary arterial hypertension is present. Vasodilators are 
unproven in cases of pulmonary hypertension and 
cor pulmonale due to parenchymal lung diseases or 
hypoventilation syndromes. The treatment of pulmo-
nary hypertension is discussed in Chap. 40.
 Sharon A. Hunt 
I  Hari R. Mallidi 
201
 Advanced or end-stage heart failure is an increasingly 
frequent sequela, as progressively more effective pallia-
tion for the earlier stages of heart disease and prevention 
of sudden death associated with heart disease become 
more widely recognized and employed ( Chap. 17 ). 
When patients with end-stage or refractory heart failure 
are identifi ed, the physician is faced with the decision 
of advising compassionate end-of-life care or choosing 
to recommend extraordinary life-extending measures. 
For the occasional patient who is relatively young and 
without serious comorbidities, the latter may represent 
a reasonable option. Current therapeutic options are 
limited to cardiac transplantation (with the option of 
mechanical cardiac assistance as a “bridge” to transplan-
tation) or (at least in theory) the option of permanent 
mechanical assistance of the circulation. In the future, it 
is possible that genetic modulation of ventricular func-
tion or cell-based cardiac repair will be options for such 
patients. Currently, both approaches are considered to 
be experimental. 
 CArdiAC trAnsPlAntAtion 
 Surgical techniques for orthotopic transplantation of 
the heart were devised in the 1960s and taken into 
the clinical arena in 1967. The procedure did not gain 
widespread clinical acceptance until the introduc-
tion of “modern” and more effective immunosuppres-
sion in the early 1980s. By the 1990s, the demand for 
transplantable hearts met, and then exceeded, the avail-
able donor supply and leveled off at about 4000 heart 
transplants annually worldwide, according to data from 
the Registry of the International Society for Heart and 
 CARDIAC TRANSPLANTATION AND 
PROLONGED ASSISTED CIRCULATION 
 CHAPter 18 
Lung Transplantation (ISHLT). Subsequently, heart 
transplant activity in the United States has remained 
stable at ∼2200/year, but worldwide activity reported 
to this registry has decreased somewhat. This appar-
ent decline in numbers may be a result of the fact that 
reporting is legally mandated in the United States, but 
not elsewhere, and several countries have started their 
own databases. 
 SurgicAl tecHniQue 
 Donor and recipient hearts are excised in virtually iden-
tical operations with incisions made across the atria and 
atrial septum at the midatrial level (leaving the poste-
rior walls of the atria in place) and across the great ves-
sels just above the semilunar valves. The donor heart is 
generally “harvested” in an anatomically identical man-
ner by a separate surgical team and transported from 
the donor hospital in a bag of iced saline solution and 
then is reanastomosed into the waiting recipient in 
the orthotopic or normal anatomic position. The only 
change in surgical technique since this method was 
fi rst described has been a movement in recent years to 
move the right atrial anastamosis back to the level of 
the superior and inferior vena cavae to better preserve 
right atrial geometry and prevent atrial arrhythmias. 
Both methods of implantation leave the recipient with 
a surgically denervated heart that does not respond to 
any direct sympathetic or parasympathetic stimuli but 
does respond to circulating catecholamines. The physi-
ologic responses of the denervated heart to the demands 
of exercise are atypical but quite adequate to carry on 
normal physical activity. 
202
SECTION IV
Disorders of the Heart
Donor Allocation System
In the United States, the allocation of donor organs is 
accomplished under the supervision of the United Net-
work for Organ Sharing (UNOS), a private organiza-
tion under contract to the federal government. The 
United States is divided geographically into eleven 
regions for donor heart allocation. Allocation of donor 
hearts within a region is decided according to a system 
of priority that takes into account (1) the severity of 
illness, (2) geographic distance from the donor, and 
(3) patient time on the waiting list. A physiologic limit 
of ∼3 h of “ischemic” (out-of-body) time for hearts 
precludes a national sharing of hearts. This allocation 
system design is reissued annually and is responsive to 
input from a variety of constituencies, including both 
donor families and transplant professionals.
At the current time, highest priority according to 
severity of illness is assigned to patients requiring hos-
pitalization at the transplant center for IV inotro-
pic support with a pulmonary artery catheter in place 
for hemodynamic monitoring or to patients requiring 
mechanical circulatory support (i.e., intraaortic bal-
loon pump [IABP], right or left ventricular assist device 
[RVAD, LVAD], extracorporeal membrane oxygen-
ation [ECMO], or mechanical ventilation). Second 
highest priority is given to patients requiring ongoing 
inotropic support, but without a pulmonary artery cath-
eter in place. All other patients have priority according 
to their time accrued on the waiting list, and matching 
is achieved only according to ABO blood group com-
patibility and gross body size compatibility, although 
some patients who are “presensitized” and have pre-
existing anti-HLA antibodies (commonly multiparous 
women or patients previously multiply transfused) 
undergo prospective cross-matching with the donor. 
While HLA matching of donor and recipient would be 
ideal, the relatively small numbers of patients, as well 
as the time constraints involved, make such matching 
impractical.
Indications/Contraindications
Heart failure is an increasingly common cause of 
death, particularly in the elderly. Most patients who 
reach what has recently been categorized as stage D, 
or refractory end-stage heart failure, are appropriately 
treated with compassionate end-of-life care. A subset of 
such patients who are younger and without significant 
comorbidities can be considered as candidates for heart 
transplantation. Exact criteria vary in different centers 
but generally take into consideration the patient’s physi-
ologic age and the existence of comorbidities such as 
peripheral or cerebrovascular disease, obesity, diabetes, 
cancer, or chronic infection.
Results
A registry organized by the ISHLT has tracked world-
wide and U.S. survival rates after heart transplantation 
since 1982. The most recent update reveals 83% and 
76% survival 1 and 3 years posttransplant, or a posttrans-
plant “half-life” of 10 years (Fig. 18-1). The quality 
of life in these patients is generally excellent, with well 
over 90% of patients in the registry returning to normal 
and unrestricted function following transplantation.
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22
Years
Survival (%)     
Half-life = 10 years
Conditional Half-life = 13 years
N = 74,267
Heart transplantation Kaplan-Meier survival  (1/1982–6/2006)
Figure 18-1 
Survival was calculated using the Kaplan-Meier method, 
which incorporates information from all transplants for whom 
any follow-up has been provided. Because many patients are 
still alive and some patients have been lost to follow-up, the 
survival rates are estimates rather than exact rates because 
the time of death is not known for all patients. Therefore, 
95% confidence limits are provided. (From J Heart Lung 
Transplant 2008; 27:937–983.)
 
CHAPTER 18
Cardiac Transplantation and Prolonged Assisted Circulation
203
Immunosuppression
Medical regimens employed to provide suppression of 
the normal immune response to a solid organ allograft 
vary from center to center and are in a constant state of 
evolution, as more effective agents with improved side-
effect profiles and less toxicity are introduced. All cur-
rently used regimens are nonspecific, providing general 
hyporeactivity to foreign antigens rather than donor- 
specific hyporeactivity, and also providing the attendant, 
and unwanted, susceptibility to infections and malig-
nancy. Most cardiac transplant programs currently use 
a three-drug regimen including a calcineurin inhibitor 
(cyclosporine or tacrolimus), an inhibitor of T cell pro-
liferation or differentiation (azathioprine, mycophenolate 
mofetil, or sirolimus), and at least a short initial course of 
glucocorticoids. Many programs also include an initial 
“induction” course of polyclonal or monoclonal anti-T 
cell antibodies in the perioperative period to decrease the 
frequency or severity of early posttransplant rejection. 
Most recently introduced have been monoclonal anti-
bodies (daclizumab and basiliximab) that block the inter-
leukin 2 receptor and may provide prevention of allograft 
rejection without additional global immunosuppression.
Diagnosis of cardiac allograft rejection is usually 
made with the use of endomyocardial biopsy, either 
done on a surveillance basis or in response to clini-
cal deterioration. Biopsy surveillance is performed on 
a regular basis in most programs for the first year post-
operatively and for the first 5 years in many programs. 
Therapy consists of augmentation of immunosuppres-
sion, the intensity and duration of which is dictated by 
the severity of the rejection.
Late Posttransplant Management 
Issues
Increasing numbers of heart transplant patients are sur-
viving for years following transplantation and constitute 
a population of patients with a number of long-term 
management issues.
Allograft coronary artery disease
Despite usually having young donor hearts, cardiac 
allograft recipients are prone to develop coronary artery 
disease (CAD). This CAD is generally a diffuse, con-
centric, and longitudinal process that is quite different 
from “ordinary” atherosclerotic CAD, which is more 
focal and often eccentric. The underlying etiology is 
most likely primarily immunologic injury of the vascu-
lar endothelium, but a variety of risk factors influence 
its existence and progression and include nonimmu-
nologic factors such as dyslipidemia, diabetes mellitus, 
and cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection. It is hoped that 
newer and improved immunosuppressive modalities will 
reduce the incidence and impact of these devastating 
complications, which currently account for the major-
ity of late posttransplant deaths. Thus far, the immu-
nosuppressive agents mycophenolate mofetil and the 
mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitors 
sirolimus and everolimus have been shown to be asso-
ciated with short-term lesser incidence and extent of 
coronary intimal thickening; in anecdotal reports, insti-
tution of sirolimus was associated with some reversal of 
the disease. The use of statins has also been shown to be 
associated with a reduced incidence of this vasculopa-
thy, and these drugs are now almost universally used in 
transplant recipients unless contraindicated. Palliation of 
the disease with percutaneous interventions is probably 
safe and effective in the short term, although the disease 
often advances relentlessly. Because of the denervated 
status of the organ, patients rarely experience angina 
pectoris, even with advanced stages of the disease.
Retransplantation is the only definitive form of 
therapy for advanced allograft CAD, but the scarcity of 
donor hearts makes the decision to pursue retransplanta-
tion a difficult one in an individual patient, as well as a 
difficult ethical issue.
Malignancy
The occurrence of an increased incidence of malig-
nancy is a well-recognized sequela of any program of 
chronic immunosuppression, and organ transplanta-
tion is no exception. Lymphoproliferative disorders are 
among the most frequent posttransplant complications 
and, in most cases, seem to be driven by the Epstein-
Barr virus. Effective therapy includes reduction of 
immunosuppression (a clear “double-edged sword” in 
the setting of a life-sustaining organ), antiviral agents, 
and traditional chemo- and radiotherapy. Most recently, 
specific antilymphocyte (CD20) therapy has shown 
great promise. Cutaneous malignancies (both basal cell 
and squamous cell carcinomas) also occur with increased 
frequency in transplant recipients and can pursue very 
aggressive courses. The role of decreasing immunosup-
pression for treatment of these cancers is far less clear.
Infections
The use of currently available nonspecific immuno-
suppressive modalities to prevent allograft rejection 
naturally results in an increased susceptibility to infec-
tious complications in transplant recipients. Although 
their incidence has decreased since the introduction of 
cyclosporine, infections with unusual and opportunis-
tic organisms remain the major cause of death during 
the first postoperative year and remain a threat to the 
chronically immunosuppressed patient throughout life. 
Effective therapy depends on careful surveillance for 
early signs and symptoms of opportunistic infection and 
204
SECTION IV
Disorders of the Heart
an extremely aggressive approach to obtaining a specific 
diagnosis as well as expertise in recognizing the more 
common clinical presentations of CMV, Aspergillus, and 
other opportunistic infectious agents.
Prolonged Assisted Circulation
The modern era of mechanical circulatory support can be 
traced back to 1953, when cardiopulmonary bypass was 
first used in a clinical setting and ushered in the possibil-
ity of brief periods of circulatory support to permit open-
heart surgery. Subsequently, a variety of extracorporeal 
pumps to provide circulatory support for brief periods 
of time have been developed. The use of a mechanical 
device to support the circulation for more than a few 
hours initially developed slowly, with the implant of 
a total artificial heart in 1969 in Texas by Cooley. This 
patient survived for 60 h until a donor organ became 
available, at which point he was transplanted. Unfortu-
nately, the patient died of pulmonary complications after 
transplantation. The entire field of mechanical replace-
ment of the heart took a decade-long hiatus until the 
1980s, when total artificial hearts were reintroduced with 
much publicity; however, they failed to produce the 
hoped-for treatment of end-stage heart disease. Starting 
in the 1970s, parallel to the development of the total arti-
ficial heart, there was intense research in the development 
of ventricular assist devices, which provide mechanical 
assistance to (rather than replacement of  ) the failing ven-
tricle (currently, newer versions of the total artificial heart 
are in preliminary clinical trials).
Although conceived of initially as alternatives to 
biologic replacement of the heart, LVADs were intro-
duced as, and are still employed primarily as, tempo-
rary “bridges” to heart transplantation in candidates 
who begin to fail medical therapy before a donor heart 
becomes available. Several devices are approved by the 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and are cur-
rently in widespread use. Those that are implantable 
within the body are compatible with hospital discharge 
and offer the patient a chance for life at home while 
waiting for a donor heart. However successful such 
“bridging” is for the individual patient, it does noth-
ing to alleviate the scarcity of donor hearts; the ultimate 
goal in the field remains that of providing a reasonable 
alternative to biologic replacement of the heart—one 
that is widely and easily available and cost-effective.
Current Indications and 
Applications of Ventricular  
Assist Devices
Currently, there are two major indications for long-
term ventricular assistance. First, patients with chronic 
end-stage heart failure are eligible for mechanical sup-
port if they are at risk of imminent death from cardio-
genic shock. Second, if patients have a left ventricular 
ejection fraction < 25%, peak VO2 < 14 mL/kg/min, 
or are dependent on inotropic therapy or support with 
intraaortic balloon counterpulsation, they may be eligi-
ble for mechanical support. If they are eligible for heart 
transplantation, the mechanical circulatory assistance is 
termed “bridge to transplantation.” By contrast, if the 
patient has a contraindication to heart transplantation, 
the device therapy is deemed to be “destination” left 
ventricular assistance therapy.
Available Devices
In the United States, there are currently four FDA-
approved devices that are used as bridges to trans-
plantation in adults. Of these four devices, one is also 
approved for use as destination therapy or long-term 
mechanical support of the heart. There are a number of 
other devices that are approved only for short-term sup-
port for post-cardiac surgery shock or for patients with 
cardiogenic shock secondary to acute myocardial infarc-
tion or fulminant myocarditis; these will not be con-
sidered here. None of the long-term devices as yet are 
totally implantable and, because of this need for transcu-
taneous connections, all share a common problem with 
infectious complications. Likewise, all share some ten-
dency to thromboembolic complications as well as the 
expected possibility of mechanical device failure com-
mon to any machine.
The CardioWest total artificial heart (TAH) (Syn-
cardia, Tucson, AZ) is a pneumatic, biventricular, 
orthotopically implanted total artificial heart with an 
externalized driveline connecting it to its console. It 
consists of two spherical polyurethane chambers with 
polyurethane diaphragms. Inflow and outflow conduits 
are constructed of Dacron and contain Medtronic-Hall 
(Medtronic, Inc., Minneapolis, MN) valves. It is cur-
rently the only FDA-approved device for use as a bridge 
to transplantation in patients who have severe biventric-
ular failure.
The Thoratec LVAD (Thoratec Corp., Pleasanton, 
CA) is an extracorporeal pump that takes blood from 
a large cannula placed in the left ventricular apex and 
propels it forward through an outflow cannula inserted 
into the ascending aorta. The pump itself sits in the 
paracorporeal position on the abdomen and is attached 
to a device console cart with wheels, allowing for lim-
ited ambulation. The extracorporeal nature of this 
pump allows it to be used in small adults for whom 
intracorporeal pumps would be too large.
The Novacor LVAD (WorldHeart, Inc., Oakland, 
CA) also takes blood from the left ventricular apex 
through a cannula and propels it into the ascending 
aorta through a second cannula. With this device, the 
 
CHAPTER 18
Cardiac Transplantation and Prolonged Assisted Circulation
205
pump itself is placed in a surgically created pocket in 
the peritoneal fascia in the abdomen. A driveline that 
connects to the power source is tunneled subcutane-
ously and usually exits in the right upper quadrant of 
the abdomen.
The HeartMate XVE LVAD (Thoratec Corp., Pleas-
anton, CA) is an intracorporeal left ventricular assist 
device that has an externalized driveline. The pump sits 
in the anterior abdominal wall with cannulae that tra-
verse across the diaphragm. There is a drainage cannula 
in the left ventricular apex, and the blood is expelled 
from the pump into the ascending aorta via a synthetic 
vascular graft. This device may be used as a bridge to 
transplantation and patients may be discharged from 
the hospital with this device to await transplantation. 
The HeartMate XVE LVAD is now one of two FDA-
approved devices for destination therapy.
The HeartMate II LVAS (Thoratec Corp., Pleas-
anton, CA) similarly uses a drainage cannula in the left 
ventricular apex to drain blood into a small chamber, 
where the blood is driven by an electrically powered 
motor that spins a rotor, accelerating blood outflow into 
the ascending aorta (Fig. 18-2). This device is currently 
the only FDA-approved axial-flow pump that can be 
used both as a bridge to transplantation and as destina-
tion therapy. There are several other axial-flow pumps 
currently being investigated. These devices have fewer 
moving parts than previous devices and provide non-
pulsatile blood flow. All current axial-flow pumps con-
tinue to require transcutaneous connections to power 
the electric motor. Newer, third-generation devices, 
which also provide nonpulsatile flow, work through a 
different mechanism than the axial-flow pumps and are 
currently being investigated. These devices are even 
smaller than the currently available axial-flow pumps, 
and their mechanism of action involves less trauma to 
blood cells, which may result in better durability and 
decreased long-term complications.
Results
The use of these devices in the United States is limited 
mainly to patients with post-cardiac surgery shock and 
to those who are bridged to transplantation. The results 
of bridging to transplantation with the available devices 
are quite good, with nearly 75% of younger patients 
receiving a transplant by 1 year and having excellent 
posttransplant survival rates.
Publication of the REMATCH (Randomized Eval-
uation of Mechanical Assistance in the Treatment of 
Heart Failure) trial in 2001 documented a somewhat 
improved survival rate in nontransplant candidates with 
end-stage heart disease randomized to a HeartMate 
XVE LVAD (albeit with a high rate of complications, 
especially neurologic ones) as opposed to continued 
medical therapy; this led to renewed interest in also 
using the devices as nonbiologic permanent replace-
ment of heart function, as well as to FDA approval of 
one device for this indication. This outcome, in turn, 
led the ISHLT to initiate a Mechanical Circulatory 
Support database in 2002, which collects voluntary data 
from 60 international centers and contained data from 
655 patients in its most recent publication. Only 12% of 
these patients had the device placed with the intention 
of permanent, or “destination,” use, with survival rates 
of only 65% at 6 months and 34% at 1 year.
External
battery
pack
System
controller
Percutaneous
lead
Continuous-
flow LVAD
Skin
entry
site
Left
ventricle
Aorta
To aorta
Outlet stator
and diffuser
Motor
Percutaneous
lead
Pump
housing
From left
ventricle
Rotor
Inlet stator and
blood-flow
straightener
Blood
flow
Figure 18-2 
Diagram of HeartMate II left ventricular assist device. (Reprinted with permission from Thoratec Corp., Pleasanton, CA.)
206
SECTION IV
Disorders of the Heart
Several studies have evaluated the benefit of LVAD 
therapy as a bridge to transplantation, with the most recent 
data taken from a series of 133 patients who underwent 
implantation of a HeartMate II device. In this group of 
patients, 80% achieved the principal outcome (defined 
as survival to transplantation, recovery of heart function, 
or ongoing device support) at 180 days. With increased 
experience and improved outcomes using LVADs as a 
bridge to transplantation, the ability to maintain end-
organ function and limit the progression of pulmonary 
hypertension, or even decrease pulmonary vascular resis-
tance, makes mechanical unloading an attractive option 
when compared with continued inotropic support. The 
early bridge-to-transplantation experience demonstrated 
reduced posttransplantation survival when compared with 
medical management; however, more recent experience 
has shown equivalent outcomes following transplantation. 
This result is likely secondary to a trend toward earlier 
device implantation, prior to the onset of irreversible end-
organ damage.
 John S. Child 
I  Jamil Aboulhosn 
207
 A little over a hundred years ago, Sir William Osler, in 
his classic textbook  The Principles and Practice of Medi-
cine (New York, Appleton & Co, 1892, pp 659–663), 
devoted only fi ve pages to “Congenital Affections of the 
Heart,” with the fi rst sentence declaring, that “[t]hese 
[disorders] have only limited clinical interest, as in a 
large proportion of cases the anomaly is not compatible 
with life, and in others nothing can be done to remedy 
the defect or even to relieve symptoms.” Fortunately, in 
the intervening century, considerable progress has been 
made in understanding the basis for these disorders and 
their effective treatment. 
 The most common birth defects are cardiovascular in 
origin. These malformations are due to complex mul-
tifactorial genetic and environmental causes, but recog-
nized chromosomal aberrations and mutations of single 
genes account for <10% of all cardiac malformations. 
Congenital heart disease (CHD) complicates ∼1% of 
all live births in the general population—about 40,000 
births/year—but occurs more frequently in the off-
spring (about 4–5%) of women with CHD. Owing to 
the remarkable surgical advances over the last 60 years, 
>90% of affl icted neonates and children now reach 
adulthood; women with CHD may now frequently 
successfully bear children after competent repairs. As 
such, the population with CHD is steadily increasing. 
Women with aortic disease (e.g., aortic coarctation or 
Marfan’s syndrome) risk aortic dissection. Patients with 
cyanotic heart disease, pulmonary hypertension, or 
Marfan’s syndrome with a dilated aortic root generally 
should not become pregnant; those with correctable 
lesions should be counseled about the risks of pregnancy 
with an uncorrected malformation versus repair and 
later pregnancy. 
 More than 1 million adults with operated or unop-
erated CHD live in the United States today and, thus, 
outnumber the 800,000 children with CHD. Because 
true surgical cures are rare, and all repairs—be they 
palliative or corrective—may leave residua, sequelae, 
or complications, most require some degree of life-
time expert surveillance. The anatomic and physio-
logic changes in the heart and circulation due to any 
specifi c CHD lesion are not static but, rather, progress 
from prenatal life to adulthood. Malformations that are 
benign or escape detection in childhood may become 
clinically signifi cant in the adult. For example, a func-
tionally normal congenitally bicuspid aortic valve may 
thicken and calcify with time, resulting in signifi cant 
aortic stenosis; a well-tolerated left-to-right shunt of an 
atrial septal defect (ASD) may result in cardiac decom-
pensation or pulmonary hypertension only after the 
fourth to fi fth decade. 
 cardiac deVeLOpMeNt 
(aLSO See cHapter 1) 
 CHD is generally the result of aberrant embryonic 
development of a normal structure or failure of such a 
structure to progress beyond an early stage of embry-
onic or fetal development. This brief section serves 
to introduce the reader to normal development so 
that defects may be better understood; by necessity, it 
is not exhaustive. Cardiogenesis is a fi nely tuned pro-
cess with transcriptional control of a complex group of 
regulatory proteins that activate or inhibit their gene 
targets in a location- and time-dependent manner. At 
about 3 weeks of embryonic development, two car-
diac cords form and become canalized; at that point, 
the primordial cardiac tube develops from two sources 
(cardiac crescent or the fi rst heart fi eld, pharyngeal 
mesoderm or the second heart fi eld); by 21 days, these 
 CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE IN THE ADULT 
 cHapter 19 
208
SECTION IV
Disorders of the Heart
fuse into a single cardiac tube beginning at the cranial 
end. The cardiac tube then elongates and develops dis-
crete constrictions with the following segments from 
caudal to cranial location: sinus venosus receives the 
umbilical, vitelline, and common cardinal veins: atrium, 
ventricle, bulbus cordis, truncus arteriosus, aortic sac, and the 
aortic arches. The cardiac tube is fixed at the sinus veno-
sus and arterial ends.
Subsequently, in the next few weeks, differential 
growth of cells causes the tube to elongate and loop 
as an “S” with the bulboventricular portion moving 
rightward and the atrium and sinus venosus moving 
posterior to the ventricle. The primitive atrium and 
ventricle communicate via the atrioventricular canal 
from which the endocardial cushion develops into two 
parts (ventrally and dorsally). The cushions fuse and 
divide the atrioventricular canal into two atrioven-
tricular inlets and also migrate to help form the ven-
tricular septum. The primitive atrium is divided first 
by a septum primum membrane, which grows down 
from the superior wall to the cushions; as this fusion 
occurs, the midportion resorbs in the center forming 
the ostium secundum. Rightward of the septum primum, 
a second septum secundum membrane grows down from 
the ventral-cranial wall toward—but not reaching—the 
cushions, and covering most, but not all, of the ostium 
secundum, resulting in a flap of the foramen ovale. The 
primitive ventricle is partitioned by a finely tuned 
set of events. The interventricular septum grows up 
toward the cushions, and the cushions form an upper 
inlet septum; between the two portions is a hole called 
the interventricular foramen. The left and right ven-
tricles begin to develop side by side, and the atria and 
their respective inlet valves align over their ventricles. 
Finally, these two parts of the septum fuse with the 
bulboventricular ridges, which, once having septated 
the truncus arteriosus, extend into the ventricle. The 
bulbocordis divides into a subaortic portion as the mus-
cular conus resorbs, while the subpulmonary section 
has elongation of its muscular conus. Spiral division of 
the common truncus arteriosus rotates and aligns the 
pulmonary artery and aortic portions over their respec-
tive outflow tracts, the aortic valve moving posterior 
over the left ventricle (LV) outflow tract and the pul-
monary valve moving anterior over the right ventricle 
(RV) outflow tract, with a wraparound relationship of 
the two great arteries.
Early on, the venous systems are bilateral and symmet-
ric and enter 2 horns of the sinus venosus. Ultimately, 
except for the coronary sinus, most of the left-sided por-
tions and the left sinus–venosus horn regress and the sys-
temic venous system empties into the right horn via the 
inferior and superior vena cavae. The pulmonary venous 
system, initially connecting to the systemic venous sys-
tem, develops as buds from the developing lungs fuse 
Table 19-1 
Simple Adult Congenital Heart Disease
Native disease
  Uncomplicated congenital aortic valve disease
  Mild congenital mitral valve disease (e.g., except  
  parachute valve, cleft leaflet)
  Uncomplicated small atrial septal defect
  Uncomplicated small ventricular septal defect
  Mild pulmonic stenosis
Repaired conditions
  Previously ligated or occluded ductus arteriosus
  Repaired secundum or sinus venosus atrial septal defect 
  without residua
  Repaired ventricular septal defect without residua
together in the pulmonary venous confluence at which 
point the connection to the systemic system regresses. 
Simultaneously, a projection from the back wall of the 
left atrium (the common pulmonary vein) grows posteriorly 
to merge with the confluence, which then becomes a 
part of the posterior left atrial wall.
The truncus arteriosus and aortic sac initially develop 
six paired symmetric arches, which curve posteri-
orly and become the paired dorsal aortae. The detailed 
description of the selective regression of some of the 
arches is not presented in this chapter. In brief sum-
mary, this process results in the development of arch 3 
as the internal carotid arteries, left arch 4 as the aortic 
arch and right subclavian artery, and part of arch 6 as 
the patent ductus arteriosus. The two dorsal thoracic 
aortae fuse in the abdomen with persistence of the left 
dorsal aorta.
Specific Cardiac Defects
Tables 19-1, 19-2, and 19-3 list CHD malformations 
as simple, intermediate, or complex. Simple defects gen-
erally are single lesions with a shunt or a valvular mal-
formation. Intermediate defects may have two or more 
simple defects. Complex defects generally have com-
ponents of an intermediate defect plus more complex 
cardiac and vascular anatomy, often with cyanosis, and 
frequently with transposition complexes. The goal of 
these tables is to suggest when cardiology consultation 
or advanced CHD specialty care is needed. Patients with 
complex CHD (which includes most “named” surger-
ies that usually involve complex CHD) should virtually 
always be managed in conjunction with an experienced 
specialty adult CHD center. Patients with intermediate 
lesions should have an initial consultation and subse-
quent occasional intermittent follow-up with a cardiolo-
gist. Patients with simple lesions often may be managed 
 
CHAPTER 19
Congenital Heart Disease in the Adult
209
Anatomic obliteration of the foramen ovale ordinarily 
follows its functional closure soon after birth, but resid-
ual “probe patency” is a common normal variant; ASD 
denotes a true deficiency of the atrial septum and implies 
functional and anatomic patency. The magnitude of the 
left-to-right shunt depends on the ASD size, ventricular 
diastolic properties, and the relative impedance in the pul-
monary and systemic circulations. The left-to-right shunt 
causes diastolic overloading of the right ventricle and 
increased pulmonary blood flow. Patients with ASD are 
usually asymptomatic in early life, although there may be 
some physical underdevelopment and an increased ten-
dency for respiratory infections; cardiorespiratory symp-
toms occur in many older patients. Beyond the fourth 
decade, a significant number of patients develop atrial 
arrhythmias, pulmonary arterial hypertension, bidirec-
tional and then right-to-left shunting of blood, and right 
heart failure. Patients exposed to the chronic environmen-
tal hypoxemia of high altitude tend to develop pulmonary 
hypertension at younger ages. In older patients, left-to-
right shunting across the ASD increases as progressive sys-
temic hypertension and/or coronary artery disease (CAD) 
result in reduced compliance of the left ventricle.
Physical examination
Examination usually reveals a prominent RV impulse 
and palpable pulmonary artery pulsation. The first heart 
sound is normal or split, with accentuation of the tri-
cuspid valve closure sound. Increased flow across the 
pulmonic valve is responsible for a mid-systolic pul-
monary outflow murmur. The second heart sound is 
widely split and is relatively fixed in relation to respira-
tion. A mid-diastolic rumbling murmur, loudest at the 
fourth intercostal space and along the left sternal bor-
der, reflects increased flow across the tricuspid valve. 
In ostium primum ASD, an apical holosystolic murmur 
indicates associated mitral or tricuspid regurgitation or a 
ventricular septal defect (VSD).
These findings are altered when increased pulmonary 
vascular resistance causes diminution of the left-to-right 
shunt. Both the pulmonary outflow and tricuspid inflow 
murmurs decrease in intensity, the pulmonic compo-
nent of the second heart sound and a systolic ejection 
sound are accentuated, the two components of the sec-
ond heart sound may fuse, and a diastolic murmur of 
pulmonic regurgitation appears. Cyanosis and clubbing 
accompany the development of a right-to-left shunt (see 
“Ventricular Septal Defect” later). In adults with an ASD 
and atrial fibrillation, the physical findings may be con-
fused with mitral stenosis with pulmonary hypertension 
because the tricuspid diastolic flow murmur and widely 
split second heart sound may be mistakenly thought to 
represent the diastolic murmur of mitral stenosis and the 
mitral “opening snap,” respectively.
Table 19-2
Intermediate Complexity Congenital Heart 
Disease
Ostium primum or sinus venosus atrial septal defect
Anomalous pulmonary venous drainage, partial or total
Atrioventricular canal defects (partial or complete)
Ventricular septal defect, complicated (e.g., absent or  
  abnormal valves or with associated obstructive lesions,  
  aortic regurgitation)
Coarctation of the aorta
Pulmonic valve stenosis (moderate to severe)
Infundibular right ventricular outflow obstruction of  
  significance
Pulmonary valve regurgitation (moderate to severe)
Patent ductus arteriosus (nonclosed)—moderate to large
Sinus of Valsalva fistula/aneurysm
Subvalvular or supravalvular aortic stenosis
Table 19-3 
Complex Adult Congenital Heart Disease
Cyanotic congenital heart diseases (all forms)
Eisenmenger’s syndrome
Ebstein’s anomaly
Tetralogy of Fallot or pulmonary atresia (all forms)
Transposition of the great arteries
Single ventricle; tricuspid or mitral atresia
Double-outlet ventricle
Truncus arteriosus
Fontan or Rastelli procedures
by a well-informed internist or general cardiologist, 
although consultation with a specifically trained adult 
congenital cardiologist is occasionally advisable.
Atrial Septal Defect
ASD is a common cardiac anomaly that may be first 
encountered in the adult and occurs more frequently in 
females. Sinus venosus ASD occurs high in the atrial sep-
tum near the entry of the superior vena cava into the 
right atrium and is associated frequently with anoma-
lous pulmonary venous connection from the right lung 
to the superior vena cava or right atrium. Ostium primum 
ASDs lie adjacent to the atrioventricular valves, either of 
which may be deformed and regurgitant. Ostium primum 
ASDs are common in Down syndrome; the more com-
plex atrioventricular septal defects with a common atrio-
ventricular valve and a posterior defect of the basal por-
tion of the interventricular septum are more typical of this 
chromosomal defect. The most common ostium secundum 
ASD involves the fossa ovalis and is midseptal in location; 
this should not be confused with a patent foramen ovale. 
210
SECTION IV
Disorders of the Heart
Electrocardiogram
In ostium secundum ASD, electrocardiogram (ECG) 
usually shows right-axis deviation and an rSr′ pattern 
in the right precordial leads representing enlargement 
of the RV outflow tract. An ectopic atrial pacemaker 
or first-degree heart block may occur with the sinus 
venous ASD. In ostium primum ASD, the RV conduc-
tion defect is accompanied by left superior axis devia-
tion and counterclockwise rotation of the frontal plane 
QRS loop. Varying degrees of RV and right atrial (RA) 
enlargement or hypertrophy may occur with each type of 
defect, depending on the height of the pulmonary artery 
pressure. Chest x-ray shows an enlarged right atrium and 
right ventricle, and pulmonary artery and its branches; 
increased pulmonary vascular markings of left-to-right 
shunt vascularity will diminish if pulmonary vascular dis-
ease develops.
Echocardiogram
Echocardiography reveals pulmonary arterial and RV and 
RA dilatation with abnormal (paradoxical) ventricular 
septal motion in the presence of a significant right heart 
volume overload. The ASD may be visualized directly by 
two-dimensional imaging, color-flow imaging, or echo-
contrast. In most institutions, two-dimensional echo-
cardiography and Doppler examination have supplanted 
cardiac catheterization. Transesophageal echocardiog-
raphy is indicated if the transthoracic echocardiogram is 
Figure 19-1
Secundum atrial septal defect. Transesophageal echocar-
diogram of secundum ASD and device closure. A. The atrial 
septal defect (ASD) between the left atrium (LA) and right 
atrium (RA) is shown. B. A percutaneous catheter–delivered 
device has occluded the defect. IVC, inferior vena cava; 
SVC, superior vena cava.
ambiguous, which is often the case with sinus venosus 
defects, or during catheter device closure (Fig. 19-1). 
Cardiac catheterization is performed if inconsistencies 
exist in the clinical data, if significant pulmonary hyper-
tension or associated malformations are suspected, or if 
CAD is a possibility.
treatment 
Atrial Septal Defect
Operative repair, usually with a patch of pericardium or 
of prosthetic material or percutaneous transcatheter 
device closure, if the ASD is of an appropriate size and 
shape, should be advised for all patients with uncom-
plicated secundum ASD with significant left-to-right 
shunting, i.e., pulmonary-to-systemic flow ratios ≥2:1. 
Excellent results may be anticipated, at low risk, even in 
patients >40 years, in the absence of severe pulmonary 
hypertension. In ostium primum ASD, cleft mitral valves 
may require repair in addition to patch closure of the 
ASD. Closure should not be carried out in patients with 
small defects and trivial left-to-right shunts or in those 
with severe pulmonary vascular disease without a sig-
nificant left-to-right shunt.
Patients with sinus venosus or ostium secundum 
ASDs rarely die before the fifth decade. During the fifth 
and sixth decades, the incidence of progressive symp-
toms, often leading to severe disability, increases sub-
stantially. Medical management should include prompt 
 
CHAPTER 19
Congenital Heart Disease in the Adult
211
treatment of respiratory tract infections; antiarrhythmic 
medications for atrial fibrillation or supraventricular 
tachycardia; and the usual measures for hypertension, 
coronary disease, or heart failure (Chap. 17), if these 
complications occur. The risk of infective endocarditis 
is quite low unless the defect is complicated by valvular 
regurgitation or has recently been repaired with a patch 
or device (Chap. 25).
Ventricular septal defect
A VSD is one of the most common of all cardiac birth 
defects, either as isolated defects or as a component of 
a combination of anomalies. The VSD is usually single 
and situated in the membranous or midmuscular por-
tion of the septum. The functional disturbance depends 
on its size and on the status of the pulmonary vascu-
lar bed. Only small- or moderate-size VSDs are seen 
initially in adulthood, as most patients with an isolated 
large VSD come to medical or surgical attention early 
in life.
A wide spectrum exists in the natural history of VSD, 
ranging from spontaneous closure to congestive cardiac 
failure and death in infancy. Included within this spec-
trum are the possible development of pulmonary vas-
cular obstruction, RV outflow tract obstruction, aortic 
regurgitation, or infective endocarditis. Spontaneous 
closure is more common in patients born with a small 
VSD, which occurs in early childhood in most. The 
pulmonary vascular bed is often a principal determi-
nant of the clinical manifestations and course of a given 
VSD and feasibility of surgical repair. Increased pulmo-
nary arterial pressure results from increased pulmonary 
blood flow and/or resistance, the latter usually the result 
of obstructive, obliterative structural changes within the 
pulmonary vascular bed. It is important to quantitate 
and compare pulmonary-to-systemic flows and resis-
tances in patients with severe pulmonary hypertension. 
The term Eisenmenger’s syndrome is applied to patients 
with a large communication between the two circula-
tions at the aortopulmonary, ventricular, or atrial levels 
and bidirectional or predominantly right-to-left shunts 
because of high resistance and obstructive pulmonary 
hypertension.
Patients with large VSDs and pulmonary hyperten-
sion are at greatest risk for developing pulmonary vas-
cular obstruction. Large VSDs should be corrected 
surgically early in life when pulmonary vascular dis-
ease is still reversible or not yet developed. In patients 
with Eisenmenger syndrome, symptoms in adult life 
consist of exertional dyspnea, chest pain, syncope, and 
hemoptysis. The right-to-left shunt leads to cyanosis, 
clubbing, and erythrocytosis (see later). The degree to 
which pulmonary vascular resistance is elevated before 
operation is a critical factor determining prognosis. If 
the pulmonary vascular resistance is one-third or less of 
the systemic value, progression of pulmonary vascular 
disease after operation is unusual; however, if a moder-
ate to severe increase in pulmonary vascular resistance 
exists preoperatively, either no change or a progres-
sion of pulmonary vascular disease is common postop-
eratively. Pregnancy is contraindicated in Eisenmenger 
syndrome. The mother’s health is most at risk if she has 
a cardiovascular lesion associated with pulmonary vas-
cular disease and pulmonary hypertension (e.g., Eisen-
menger physiology or mitral stenosis) or LV outflow 
tract obstruction (e.g., aortic stenosis), but she is also 
at risk of death with any malformation that may cause 
heart failure or a hemodynamically important arrhyth-
mia. The fetus is most at risk with maternal cyanosis, 
heart failure, or pulmonary hypertension.
RV outflow tract obstruction develops in ∼5–10% 
of patients who present in infancy with a moderate 
to large left-to-right shunt. With time, as subvalvu-
lar RV outflow tract obstruction progresses, the find-
ings in these patients whose VSD remains sizable begin 
to resemble more closely those of the cyanotic tetral-
ogy of Fallot. In ∼5% of patients, aortic valve regurgita-
tion results from insufficient cusp tissue or prolapse of 
the cusp through the interventricular defect; the aortic 
regurgitation then complicates and dominates the clini-
cal course. Two-dimensional echocardiography with spec-
tral and color Doppler examination defines the number 
and location of defects in the ventricular septum and 
associated anomalies and the hemodynamic physiology 
of the defect(s). Hemodynamic and angiographic study 
may be occasionally required to assess the status of the 
pulmonary vascular bed and clarify details of the altered 
anatomy.
treatment 
Ventricular Septal Defect
Surgery is not recommended for patients with normal 
pulmonary arterial pressures with small shunts (pulmo-
nary-to-systemic flow ratios of <1.5 to 2:1). Operative 
correction or transcatheter closure is indicated when 
there is a moderate to large left-to-right shunt with a 
pulmonary-to-systemic flow ratio >1.5:1 or 2:1, in the 
absence of prohibitively high levels of pulmonary vascu-
lar resistance.
In the Eisenmenger VSD patient, pulmonary arte-
rial vasodilators and both single-lung transplantation 
with intracardiac defect repair and total heart-lung trans-
plantation show promise for improvement in symptoms 
(Chap. 18). Chronic hypoxemia in cyanotic CHD results 
in secondary erythrocytosis due to increased erythropoietin 
production (Chap. 6). The term polycythemia is a mis-
nomer; white cell counts are normal and platelet counts 
212
SECTION IV
Disorders of the Heart
are normal to decreased. Compensated erythrocytosis 
with iron-replete equilibrium hematocrits rarely result 
in symptoms of hyperviscosity at hematocrits < 65% 
and occasionally not even with hematocrits ≥ 70%. For 
this reason, therapeutic phlebotomy is rarely required in 
compensated erythrocytosis. In contrast, patients with 
decompensated erythrocytosis fail to establish equilibrium 
with unstable, rising hematocrits and recurrent hypervis-
cosity symptoms. Therapeutic phlebotomy, a two-edged 
sword, allows temporary relief of symptoms but lim-
its oxygen delivery, begets instability of the hematocrit, 
and compounds the problem by iron depletion. Iron- 
deficiency symptoms are usually indistinguishable from 
those of hyperviscosity; progressive symptoms after 
recurrent phlebotomy are usually due to iron depletion 
with hypochromic microcytosis. Iron depletion results 
in a larger number of smaller (microcytic) hypochromic 
red cells that are less capable of carrying oxygen and less 
deformable in the microcirculation; with more of them 
relative to plasma volume, viscosity is greater than for an 
equivalent hematocrit with fewer, larger, iron-replete, 
deformable cells. As such, iron-depleted erythrocytosis 
results in increasing symptoms due to decreased oxygen 
delivery to the tissues.
Hemostasis is abnormal in cyanotic CHD, due, in 
part, to the increased blood volume and engorged capil-
laries, abnormalities in platelet function, and sensitivity 
to aspirin or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents, as 
well as abnormalities of the extrinsic and intrinsic coag-
ulation system. Oral contraceptives are often contraindi-
cated for cyanotic women because of the enhanced risk 
of vascular thrombosis. Adults with cyanotic CHD do 
not appear to be at increased risk for stroke unless there 
are excessive injudicious phlebotomies, inappropriate 
use of aspirin or anticoagulants, or the presence of atrial 
arrhythmias or infective endocarditis. Symptoms of 
hyperviscosity can be produced in any cyanotic patient 
with erythrocytosis if dehydration reduces plasma vol-
ume. Phlebotomy for symptoms of hyperviscosity not 
due to dehydration or iron deficiency is a simple out-
patient removal of 500 mL of blood over 45 min with 
isovolumetric replacement with isotonic saline. Acute 
phlebotomy without volume replacement is contrain-
dicated. Iron repletion in decompensated iron-depleted 
erythrocytosis reduces iron-deficiency symptoms, but 
must be done gradually to avoid an excessive rise in 
hematocrit and resulting hyperviscosity.
Patent ductus arteriosus
The ductus arteriosus is a vessel leading from the bifur-
cation of the pulmonary artery to the aorta just distal to 
the left subclavian artery. Normally, the vascular channel 
is open in the fetus but closes immediately after birth. 
The flow across the ductus is determined by the pressure 
and resistance relationships between the systemic and 
pulmonary circulations and by the cross-sectional area 
and length of the ductus. In most adults with this anom-
aly, pulmonary pressures are normal and a gradient and 
shunt from aorta to pulmonary artery persist through-
out the cardiac cycle, resulting in a characteristic thrill 
and a continuous “machinery” murmur with late systolic 
accentuation at the upper left sternal edge. In adults who 
were born with a large left-to-right shunt through the 
ductus arteriosus, pulmonary vascular obstruction (Eisen-
menger syndrome) with pulmonary hypertension, right-
to-left shunting, and cyanosis have usually developed. 
Severe pulmonary vascular disease results in reversal of 
flow through the ductus; unoxygenated blood is shunted 
to the descending aorta; and the toes—but not the 
fingers—become cyanotic and clubbed, a finding termed 
differential cyanosis. The leading causes of death in adults 
with patent ductus are cardiac failure and infective endo-
carditis; occasionally severe pulmonary vascular obstruc-
tion may cause aneurysmal dilatation, calcification, and 
rupture of the ductus.
treatment 
Patent Ductus Arteriosus
In the absence of severe pulmonary vascular disease 
and predominant left-to-right shunting of blood, the 
patent ductus should be surgically ligated or divided. 
Transcatheter closure using coils, buttons, plugs, and 
umbrellas has become commonplace for appropriately 
shaped defects. Thoracoscopic surgical approaches are 
considered experimental. Operation should be deferred 
for several months in patients treated successfully for 
infective endocarditis because the ductus may remain 
somewhat edematous and friable.
Aortic root–to-right-heart shunts
The three most common causes of aortic root–to-right-
heart shunts are congenital aneurysm of an aortic sinus 
of Valsalva with fistula, coronary arteriovenous fistula, 
and anomalous origin of the left coronary artery from 
the pulmonary trunk. Aneurysm of an aortic sinus of Val-
salva consists of a separation or lack of fusion between 
the media of the aorta and the annulus of the aortic 
valve. Rupture usually occurs in the third or fourth 
decade of life; most often, the aorticocardiac fistula 
is between the right coronary cusp and the right ven-
tricle; but occasionally, when the noncoronary cusp 
is involved, the fistula drains into the right atrium. 
Abrupt rupture causes chest pain, bounding pulses, a 
continuous murmur accentuated in diastole, and vol-
ume overload of the heart. Diagnosis is confirmed by 
two-dimensional and Doppler echocardiographic stud-
ies; cardiac catheterization quantitates the left-to-right 
shunt, and thoracic aortography visualizes the fistula. 
Medical management is directed at cardiac failure, 
 
CHAPTER 19
Congenital Heart Disease in the Adult
213
arrhythmias, or endocarditis. At operation, the aneu-
rysm is closed and amputated, and the aortic wall is 
reunited with the heart, either by direct suture or with a 
patch or prosthesis.
Coronary arteriovenous fistula, an unusual anomaly, 
consists of a communication between a coronary artery 
and another cardiac chamber, usually the coronary 
sinus, right atrium, or right ventricle. The shunt is usu-
ally of small magnitude and myocardial blood flow is 
not usually compromised; if the shunt is large, there 
may be a coronary “steal” syndrome with myocardial 
ischemia and possible angina or ventricular arrhythmias. 
Potential complications include infective endocarditis; 
thrombus formation with occlusion or distal emboli-
zation with myocardial infarction; rupture of an aneu-
rysmal fistula; and, rarely, pulmonary hypertension and 
congestive failure. A loud, superficial, continuous mur-
mur at the lower or midsternal border usually prompts 
a further evaluation of asymptomatic patients. Doppler 
echocardiography demonstrates the site of drainage; if 
the site of origin is proximal, it may be detectable by 
two-dimensional echocardiography. Angiography (clas-
sic catheterization, CT, or magnetic resonance angiog-
raphy) permits identification of the size and anatomic 
features of the fistulous tract, which may be closed by 
suture or transcatheter obliteration.
The third anomaly causing a shunt from the aortic 
root to the right heart is anomalous origin of the left coronary 
artery from the pulmonary artery. Myocardial infarction and 
fibrosis commonly lead to death within the first year, 
although up to 20% of patients survive to adolescence 
and beyond without surgical correction. The diagno-
sis is supported by the ECG findings of an anterolateral 
myocardial infarction and left ventricular hypertrophy 
(LVH). Operative management of adults consists of 
coronary artery bypass with an internal mammary artery 
graft or saphenous vein–coronary artery graft.
Congenital aortic stenosis
Malformations that cause obstruction to LV out-
flow include congenital valvular aortic stenosis, dis-
crete subaortic stenosis, or supravalvular aortic steno-
sis. Bicuspid aortic valves are more common in males 
than in females. The congenital bicuspid aortic valve, 
which may initially be functionally normal, is one of 
the most common congenital malformations of the 
heart and may go undetected in early life. Because 
bicuspid valves may develop stenosis or regurgitation 
with time or be the site of infective endocarditis, the 
lesion may be difficult to distinguish in older adults 
from acquired rheumatic or degenerative calcific aor-
tic valve disease. The dynamics of blood flow associ-
ated with a congenitally deformed, rigid aortic valve 
commonly lead to thickening of the cusps and, in 
later life, to calcification. Hemodynamically significant 
obstruction causes concentric hypertrophy of the LV 
wall. The ascending aorta is often dilated, misnamed 
“poststenotic” dilatation; this is due to histologic 
abnormalities of the aortic media similar to those in 
Marfan’s syndrome and may result in aortic dissection. 
Diagnosis is made by echocardiography, which reveals 
the morphology of the aortic valve and aortic root and 
quantitates severity of stenosis or regurgitation. The 
clinical manifestations and hemodynamic abnormalities 
are discussed in Chap. 20.
treatment 
Valvular Aortic Stenosis
Medical management includes prophylaxis against 
infective endocarditis and, in patients with diminished  
cardiac reserve, the administration of digoxin and diuret-
ics and sodium restriction while awaiting operation. 
A dilated aortic root may require beta blockers. Aor-
tic valve replacement is indicated in adults with critical 
obstruction, i.e., with an aortic valve area <0.45 cm2/m2, 
with symptoms secondary to LV dysfunction or myo-
cardial ischemia, or with hemodynamic evidence of LV 
dysfunction. In asymptomatic children or adolescents 
or young adults with critical aortic stenosis without 
valvular calcification or these features, aortic balloon  
valvuloplasty is often useful (Chap. 36). If surgery is con-
traindicated in older patients because of a complicating 
medical problem such as malignancy or renal or hepatic 
failure, balloon valvuloplasty may provide short-term 
improvement. This procedure may serve as a bridge to 
aortic valve replacement in patients with severe heart 
failure.
Subaortic stenosis
The discrete form of subaortic stenosis consists of a mem-
branous diaphragm or fibromuscular ring encircling 
the LV outflow tract just beneath the base of the aor-
tic valve. The jet impact from the subaortic stenotic jet 
on the underside of the aortic valve often begets pro-
gressive aortic valve fibrosis and valvular regurgitation. 
Echocardiography demonstrates the anatomy of the 
subaortic obstruction; Doppler studies show turbulence 
proximal to the aortic valve and can quantitate the pres-
sure gradient and severity of aortic regurgitation. Treat-
ment consists of complete excision of the membrane or 
fibromuscular ring.
Supravalvular aortic stenosis
This is a localized or diffuse narrowing of the ascend-
ing aorta originating just above the level of the coronary 
arteries at the superior margin of the sinuses of Valsalva. 
In contrast to other forms of aortic stenosis, the coro-
nary arteries are subjected to elevated systolic pressures 
from the left ventricle, are often dilated and tortuous, 
and are susceptible to premature atherosclerosis. In most 
214
SECTION IV
Disorders of the Heart
patients, a genetic defect for the anomaly is located in 
the same chromosomal region as elastin on chromo-
some 7. Supravalvular aortic stenosis is the most com-
monly associated cardiac defect in Williams-Beuren 
syndrome, typically comprising the following: “elfin” 
facies, low nasal bridge, cheerful demeanor, men-
tal retardation with retained language skills and love 
of music, supravalvular aortic stenosis, and transient 
hypercalcemia.
Coarctation of the aorta
Narrowing or constriction of the lumen of the aorta 
may occur anywhere along its length but is most com-
mon distal to the origin of the left subclavian artery near 
the insertion of the ligamentum arteriosum. Coarctation 
occurs in ∼7% of patients with congenital heart disease, is 
more common in males than females, and is particularly 
frequent in patients with gonadal dysgenesis (e.g., Turner 
syndrome). Clinical manifestations depend on the site and 
extent of obstruction and the presence of associated car-
diac anomalies; most commonly a bicuspid aortic valve. 
Circle of Willis aneurysms may occur in up to 10%, and 
pose a high risk of sudden rupture and death.
Most children and young adults with isolated, dis-
crete coarctation are asymptomatic. Headache, epi-
staxis, cold extremities, and claudication with exercise 
may occur, and attention is usually directed to the car-
diovascular system when a heart murmur or hyper-
tension in the upper extremities and absence, marked 
diminution, or delayed pulsations in the femoral arter-
ies are detected on physical examination. Enlarged and 
pulsatile collateral vessels may be palpated in the inter-
costal spaces anteriorly, in the axillae, or posteriorly in 
the interscapular area. The upper extremities and tho-
rax may be more developed than the lower extremi-
ties. A mid-systolic murmur over the left interscapular 
space may become continuous if the lumen is narrowed 
sufficiently to result in a high-velocity jet across the 
lesion throughout the cardiac cycle. Additional systolic 
and continuous murmurs over the lateral thoracic wall 
may reflect increased flow through dilated and tortuous 
collateral vessels. The ECG usually reveals LV hyper-
trophy. Chest x-ray may show a dilated left subclavian 
artery high on the left mediastinal border and a dilated 
ascending aorta. Indentation of the aorta at the site of 
coarctation and pre- and poststenotic dilatation (the “3” 
sign) along the left paramediastinal shadow are essen-
tially pathognomonic. Notching of the third to ninth 
ribs, an important radiographic sign, is due to inferior 
rib erosion by dilated collateral vessels (Figs. 19-2 and 
19-3). Two-dimensional echocardiography from supra-
sternal windows identifies the site of coarctation; Dop-
pler quantitates the pressure gradient. Transesophageal 
echocardiography and MRI or three-dimensional CT 
allow visualization of the length and severity of the 
Figure 19-2
Aortic coarctation. The extensive collaterals (left) under-
neath the ribs and in the periscapular region are shown on 
a posterior view of a three-dimensional CT angiogram, 
which are responsible for rib notching on chest x-ray. dao, 
descending aorta.
Figure 19-3
Aortic coarctation. The coarctation (Coarct) of the aorta is 
shown in the typical “adult” location in the descending aorta 
(DAo) just distal to the dilated left subclavian artery (LSCA) in 
this three-dimensional reconstruction of an MR angiogram. 
There is a post-coarct aneurysm that is in part due to intrinsic 
aortic medial tissue weakness. The left internal mammary artery 
(LIMA) is dilated. Asc Ao, ascending aorta; prox, proximal.
obstruction and associated collateral arteries (Figs. 19-2 
and 19-3). In adults, cardiac catheterization is indicated 
primarily to evaluate the coronary arteries or to perform 
catheter-based intervention (angioplasty and stent of the 
coarctation).
 
CHAPTER 19
Congenital Heart Disease in the Adult
215
The chief hazards of proximal aortic severe hyperten-
sion include cerebral aneurysms and hemorrhage, aortic 
dissection and rupture, premature coronary arterioscle-
rosis, and LV failure; infective endarteritis may occur 
on the coarctation site or endocarditis may settle on an 
associated bicuspid aortic valve, which is estimated to be 
present in up to 75% of patients.
treatment 
Coarctation of the Aorta
Treatment is surgical or involves percutaneous catheter 
balloon dilatation with stent placement; the details of 
selection of therapy are beyond this review. Late post-
operative systemic hypertension in the absence of 
residual coarctation is related partly to the duration of 
preoperative hypertension. Follow-up of rest and exer-
cise blood pressures is important; many have systolic 
hypertension only during exercise, in part due to a dif-
fuse vasculopathy. All operated or stented coarctation 
patients deserve a high-quality MRI or CT procedure in 
follow-up.
Pulmonary stenosis with intact ventricular 
septum
Obstruction to RV outflow may be localized to the 
supravalvular, valvular, or subvalvular levels or occur at 
a combination of these sites. Multiple sites of narrow-
ing of the peripheral pulmonary arteries are a feature of 
rubella embryopathy and may occur with both the familial 
and sporadic forms of supravalvular aortic stenosis. Val-
vular pulmonic stenosis (PS) is the most common form 
of isolated RV obstruction.
The severity of the obstructing lesion, rather than the 
site of narrowing, is the most important determinant of 
the clinical course. In the presence of a normal cardiac 
output, a peak systolic pressure gradient <30 mmHg 
indicates mild PS and >50 mmHg indicates severe PS; 
processes between these limits are considered to indicate 
moderate stenosis. Patients with mild PS are generally 
asymptomatic and demonstrate little or no progres-
sion in the severity of obstruction with age. In patients 
with more significant stenosis, the severity may increase 
with time. Symptoms vary with the degree of obstruc-
tion. Fatigue, dyspnea, RV failure, and syncope may 
limit the activity of older patients, in whom moder-
ate or severe obstruction may prevent an augmenta-
tion of cardiac output with exercise. In patients with 
severe obstruction, the systolic pressure in the RV may 
exceed that in the LV, because the ventricular septum 
is intact. RV ejection is prolonged with moderate or 
severe stenosis, and the sound of pulmonary valve clo-
sure is delayed and soft. RV hypertrophy reduces the 
compliance of that chamber, and a forceful RA contrac-
tion is necessary to augment RV filling. A fourth heart 
sound; prominent a waves in the jugular venous pulse; 
and, occasionally, presystolic pulsations of the liver 
reflect vigorous atrial contraction. The clinical diagnosis 
is supported by a left parasternal lift and harsh systolic 
crescendo-decrescendo murmur and thrill at the upper 
left sternal border, typically preceded by a systolic ejec-
tion sound if the obstruction is due to a mobile non-
dysplastic pulmonary valve. The holosystolic murmur 
of tricuspid regurgitation may accompany severe PS, 
especially in the presence of congestive heart failure. 
Cyanosis usually reflects right-to-left shunting through 
a patent foramen ovale or ASD. In patients with supra-
valvular or peripheral pulmonary arterial stenosis, the 
murmur is systolic or continuous and is best heard over 
the area of narrowing, with radiation to the peripheral 
lung fields.
In mild cases, the ECG is normal, whereas moder-
ate and severe stenoses are associated with RV hyper-
trophy. The chest x-ray with mild or moderate PS 
shows a heart of normal size with normal lung vascu-
larity. In pulmonary valvular stenosis, dilatation of the 
main and left pulmonary arteries occurs in part due to 
the direction of the PS jet and in part due to intrinsic 
tissue weakness. With severe obstruction, RV hyper-
trophy is generally evident. The pulmonary vascularity 
may be reduced with severe stenosis, RV failure, and/or 
a right-to-left shunt at the atrial level. Two-dimensional 
echocardiography visualizes pulmonary-valve morphol-
ogy; the outflow tract pressure gradient is quantitated 
by Doppler echocardiography.
treatment 
Pulmonary Stenosis
The cardiac catheter technique of balloon valvuloplasty 
(Chap. 13) is usually effective. Direct surgical relief of 
moderate and severe obstruction may be accomplished 
at a low risk. Multiple stenoses of the peripheral pulmo-
nary arteries are usually inoperable, but narrowing of a 
proximal branch or at the bifurcation of the main pul-
monary trunk may be surgically corrected or undergo 
balloon dilatation and stenting.
Tetralogy of Fallot
The four components of the tetralogy of Fallot are 
malaligned VSD, obstruction to RV outflow, aor-
tic override of the VSD, and RV hypertrophy due to 
the RV’s response to aortic pressure via the large VSD 
(Fig. 19-4).
The severity of RV outflow obstruction determines 
the clinical presentation. The severity of hypoplasia of 
the RV outflow tract varies from mild to complete (pul-
monary atresia). Pulmonary valve stenosis and supraval-
vular and peripheral pulmonary arterial obstruction may 
216
SECTION IV
Disorders of the Heart
Figure 19-4
Tetralogy of Fallot. Magnetic resonance angiogram. A mid-
systolic frame showing the malaligned ventricular septal 
defect (VSD) with the aorta overriding the ventricular septal 
defect. LV, left ventricle; RVH, RV hypertrophy; VS, ventricu-
lar septum.
treatment 
Tetralogy of Fallot
For a variety of reasons, only a few adults with tetral-
ogy of Fallot have not had some form of previous sur-
gical intervention. Reoperation in adults is most com-
monly for severe pulmonary regurgitation. Long-term 
concerns about ventricular function persist. Ventricular 
and atrial arrhythmias may require medical treatment 
or electrophysiologic study and ablation. Interventional 
catheterization may be needed in selected patients (i.e., 
angioplasty and stenting of branch pulmonary steno-
sis). The aortic root has a medial tissue defect; it is com-
monly enlarged and associated with aortic regurgita-
tion. Endocarditis remains a risk despite surgical repair.
Complete transposition of the great arteries
This condition is commonly called dextro- or d-transposition 
of the great arteries. The aorta arises rightward anteri-
orly from the right ventricle, and the pulmonary artery 
emerges leftward and posteriorly from the LV, which 
results in two separate parallel circulations; some com-
munication between them must exist after birth to sus-
tain life. Most patients have an interatrial communication, 
two-thirds have a patent ductus arteriosus, and about 
one-third have an associated VSD. Transposition is more 
common in males and accounts for ∼10% of cyanotic 
heart disease. The course is determined by the degree of 
tissue hypoxemia, the ability of each ventricle to sustain 
an increased workload in the presence of reduced coro-
nary arterial oxygenation, the nature of the associated 
cardiovascular anomalies, and the status of the pulmonary 
vascular bed. By the third decade of life, ∼30% of patients 
will have developed decreased RV function and progres-
sive tricuspid regurgitation, which may lead to congestive 
heart failure. Pulmonary vascular obstruction develops 
by 1 to 2 years of age in patients with an associated large 
VSD or large patent ductus arteriosus in the absence of 
obstruction to LV outflow.
treatment 
Transposition of the Great Arteries
The balloon or blade catheter or surgical creation 
or enlargement of an interatrial communication in 
the neonate is the simplest procedure for providing 
increased intracardiac mixing of systemic and pulmo-
nary venous blood. Systemic pulmonary–artery anas-
tomosis may be indicated in the patient with severe 
obstruction to LV outflow and diminished pulmonary 
blood flow. Intracardiac repair may be accomplished 
by rearranging the venous returns (intraatrial switch, 
i.e., Mustard or Senning operation) so that the systemic 
venous blood is directed to the mitral valve and, thence, 
to the left ventricle and pulmonary artery, while the  
coexist; rarely, there is unilateral absence of a pulmonary 
artery (usually the left). A right-sided aortic arch and 
descending thoracic aorta occur in ∼25%.
The relationship between the resistance of blood 
flow from the ventricles into the aorta and into the 
pulmonary artery plays a major role in determining 
the hemodynamic and clinical picture. When the RV 
outflow obstruction is severe, pulmonary blood flow 
is reduced markedly, and a large volume of desatu-
rated systemic venous blood shunts right-to-left across 
the VSD. Severe cyanosis and erythrocytosis occur, and 
symptoms of systemic hypoxemia are prominent. In 
many infants and children, the obstruction is mild but 
progressive.
The ECG shows RV hypertrophy. Chest x-ray 
shows a normal-sized, boot-shaped heart (coeur en sabot) 
with a prominent right ventricle and a concavity in the 
region of the pulmonary conus. Pulmonary vascular 
markings are typically diminished, and the aortic arch 
and knob may be on the right side. Two-dimensional 
echocardiography demonstrates the malaligned VSD 
with the overriding aorta and the site and severity of 
PS, which may be subpulmonic (fixed or dynamic), 
at the pulmonary valve or in the main or branch pul-
monary arteries. Classic contrast angiography may pro-
vide details regarding the RV outflow tract, pulmonary 
valve and annulus, and caliber of the main branches of 
the pulmonary artery as well of possible associated aor-
topulmonary collaterals. Coronary arteriography identi-
fies the anatomy and course of the coronary arteries. In 
experienced centers, these issues are often well demon-
strated in adults by MRI (Fig. 19-4) or CT angiography 
with three-dimensional reconstruction.
 
CHAPTER 19
Congenital Heart Disease in the Adult
217
pulmonary venous blood is diverted through the tricus-
pid valve and right ventricle to the aorta. The late sur-
vival after these repairs is good, but arrhythmias (e.g., 
atrial flutter) or conduction defects (e.g., sick sinus syn-
drome) occur in ∼50% of such patients by 30 years after 
the intraatrial switch surgery. Progressive dysfunction of 
the systemic subaortic right ventricle, tricuspid regur-
gitation, ventricular arrhythmias, or cardiac arrest and 
late sudden death are worrisome features. Preferably, 
this malformation is corrected in infancy by transpos-
ing both coronary arteries to the posterior artery and 
transecting, contraposing, and anastomosing the aorta 
and pulmonary arteries (arterial-switch operation). For 
those patients with a VSD in whom it is necessary to 
bypass a severely obstructed LV outflow tract, corrective 
operation employs an intracardiac ventricular baffle and 
extracardiac prosthetic conduit to replace the pulmo-
nary artery (Rastelli procedure).
Single ventricle
This is a family of complex lesions with both atrioven-
tricular valves or a common atrioventricular valve open-
ing to a single ventricular chamber. Associated anomalies 
include abnormal great artery positional relationships, 
pulmonic valvular or subvalvular stenosis, and subaortic 
stenosis. Survival to adulthood depends on a relatively 
normal pulmonary blood flow, yet normal pulmonary 
resistance and good ventricular function. Modifications 
of the Fontan approach are generally applied to carefully 
selected patients with creation of a pathway(s) from the 
systemic veins to the pulmonary arteries.
Tricuspid atresia
This malformation is characterized by atresia of the tri-
cuspid valve; an interatrial communication; and, fre-
quently, hypoplasia of the right ventricle and pulmo-
nary artery. The clinical picture is usually dominated by 
severe cyanosis due to obligatory admixture of systemic 
and pulmonary venous blood in the left ventricle. The 
ECG characteristically shows RA enlargement, left-axis 
deviation, and LV hypertrophy.
Atrial septostomy and palliative operations to increase 
pulmonary blood flow, often by anastomosis of a sys-
temic artery or vein to a pulmonary artery, may allow 
survival to the second or third decade. A Fontan atri-
opulmonary or total cavopulmonary connection may 
then allow functional correction in those patients with 
normal or low pulmonary arterial resistance pressure 
and good LV function.
Ebstein’s anomaly
Characterized by a downward displacement of the tri-
cuspid valve into the right ventricle, due to anomalous 
attachment of the tricuspid leaflets, the Ebstein tricuspid 
valve tissue is dysplastic and results in tricuspid regur-
gitation. The abnormally situated tricuspid orifice pro-
duces an “atrialized” portion of the RV lying between 
the atrioventricular ring and the origin of the valve, 
which is continuous with the RA chamber. Often, the 
RV is hypoplastic. Although the clinical manifestations 
are variable, some patients come to initial attention 
because of either (1) progressive cyanosis from right-
to-left atrial shunting, (2) symptoms due to tricuspid 
regurgitation and RV dysfunction, or (3) paroxysmal 
atrial tachyarrhythmias with or without atrioventricu-
lar bypass tracts (Wolff-Parkinson-White [WPW] syn-
drome). Diagnostic findings by two-dimensional echo-
cardiography include the abnormal positional relation 
between the tricuspid and mitral valves with abnormally 
increased apical displacement of the septal tricuspid leaf-
let. Tricuspid regurgitation is quantitated by Doppler 
examination. Surgical approaches include prosthetic 
replacement of the tricuspid valve when the leaflets are 
tethered or repair of the native valve.
Congenitally corrected transposition
The two fundamental anatomic abnormalities in this 
malformation are transposition of the ascending aorta 
and pulmonary trunk and inversion of the ventricles. 
This arrangement results in desaturated systemic venous 
blood passing from the right atrium through the mitral 
valve to the LV and into the pulmonary trunk, whereas 
oxygenated pulmonary venous blood flows from the 
left atrium through the tricuspid valve to the RV and 
into the aorta. Thus, the circulation is corrected func-
tionally. The clinical presentation, course, and prog-
nosis of patients with congenitally corrected transposi-
tion vary depending on the nature and severity of any 
complicating intracardiac anomalies and of development 
of dysfunction of the systemic subaortic RV. Progres-
sive RV dysfunction and tricuspid regurgitation may 
also develop in one-third of patients by age 30; Ebstein-
type anomalies of the left-side tricuspid atrioventricular 
valve are common. VSD or PS due to obstruction to 
outflow from the right-sided subpulmonary (anatomic 
left) ventricle may coexist. Complete heart block occurs 
at a rate of 2–10% per decade. The diagnosis of the mal-
formation and associated lesions can be established by 
comprehensive two-dimensional echocardiography and 
Doppler examination.
Malpositions of the heart
Positional anomalies refer to conditions in which the 
cardiac apex is in the right side of the chest (dextrocar-
dia), or at the midline (mesocardia), or in which there is a 
normal location of the heart in the left side of the chest 
but abnormal position of the viscera (isolated levocardia). 
218
SECTION IV
Disorders of the Heart
Knowledge of the position of the abdominal organs 
and of the branching pattern of the main stem bronchi 
is important in categorizing these malpositions. When 
dextrocardia occurs without situs inversus, when the 
visceral situs is indeterminate, or if isolated levocardia 
is present, associated, often complex, multiple cardiac 
anomalies are usually present. In contrast, mirror-image 
dextrocardia is usually observed with complete situs 
inversus, which occurs most frequently in individuals 
whose hearts are otherwise normal.
Surgically Modified Congenital 
Heart Disease
Owing to the enormous strides in cardiovascular surgi-
cal techniques that have occurred in the past 60 years, 
a large number of long-term survivors of corrective 
operations in infancy and childhood have reached adult-
hood. These patients are often challenging because of 
the diversity of anatomic, hemodynamic, and electro-
physiologic residua and sequelae of cardiac operations.
The proper care of the survivor of operation for CHD 
requires that the clinician understand the details of the 
malformation before operation; pay meticulous attention 
to the details of the operative procedure; and recognize 
the postoperative residua (conditions left totally or par-
tially uncorrected), the sequelae (conditions caused by 
surgery), and the complications that may have resulted 
from the operation. Except for ligation of an uncompli-
cated patent ductus arteriosus, almost every other surgi-
cal repair leaves behind or causes some abnormality of 
the heart and circulation that may range from trivial to 
serious. Intraoperative transesophageal echocardiography 
assists in detecting unsuspected lesions, in monitoring the 
repair, and in verifying a satisfactory result or directing 
further repair. Thus, even with results that are considered 
clinically to be good to excellent, continued long-term 
postoperative follow-up is advisable.
Cardiac operations importantly involving the atria, 
such as closure of ASD, repair of total or partial anoma-
lous pulmonary venous return, or venous switch correc-
tions of complete transposition of the great arteries (the 
Mustard or Senning operations), may be followed years 
later by sinus node or atrioventricular node dysfunc-
tion or by atrial arrhythmias (especially atrial flutter). 
Intraventricular surgery may also result in electro-
physiologic consequences, including complete heart 
block necessitating pacemaker insertion to avoid sud-
den death. Valvular problems may arise late after ini-
tial cardiac operation. An example is the progressive 
stenosis of an initially nonobstructive bicuspid aortic 
valve in the patient who underwent aortic coarcta-
tion repair. Such aortic valves may also be the site of 
infective endocarditis. After repair of the ostium pri-
mum ASD, the cleft mitral valve may become pro-
gressively regurgitant. Tricuspid regurgitation may also 
be progressive in the postoperative patient with tetral-
ogy of Fallot if RV outflow tract obstruction was not 
relieved adequately at initial surgery. In many patients 
with surgically modified CHD, inadequate relief of an 
obstructive lesion, or a residual regurgitant lesion, or a 
residual shunt will cause or hasten the onset of clinical 
signs and symptoms of myocardial dysfunction. Despite 
a good hemodynamic repair, many patients with a sub-
aortic RV develop RV decompensation and signs of left 
heart failure. In many patients, particularly those who 
were cyanotic for many years before operation, a preex-
isting compromise in ventricular performance is due to 
the original underlying malformation.
A final category of postoperative problems involves 
the use of prosthetic valves, patches, or conduits in 
the operative repair. The special risks include infec-
tive endocarditis, thrombus formation, and premature 
degeneration and calcification of the prosthetic mate-
rials. There are many patients in whom extracardiac 
conduits are required to correct the circulation func-
tionally and often to carry blood to the lungs from the 
right atrium or right ventricle. These conduits may 
develop intraluminal obstruction, and, if they include 
a prosthetic valve, it may show progressive calcification 
and thickening. Many such patients face reinterven-
tion (interventional cardiac catheterization or surgical 
reoperation) one or more times in their lives. Such care 
should be directed to centers specializing in adults with 
complex congenital cardiovascular malformations. The 
effect of pregnancy in postoperative patients depends on 
the outcome of the repair, including the presence and 
severity of residua, sequelae, or complications. Contra-
ception is an important topic with such patients. Tubal 
ligation should be considered in those in whom preg-
nancy is strictly contraindicated.
Endocarditis prophylaxis
Two major predisposing causes of infective endocar-
ditis are a susceptible cardiovascular substrate and a 
source of bacteremia. The clinical and bacteriologic 
profile of infective endocarditis in patients with CHD 
has changed with the advent of intracardiac surgery and 
of prosthetic devices. Prophylaxis includes both anti-
microbial and hygienic measures. Meticulous dental 
and skin care are required. Routine antimicrobial pro-
phylaxis is recommended for bacteremic dental pro-
cedures or instrumentation through an infected site in 
most patients with operated CHD, particularly if for-
eign material, such as a prosthetic valve, conduit, sur-
gically constructed shunt, etc., is in place. In the case 
of patches, in the absence of a high-pressure patch leak, 
prophylaxis is usually recommended for 6 months until 
there is endothelialization. Individuals with unrepaired 
cyanotic heart disease are also generally recommended 
to receive prophylaxis (Chap. 25).
 Patrick O’Gara 
I  Joseph Loscalzo 
219
 The role of the physical examination in the evaluation 
of patients with valvular heart disease is also considered 
in Chaps. 9 and 10; of electrocardiography (ECG) in 
 Chap. 11 ; of echocardiography and other noninvasive 
imaging techniques in  Chap. 12 ; and of cardiac cathe-
terization and angiography in  Chap. 13 . 
 Mitral stenosis 
 etiology anD patHology 
 Rheumatic fever is the leading cause of mitral steno-
sis (MS)  ( Table 20-1 ) . Other less common etiologies 
of obstruction to left atrial outfl ow include congeni-
tal mitral valve stenosis, cor triatriatum, mitral annular 
calcifi cation with extension onto the leafl ets, systemic 
lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, left atrial 
myxoma, and infective endocarditis with large vegeta-
tions. Pure or predominant MS occurs in approximately 
40% of all patients with rheumatic heart disease and a 
history of rheumatic fever. In other patients with rheu-
matic heart disease, lesser degrees of MS may accompany 
mitral regurgitation (MR) and aortic valve disease. With 
reductions in the incidence of acute rheumatic fever, 
particularly in temperate climates and developed coun-
tries, the incidence of MS has declined considerably 
over the past few decades. However, it remains a major 
problem in developing nations, especially in tropical 
and semitropical climates. 
 In rheumatic MS, the valve leafl ets are diffusely 
thickened by fi brous tissue and/or calcifi c deposits. 
The mitral commissures fuse, the chordae tendineae 
fuse and shorten, the valvular cusps become rigid, and 
these changes, in turn, lead to narrowing at the apex of 
the funnel-shaped (“fi sh-mouth”) valve. Although the 
initial insult to the mitral valve is rheumatic, the later 
changes may be a nonspecifi c process resulting from 
trauma to the valve caused by altered fl ow patterns due 
to the initial deformity. Calcifi cation of the stenotic 
mitral valve immobilizes the leafl ets and narrows the 
orifi ce further. Thrombus formation and arterial embo-
lization may arise from the calcifi c valve itself, but in 
patients with atrial fi brillation (AF), thrombi arise more 
frequently from the dilated left atrium (LA), particularly 
from within the left atrial appendage. 
 patHopHysiology 
 In normal adults, the area of the mitral valve orifi ce is 
4–6 cm 2 . In the presence of signifi cant obstruction, i.e., 
when the orifi ce area is reduced to <∼2 cm 2 , blood can 
fl ow from the LA to the left ventricle (LV) only if pro-
pelled by an abnormally elevated left atrioventricular pres-
sure gradient, the hemodynamic hallmark of MS. When 
the mitral valve opening is reduced to <1 cm 2 , often 
referred to as “severe” MS, an LA pressure of ∼25 mmHg 
is required to maintain a normal cardiac output (CO). The 
elevated pulmonary venous and pulmonary arterial (PA) 
wedge pressures reduce pulmonary compliance, contribut-
ing to exertional dyspnea. The fi rst bouts of dyspnea are 
usually precipitated by clinical events that increase the rate 
of blood fl ow across the mitral orifi ce, resulting in further 
elevation of the LA pressure (see later in this chapter). 
 To assess the severity of obstruction hemodynami-
cally, both the transvalvular pressure gradient and the 
fl ow rate must be measured ( Chap. 13 ). The latter 
depends not only on the CO but on the heart rate, as 
well. An increase in heart rate shortens diastole pro-
portionately more than systole and diminishes the time 
available for fl ow across the mitral valve. Therefore, 
at any given level of CO, tachycardia, including that 
associated with rapid AF, augments the transvalvular 
pressure gradient and elevates further the LA pressure. 
Similar considerations apply to the pathophysiology of 
tricuspid stenosis. 
 VALVULAR HEART DISEASE 
 cHaPter 20 
220
SECTION IV
Disorders of the Heart
Table 20-1 
Major Causes of Valvular Heart Diseases
Valve Lesion
Etiologies
Valve Lesion
Etiologies
Mitral stenosis
Mitral regurgitation
Aortic stenosis
Aortic regurgitation
Rheumatic fever
Congenital
Severe mitral annular calcification
SLE, RA
Acute
  Endocarditis
  Papillary muscle rupture (post-MI)
  Trauma
  Chordal rupture/leaflet flail (MVP, IE)
Chronic
  Myxomatous (MVP)
  Rheumatic fever
  Endocarditis (healed)
  Mitral annular calcification
  Congenital (cleft, AV canal)
  HOCM with SAM
  Ischemic (LV remodeling)
  Dilated cardiomyopathy 
  Radiation
Congenital (bicuspid, unicuspid)
Degenerative calcific
Rheumatic fever 
Radiation
Valvular
  Congenital (bicuspid)
  Endocarditis
  Rheumatic fever
  Myxomatous (prolapse)
  Traumatic
  Syphilis
  Ankylosing spondylitis
Root disease
  Aortic dissection
  Cystic medial degeneration
    Marfan’s syndrome
    Bicuspid aortic valve
    Nonsyndromic familial aneurysm
  Aortitis
  Hypertension
Tricuspid stenosis
Tricuspid regurgitation
Pulmonic stenosis
Pulmonic regurgitation
Rheumatic
Congenital
Primary
  Rheumatic
  Endocarditis
  Myxomatous (TVP)
  Carcinoid
  Radiation
  Congenital (Ebstein’s)
  Trauma
  Papillary muscle injury (post-MI)
Secondary
  RV and tricuspid annular dilatation
  Multiple causes of RV enlargement  
  (e.g., long-standing pulmonary HTN)
  Chronic RV apical pacing
Congenital
Carcinoid
Valve disease
  Congenital
  Postvalvotomy
  Endocarditis
Annular enlargement
  Pulmonary hypertension
  Idiopathic dilation
  Marfan’s syndrome
Abbreviations: AV, atrioventricular; HOCM, hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy; HTN, hypertension; IE, infective endocarditis; LV, left ven-
tricular; MI, myocardial infarction; MVP, mitral valve prolapse; RA, rheumatoid arthritis; RV, right ventricular; SAM, systolic anterior motion of the 
anterior mitral valve leaflet; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus; TVP, tricuspid valve prolapse.
The LV diastolic pressure and ejection fraction (EF) 
are normal in isolated MS. In MS and sinus rhythm, the 
elevated LA and PA wedge pressures exhibit a prominent 
atrial contraction pattern (a wave) and a gradual pres-
sure decline after the v wave and mitral valve opening 
(y descent). In severe MS and whenever pulmonary vas-
cular resistance is significantly increased, the pulmonary 
arterial pressure (PAP) is elevated at rest and rises further 
during exercise, often causing secondary elevations of 
right ventricular (RV) end-diastolic pressure and volume.
Cardiac output
In patients with moderate MS (mitral valve orifice 
1–1.5 cm2), the CO is normal or almost so at rest, but 
rises subnormally during exertion. In patients with 
severe MS (valve area <1 cm2), particularly those in 
whom pulmonary vascular resistance is markedly ele-
vated, the CO is subnormal at rest and may fail to rise 
or may even decline during activity.
Pulmonary hypertension
The clinical and hemodynamic features of MS are influ-
enced importantly by the level of the PAP. Pulmonary 
hypertension results from: (1) passive backward trans-
mission of the elevated LA pressure; (2) pulmonary 
arteriolar constriction (the so-called “second stenosis”), 
which presumably is triggered by LA and pulmonary 
venous hypertension (reactive pulmonary hypertension); 
 
CHAPTER 20
Valvular Heart Disease
221
(3) interstitial edema in the walls of the small pulmo-
nary vessels; and (4) at end stage, organic obliterative 
changes in the pulmonary vascular bed. Severe pulmo-
nary hypertension results in RV enlargement, secondary 
tricuspid regurgitation (TR), and pulmonic regurgitation 
(PR), as well as right-sided heart failure.
Symptoms
In temperate climates, the latent period between the 
initial attack of rheumatic carditis (in the increasingly 
rare circumstances in which a history of one can be 
elicited) and the development of symptoms due to MS 
is generally about two decades; most patients begin to 
experience disability in the fourth decade of life. Studies 
carried out before the development of mitral valvotomy 
revealed that once a patient with MS became seriously 
symptomatic, the disease progressed continuously to 
death within 2–5 years.
In patients whose mitral orifices are large enough to 
accommodate a normal blood flow with only mild ele-
vations of LA pressure, marked elevations of this pres-
sure leading to dyspnea and cough may be precipitated 
by sudden changes in the heart rate, volume status, or 
CO, as, for example, with severe exertion, excitement, 
fever, severe anemia, paroxysmal AF and other tachy-
cardias, sexual intercourse, pregnancy, and thyrotoxico-
sis. As MS progresses, lesser degrees of stress precipitate 
dyspnea, the patient becomes limited in daily activi-
ties, and orthopnea and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea 
develop. The development of permanent AF often 
marks a turning point in the patient’s course and is gen-
erally associated with acceleration of the rate at which 
symptoms progress.
Hemoptysis results from rupture of pulmonary-
bronchial venous connections secondary to pulmo-
nary venous hypertension. It occurs most frequently 
in patients who have elevated LA pressures without 
markedly elevated pulmonary vascular resistances and 
is rarely fatal. Recurrent pulmonary emboli, sometimes 
with infarction, are an important cause of morbidity 
and mortality rates late in the course of MS. Pulmonary 
infections, i.e., bronchitis, bronchopneumonia, and lobar 
pneumonia, commonly complicate untreated MS, espe-
cially during the winter months.
Pulmonary changes
In addition to the aforementioned changes in the pul-
monary vascular bed, fibrous thickening of the walls 
of the alveoli and pulmonary capillaries occurs com-
monly in MS. The vital capacity, total lung capacity, 
maximal breathing capacity, and oxygen uptake per 
unit of ventilation are reduced. Pulmonary compliance 
falls further as pulmonary capillary pressure rises during 
exercise.
Thrombi and emboli
Thrombi may form in the left atria, particularly within 
the enlarged atrial appendages of patients with MS. Sys-
temic embolization, the incidence of which is 10–20%, 
occurs more frequently in patients with AF, in patients 
>65 years of age, and in those with a reduced CO. 
However, systemic embolization may be the presenting 
feature in otherwise asymptomatic patients with only 
mild MS.
Physical Findings
(See also Chaps. 9 and 10)
Inspection and palpation
In patients with severe MS, there may be a malar flush 
with pinched and blue facies. In patients with sinus 
rhythm and severe pulmonary hypertension or associ-
ated tricuspid stenosis (TS), the jugular venous pulse 
reveals prominent a waves due to vigorous right atrial 
systole. The systemic arterial pressure is usually normal 
or slightly low. An RV tap along the left sternal border 
signifies an enlarged RV. A diastolic thrill may rarely be 
present at the cardiac apex, with the patient in the left 
lateral recumbent position.
Auscultation
The first heart sound (S1) is usually accentuated and 
slightly delayed. The pulmonic component of the sec-
ond heart sound (P2) also is often accentuated, and 
the two components of the second heart sound (S2) 
are closely split. The opening snap (OS) of the mitral 
valve is most readily audible in expiration at, or just 
medial to, the cardiac apex. This sound generally fol-
lows the sound of aortic valve closure (A2) by 0.05–
0.12 s. The time interval between A2 and OS varies 
inversely with the severity of the MS. The OS is fol-
lowed by a low-pitched, rumbling, diastolic murmur, 
heard best at the apex with the patient in the left lat-
eral recumbent position (see Fig. 9-5); it is accentu-
ated by mild exercise (e.g., a few rapid sit-ups) carried 
out just before auscultation. In general, the duration 
of this murmur correlates with the severity of the ste-
nosis in patients with preserved CO. In patients with 
sinus rhythm, the murmur often reappears or becomes 
louder during atrial systole (presystolic accentuation). 
Soft, grade I or II/VI systolic murmurs are commonly 
heard at the apex or along the left sternal border in 
patients with pure MS and do not necessarily signify 
the presence of MR. Hepatomegaly, ankle edema, 
ascites, and pleural effusion, particularly in the right 
pleural cavity, may occur in patients with MS and RV 
failure.
222
SECTION IV
Disorders of the Heart
Associated lesions
With severe pulmonary hypertension, a pansystolic 
murmur produced by functional TR may be audible 
along the left sternal border. This murmur is usually 
louder during inspiration and diminishes during forced 
expiration (Carvallo’s sign). When the CO is mark-
edly reduced in MS, the typical auscultatory findings, 
including the diastolic rumbling murmur, may not be 
detectable (silent MS), but they may reappear as com-
pensation is restored. The Graham Steell murmur of PR, 
a high-pitched, diastolic, decrescendo blowing murmur 
along the left sternal border, results from dilation of the 
pulmonary valve ring and occurs in patients with mitral 
valve disease and severe pulmonary hypertension. This 
murmur may be indistinguishable from the more com-
mon murmur produced by aortic regurgitation (AR), 
although it may increase in intensity with inspiration 
and is accompanied by a loud and often palpable P2.
Laboratory Examination
ECG
In MS and sinus rhythm, the P wave usually suggests 
LA enlargement (see Fig. 11-8). It may become tall and 
peaked in lead II and upright in lead V1 when severe 
pulmonary hypertension or TS complicates MS and 
right atrial (RA) enlargement occurs. The QRS com-
plex is usually normal. However, with severe pulmonary 
hypertension, right-axis deviation and RV hypertrophy 
are often present.
Echocardiogram
(See also Chap. 12) Transthoracic echocardiography 
(TTE) with color flow and spectral Doppler imaging 
provides critical information, including measurements 
of mitral inflow velocity during early (E wave) and late 
(A wave in patients in sinus rhythm) diastolic filling, 
estimates of the transvalvular peak and mean gradients 
and of the mitral orifice area, the presence and severity 
of any associated MR, the extent of leaflet calcification 
and restriction, the degree of distortion of the subvalvu-
lar apparatus, and the anatomic suitability for percutane-
ous mitral balloon valvotomy (percutaneous mitral bal-
loon valvuloplasty [PMBV]; see later). In addition, TTE 
provides an assessment of LV and RV function, cham-
ber sizes, an estimation of the pulmonary artery pressure 
(PAP) based on the tricuspid regurgitant jet velocity, and 
an indication of the presence and severity of any associ-
ated valvular lesions. Transesophageal echocardiography 
(TEE) provides superior images and should be employed 
when TTE is inadequate for guiding management 
decisions. TEE is especially indicated to exclude the 
presence of left atrial thrombus prior to PMBV.
Chest x-ray
The earliest changes are straightening of the upper left 
border of the cardiac silhouette, prominence of the 
main pulmonary arteries, dilation of the upper lobe pul-
monary veins, and posterior displacement of the esoph-
agus by an enlarged LA. Kerley B lines are fine, dense, 
opaque, horizontal lines that are most prominent in the 
lower and midlung fields and that result from distention 
of interlobular septae and lymphatics with edema when 
the resting mean LA pressure exceeds approximately 
20 mmHg.
Differential Diagnosis
Like MS, significant MR may also be associated with 
a prominent diastolic murmur at the apex due to 
increased antegrade transmitral flow, but in patients 
with isolated MR, this diastolic murmur commences 
slightly later than in patients with MS, and there is often 
clear-cut evidence of LV enlargement. An opening snap 
and increased P2 are absent, and S1 is soft or absent. An 
apical pansystolic murmur of at least grade III/VI inten-
sity as well as an S3 suggest significant MR. Similarly, 
the apical mid-diastolic murmur associated with severe 
AR (Austin Flint murmur) may be mistaken for MS but 
can be differentiated from it because it is not intensified 
in presystole and becomes softer with administration of 
amyl nitrite. TS, which occurs rarely in the absence of 
MS, may mask many of the clinical features of MS or be 
clinically silent; when present, the diastolic murmur of 
TS increases with inspiration.
Atrial septal defect (Chap. 19) may be mistaken for 
MS; in both conditions there is often clinical, ECG, and 
chest x-ray evidence of RV enlargement and accentua-
tion of pulmonary vascularity. However, the absence of 
LA enlargement and of Kerley B lines and the demon-
stration of fixed splitting of S2 with a grade 2 or 3 mid-
systolic murmur at the mid to upper left sternal border 
all favor atrial septal defect over MS. Atrial septal defects 
with large left-to-right shunts may result in functional 
TS because of the enhanced diastolic flow.
Left atrial myxoma (Chap. 23) may obstruct LA emp-
tying, causing dyspnea, a diastolic murmur, and hemo-
dynamic changes resembling those of MS. However, 
patients with an LA myxoma often have features sugges-
tive of a systemic disease, such as weight loss, fever, ane-
mia, systemic emboli, and elevated serum IgG and inter-
leukin 6 (IL-6) concentrations. The auscultatory findings 
may change markedly with body position. The diagnosis 
can be established by the demonstration of a characteris-
tic echo-producing mass in the LA with TTE.
 
CHAPTER 20
Valvular Heart Disease
223
Cardiac Catheterization
Left and right heart catheterization is useful when there is 
a discrepancy between the clinical and TTE findings that 
cannot be resolved with either TEE or cardiac magnetic 
resonance (CMR) imaging. The growing experience 
with CMR for the assessment of patients with valvular 
heart disease may decrease the need for invasive catheter-
ization. Catheterization is helpful in assessing associated 
lesions, such as aortic stenosis (AS) and AR. Catheter-
ization and coronary angiography are not usually neces-
sary to aid in decision making about surgery in patients 
younger than 65 years of age, with typical findings of 
severe mitral obstruction on physical examination and 
TTE. In men older than 40 years of age, women older 
than 45 years of age, and younger patients with coronary 
risk factors, especially those with positive noninvasive 
stress tests for myocardial ischemia, coronary angiogra-
phy is advisable preoperatively to identify patients with 
critical coronary obstructions that should be bypassed at 
the time of operation. Computed tomographic coronary 
angiography (CTCA) (Chap. 12) is now often used to 
screen preoperatively for the presence of coronary artery 
disease (CAD) in patients with valvular heart disease and 
low pretest likelihood of CAD. Catheterization and left 
ventriculography are indicated in most patients who have 
undergone PMBV or previous mitral valve surgery, and 
who have redeveloped limiting symptoms, especially 
if questions regarding the severity of the valve lesion(s) 
remain after echocardiography.
treatment	
Mitral Stenosis
(See Fig. 20-1) Penicillin prophylaxis of group A 
β-hemolytic streptococcal infections (Chap. 26) for sec-
ondary prevention of rheumatic fever is important for 
at-risk patients with rheumatic MS (Table 20-2). Rec-
ommendations for infective endocarditis prophylaxis 
have recently changed. In symptomatic patients, some 
improvement usually occurs with restriction of sodium 
intake and small doses of oral diuretics. Beta blockers, 
nondihydropyridine calcium channel blockers (e.g., vera-
pamil or diltiazem), and digitalis glycosides are useful 
in slowing the ventricular rate of patients with AF. War-
farin to an international normalized ratio (INR) of 2–3 
should be administered indefinitely to patients with MS, 
who have AF or a history of thromboembolism. The rou-
tine use of warfarin in patients in sinus rhythm with LA 
enlargement (maximal dimension >5.5 cm) with or with-
out spontaneous echo contrast is more controversial.
If AF is of relatively recent onset in a patient  
whose MS is not severe enough to warrant PMBV or 
surgical commissurotomy, reversion to sinus rhythm  
pharmacologically or by means of electrical counter-
shock is indicated. Usually, cardioversion should be 
undertaken after the patient has had at least 3 consecu-
tive weeks of anticoagulant treatment to a therapeutic 
INR. If cardioversion is indicated more urgently, then 
intravenous heparin should be provided and TEE per-
formed to exclude the presence of left atrial thrombus 
before the procedure. Conversion to sinus rhythm is 
rarely successful or sustained in patients with severe MS, 
particularly those in whom the LA is especially enlarged 
or in whom AF has been present for more than 1 year.
Figure 20-1 
Management strategy for patients with mitral steno-
sis (MS) and mild symptoms. † There is controversy as to 
whether patients with severe MS (MVA <1 cm2) and severe 
pulmonary hypertension (PH) (PASP >60 mmHg) should 
undergo percutaneous mitral balloon valvotomy (PMBV) or 
mitral valve replacement (MVR) to prevent right ventricu-
lar failure. CXR, chest x-ray; ECG, electrocardiogram; echo, 
echocardiography; LA, left atrial; MR, mitral regurgitation; 
MVA, mitral valve area; MVG, mean mitral valve pressure 
gradient; NYHA, New York Heart Association; PASP, pulmo-
nary artery systolic pressure; PAWP, pulmonary artery wedge 
pressure; 2-D, two-dimensional. (From RO Bonow et al: J Am 
Coll Cardiol 48:e1, 2006; with permission.)
History, physical exam, CXR, ECG, 2D echo/Doppler
Mild stenosis
MVA > 1.5 cm2
Moderate or
severe stenosis
MVA ≤ 1.5 cm2
Exercise
PASP > 60 mmHg
PAWP ≥ 25 mmHg
MVG > 15 mmHg
Valve morphology
favorable for PMBV?
Valve morphology
favorable for PMBV?
Yearly
follow-up
6-month
follow-up
6-month
follow-up
Class IIb
Class IIa
Class I
Severe PH
PAP > 60 mmHg
Consider
PMBV
† Consider
commissurotomy or MVR
Exclude LA clot,
3+ to 4+ MR
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Symptomatic mitral stenosis
NYHA functional class II
224
SECTION IV
Disorders of the Heart
Mitral Valvotomy  Unless there is a contra-
indication, mitral valvotomy is indicated in symptom-
atic [New York Heart Association (NYHA) Functional  
Class II–IV] patients with isolated MS, whose effective 
orifice (valve area) is <∼1 cm2/m2 body surface area, or 
<1.5 cm2 in normal-sized adults. Mitral valvotomy can 
be carried out by two techniques: PMBV and surgical 
valvotomy. In PMBV (Figs. 20-2 and 20-3), a catheter is 
directed into the LA after transseptal puncture, and a 
single balloon is directed across the valve and inflated 
in the valvular orifice. Ideal patients have relatively pli-
able leaflets with little or no commissural calcium. In 
addition, the subvalvular structures should not be sig-
nificantly scarred or thickened, and there should be no 
left atrial thrombus. The short- and long-term results 
of this procedure in appropriate patients are similar to 
those of surgical valvotomy, but with less morbidity and 
a lower periprocedural mortality rate. Event-free survival 
in younger (<45 years) patients with pliable valves is  
Table 20-2
Medical Therapy of Valvular Heart Disease
Lesion
Symptom Control
Natural History
Mitral  
stenosis
Mitral  
regurgitation
Aortic  
stenosis
Aortic  
regurgitation
Beta blockers, non-
dihydropyridine 
calcium channel 
blockers, or digoxin 
for rate control of 
AF; cardioversion 
for new-onset AF 
and HF; diuretics 
for HF
Diuretics for HF
Vasodilators for  
acute MR
Diuretics for HF
Diuretics and vasodi-
lators for HF
Warfarin for AF or 
thromboembo-
lism; PCN for RF 
prophylaxis
Warfarin for AF or 
thromboembolism
Vasodilators for 
HTN
No proven therapy
Vasodilators for 
HTN
Note: Antibiotic prophylaxis is recommended according to cur-
rent American Heart Association guidelines. For patients with these 
forms of valvular heart disease, prophylaxis is indicated for a prior 
history of endocarditis. HF is an indication for surgical or percutane-
ous treatment, and the recommendations here pertain to short-term 
therapy prior to definitive correction of the valve lesion. For patients 
whose comorbidities prohibit surgery, the medical therapies listed 
can be continued according to available guidelines for the manage-
ment of HF. See text.
Abbreviations: AF, atrial fibrillation; HF, heart failure; HTN, systemic 
hypertension; PCN, penicillin; RF, rheumatic fever.
Source: Adapted from NA Boon, P Bloomfield: Heart 87:395, 2002; 
with permission.
D
C
B
A
Guide-
wire
Stiffening
cannula
Figure 20-2 
Inoue balloon technique for percutaneous mitral balloon 
valvotomy. A. After transseptal puncture, the deflated bal-
loon catheter is advanced across the interatrial septum, then 
across the mitral valve and into the left ventricle. B–D. The 
balloon is inflated stepwise within the mitral orifice.
ECG
PREDILATATION
40
LV
LA
20
Pressure (mmHg)
0
Mean mitral gradient 15 mmHg
Cardiac output 3 L/min
Mitral valve area 0.6 cm2
ECG
POSTDILATATION
40
20
0
Mean mitral gradient 3 mmHg
Cardiac output 3.8 L/min
Mitral valve area 1.8 cm2
LV
LA
Figure 20-3 
Simultaneous left atrial (LA) and left ventricular (LV) 
pressure before and after percutaneous mitral balloon val-
vuloplasty (PMBV) in a patient with severe mitral stenosis. 
(Courtesy of Raymond G. McKay, MD; with permission.)
 
CHAPTER 20
Valvular Heart Disease
225
excellent, with rates as high as 80–90% over 3–7 years. 
Therefore, PMBV has become the procedure of choice 
for such patients when it can be performed by a skilled 
operator in a high-volume center.
Transthoracic echocardiography is helpful in identi-
fying patients for the percutaneous procedure, and TEE 
is performed routinely to exclude left atrial thrombus 
at the time of the scheduled procedure. An “echo score” 
has been developed to help guide decision making. The 
score accounts for the degree of leaflet thickening, calci-
fication, and mobility, and for the extent of subvalvular 
thickening. A lower score predicts a higher likelihood of 
successful PMBV.
In patients in whom PMBV is not possible or unsuc-
cessful, or in many patients with restenosis, an “open” 
valvotomy using cardiopulmonary bypass is neces-
sary. In addition to opening the valve commissures, it is 
important to loosen any subvalvular fusion of papillary 
muscles and chordae tendineae and to remove large 
deposits of calcium, thereby improving valvular func-
tion, as well as to remove atrial thrombi. The periopera-
tive mortality rate is ∼2%.
Successful valvotomy is defined by a 50% reduction 
in the mean mitral valve gradient and a doubling of the 
mitral valve area. Successful valvotomy, whether bal-
loon or surgical, usually results in striking symptomatic 
and hemodynamic improvement and prolongs sur-
vival. However, there is no evidence that the procedure 
improves the prognosis of patients with slight or no 
functional impairment. Therefore, unless recurrent sys-
temic embolization or severe pulmonary hypertension 
has occurred (PA systolic pressures >50 mmHg at rest 
or >60 mmHg with exercise), valvotomy is not recom-
mended for patients who are entirely asymptomatic and/
or who have mild stenosis (mitral valve area >1.5 cm2). 
When there is little symptomatic improvement after val-
votomy, it is likely that the procedure was ineffective, 
that it induced MR, or that associated valvular or myo-
cardial disease was present. About half of all patients 
undergoing surgical mitral valvotomy require reopera-
tion by 10 years. In the pregnant patient with MS, val-
votomy should be carried out if pulmonary congestion 
occurs despite intensive medical treatment. PMBV is the 
preferred strategy in this setting and is performed with 
TEE and no or minimal x-ray exposure.
Mitral valve replacement (MVR) is necessary in 
patients with MS and significant associated MR, those 
in whom the valve has been severely distorted by 
previous transcatheter or operative manipulation, or 
those in whom the surgeon does not find it possible 
to improve valve function significantly with valvotomy.  
MVR is now routinely performed with preservation 
of the chordal attachments to optimize LV functional 
recovery. Perioperative mortality rates with MVR 
vary with age, LV function, the presence of CAD, and  
associated comorbidities. They average 5% overall but 
are lower in young patients and may be twice as high 
in patients >65 years of age with comorbidity rates 
(Table 20-3). Since there are also long-term complica-
tions of valve replacement, patients in whom preopera-
tive evaluation suggests the possibility that MVR may be 
required should be operated on only if they have severe 
MS—i.e., an orifice area ≤1 cm2—and are in NYHA class III, 
i.e., symptomatic with ordinary activity despite optimal 
medical therapy. The overall 10-year survival of surgi-
cal survivors is ∼70%. Long-term prognosis is worse in 
patients >65 years of age and those with marked dis-
ability and marked depression of the CO preoperatively. 
Pulmonary hypertension and RV dysfunction are addi-
tional risk factors for poor outcome.
Mitral Regurgitation
Etiology
MR may result from an abnormality or disease process 
that affects any one or more of the five functional compo-
nents of the mitral valve apparatus (leaflets, annulus, chor-
dae tendineae, papillary muscles, and subjacent myocar-
dium) (Table 20-1). Acute MR can occur in the setting 
of acute myocardial infarction (MI) with papillary muscle 
rupture (Chap. 35), following blunt chest wall trauma, or 
during the course of infective endocarditis. With acute 
Table 20-3
Mortality Rates After Valve Surgerya
Operation
Number
Unadjusted Operative 
Mortality (%)
AVR (isolated)
20,168
3.2
MVR (isolated)
4,616
5.0
AVR + CAB
16,678
5.0
MVR + CAB
2,479
8.8
AVR + MVR
1,239
9.0
MVP
5,617
1.8
MVP + CAB
4,932
4.8
TV surgery
6,235
9.2
PV surgery
480
6.0
aData are for calendar year 2008, in which 912 sites reported a total 
of 276,308 procedures. Data are available from the Society of Tho-
racic Surgeons at http://www.sts.org/documents/pdf/ndb/2ndHarve
stExecutiveSummary_2009.pdf.
Abbreviations: AVR, aortic valve replacement; CAB, coronary artery 
bypass; MVR, mitral valve replacement; MVP, mitral valve repair; 
TV surgery, tricuspid valve repair and replacement; PV surgery, pul-
monic valve repair and replacement.
226
SECTION IV
Disorders of the Heart
MI, the posteromedial papillary muscle is involved much 
more frequently than the anterolateral papillary muscle 
because of its singular blood supply. Transient, acute MR 
can occur during periods of active ischemia and bouts of 
angina pectoris. Rupture of chordae tendineae can result 
in “acute-on-chronic MR” in patients with myxomatous 
degeneration of the valve apparatus.
Chronic MR can result from rheumatic disease, 
mitral valve prolapse (MVP), extensive mitral annu-
lar calcification, congenital valve defects, hypertrophic 
obstructive cardiomyopathy (HOCM), and dilated 
cardiomyopathy (Chap. 21). The rheumatic process 
produces rigidity, deformity, and retraction of the 
valve cusps and commissural fusion, as well as short-
ening, contraction, and fusion of the chordae tendin-
eae. The MR associated with both MVP and HOCM 
is usually dynamic in nature. MR in HOCM occurs 
as a consequence of anterior papillary muscle dis-
placement and systolic anterior motion of the ante-
rior mitral valve leaflet into the narrowed LV outflow 
tract. Annular calcification is especially prevalent among 
patients with advanced renal disease and is commonly 
observed in women >65 years of age with hypertension 
and diabetes. MR may occur as a congenital anomaly 
(Chap. 19), most commonly as a defect of the endocar-
dial cushions (atrioventricular cushion defects). A cleft 
anterior mitral valve leaflet accompanies primum atrial 
septal defect. Chronic MR is frequently secondary to 
ischemia and may occur as a consequence of ventricu-
lar remodeling, papillary muscle displacement, and leaf-
let tethering, or with fibrosis of a papillary muscle, in 
patients with healed myocardial infarction(s) and isch-
emic cardiomyopathy. Similar mechanisms of annu-
lar dilation and ventricular remodeling contribute to 
the MR that occurs among patients with nonischemic 
forms of dilated cardiomyopathy once the left ventricu-
lar end-diastolic dimension reaches 6 cm.
Irrespective of cause, chronic severe MR is often 
progressive, since enlargement of the LA places tension 
on the posterior mitral leaflet, pulling it away from the 
mitral orifice and thereby aggravating the valvular dys-
function. Similarly, LV dilation increases the regurgita-
tion, which, in turn, enlarges the LA and LV further, 
causing chordal rupture and resulting in a vicious circle; 
hence the aphorism, “mitral regurgitation begets mitral 
regurgitation.”
Pathophysiology
The resistance to LV emptying (LV afterload) is reduced 
in patients with MR. As a consequence, the LV is 
decompressed into the LA during ejection, and with 
the reduction in LV size during systole, there is a rapid 
decline in LV tension. The initial compensation to MR 
is more complete LV emptying. However, LV volume 
increases progressively with time as the severity of the 
regurgitation increases and as LV contractile func-
tion deteriorates. This increase in LV volume is often 
accompanied by a reduced forward CO, although LV 
compliance is often increased and, thus, LV diastolic 
pressure does not increase until late in the course. The 
regurgitant volume varies directly with the LV systolic 
pressure and the size of the regurgitant orifice; as men-
tioned earlier, the latter, in turn, is influenced by the 
extent of LV and mitral annular dilation. Since ejec-
tion fraction (EF) rises in severe MR in the presence of 
normal LV function, even a modest reduction in this 
parameter (<60%) reflects significant dysfunction.
During early diastole, as the distended LA empties, 
there is a particularly rapid y descent in the absence of 
accompanying MS. A brief, early diastolic LA-LV pres-
sure gradient (often generating a rapid filling sound [S3] 
and mid-diastolic murmur masquerading as MS) may 
occur in patients with pure MR as a result of the very 
rapid flow of blood across a normal-sized mitral orifice.
Semiquantitative estimates of left ventricular ejection 
fraction (LVEF), CO, PA systolic pressure, regurgi-
tant volume, regurgitant fraction (RF), and the effec-
tive regurgitant orifice area can be obtained during a 
careful Doppler echocardiographic examination. These 
measurements can also be obtained with CMR. Left 
and right heart catheterization with contrast ventricu-
lography is used less frequently. Severe, nonischemic 
MR is defined by a regurgitant volume ≥60 mL/beat, 
regurgitant fraction (RF) ≥50%, and effective regurgi-
tant orifice area ≥0.40 cm2. Severe ischemic MR is usu-
ally associated with an effective regurgitant orifice area 
of >0.3 cm2.
LA compliance
In acute severe MR, the regurgitant volume is delivered 
into a normal-sized LA having normal or reduced com-
pliance. As a result, LA pressures rise markedly for any 
increase in LA volume. The v wave in the LA pressure 
pulse is usually prominent, LA and pulmonary venous 
pressures are markedly elevated, and pulmonary edema 
is common. Because of the rapid rise in LA pressures 
during ventricular systole, the murmur of acute MR is 
early in timing and decrescendo in configuration ending 
well before S2, as a reflection of the progressive diminu-
tion in the LV-LA pressure gradient. LV systolic func-
tion in acute MR may be normal, hyperdynamic, or 
reduced, depending on the clinical context.
Patients with chronic severe MR, on the other hand, 
develop marked LA enlargement and increased LA com-
pliance with little if any increase in LA and pulmo-
nary venous pressures for any increase in LA volume. 
The LA v wave is relatively less prominent. The mur-
mur of chronic MR is classically holosystolic in timing 
 
CHAPTER 20
Valvular Heart Disease
227
and plateau in configuration, as a reflection of the 
near-constant LV-LA pressure gradient. These patients 
usually complain of severe fatigue and exhaustion sec-
ondary to a low forward CO, while symptoms resulting 
from pulmonary congestion are less prominent initially; 
AF is almost invariably present once the LA dilates 
significantly.
Symptoms
Patients with chronic mild-to-moderate isolated MR 
are usually asymptomatic. This form of LV volume 
overload is well tolerated. Fatigue, exertional dyspnea, 
and orthopnea are the most prominent complaints in 
patients with chronic severe MR. Palpitations are com-
mon and may signify the onset of AF. Right-sided heart 
failure, with painful hepatic congestion, ankle edema, 
distended neck veins, ascites, and secondary TR, occurs 
in patients with MR who have associated pulmonary 
vascular disease and marked pulmonary hypertension. 
Conversely, acute pulmonary edema is common in 
patients with acute severe MR.
Physical Findings
In patients with chronic severe MR, the arterial pres-
sure is usually normal, although the carotid arterial pulse 
may show a sharp upstroke owing to the reduced for-
ward cardiac output. A systolic thrill is often palpable at 
the cardiac apex, the LV is hyperdynamic with a brisk 
systolic impulse and a palpable rapid-filling wave (S3), 
and the apex beat is often displaced laterally.
In patients with acute severe MR, the arterial pres-
sure may be reduced with a narrow pulse pressure, the 
jugular venous pressure and wave forms may be nor-
mal or increased and exaggerated, the apical impulse is 
not displaced, and signs of pulmonary congestion are 
prominent.
Auscultation
S1 is generally absent, soft, or buried in the holosys-
tolic murmur of chronic MR. In patients with severe 
MR, the aortic valve may close prematurely, resulting 
in wide but physiologic splitting of S2. A low-pitched 
S3 occurring 0.12–0.17 s after the aortic valve clo-
sure sound, i.e., at the completion of the rapid-filling 
phase of the LV, is believed to be caused by the sud-
den tensing of the papillary muscles, chordae tendin-
eae, and valve leaflets. It may be followed by a short, 
rumbling, mid-diastolic murmur, even in the absence 
of structural MS. A fourth heart sound is often audi-
ble in patients with acute severe MR who are in sinus 
rhythm. A presystolic murmur is not ordinarily heard 
with isolated MR.
A systolic murmur of at least grade III/VI intensity 
is the most characteristic auscultatory finding in chronic 
severe MR. It is usually holosystolic (see Fig. 9-5A), 
but as previously noted it is decrescendo and ceases in 
mid- to late systole in patients with acute severe MR. 
The systolic murmur of chronic MR is usually most 
prominent at the apex and radiates to the axilla. How-
ever, in patients with ruptured chordae tendineae or 
primary involvement of the posterior mitral leaflet with 
prolapse or flail, the regurgitant jet is eccentric, directed 
anteriorly, and strikes the LA wall adjacent to the aor-
tic root. In this situation, the systolic murmur is trans-
mitted to the base of the heart and, therefore, may be 
confused with the murmur of AS. In patients with rup-
tured chordae tendineae, the systolic murmur may have 
a cooing or “seagull” quality, while a flail leaflet may 
produce a murmur with a musical quality. The systolic 
murmur of chronic MR not due to MVP is intensified 
by isometric exercise (hand grip) but is reduced during 
the strain phase of the Valsalva maneuver because of the 
associated decrease in LV preload.
Laboratory Examination
ECG
In patients with sinus rhythm, there is evidence of LA 
enlargement, but RA enlargement also may be present 
when pulmonary hypertension is severe. Chronic severe 
MR is generally associated with AF. In many patients, 
there is no clear-cut ECG evidence of enlargement of 
either ventricle. In others, the signs of eccentric LV 
hypertrophy are present.
Echocardiogram
TTE is indicated to assess the mechanism of the MR 
and its hemodynamic severity. LV function can be 
assessed from LV end-diastolic and end-systolic vol-
umes and EF. Observations can be made regarding leaf-
let structure and function, chordal integrity, LA and LV 
size, annular calcification, and regional and global LV 
systolic function. Doppler imaging should demonstrate 
the width or area of the color flow MR jet within the 
LA, the intensity of the continuous wave Doppler sig-
nal, the pulmonary venous flow contour, the early peak 
mitral inflow velocity, and the quantitative measures 
of regurgitant volume, RF, and effective regurgitant 
orifice area. In addition, the PA pressures can be esti-
mated from the TR jet velocity. TTE is also indicated 
to follow the course of patients with chronic MR and 
to provide rapid assessment for any clinical change. The 
echocardiogram in patients with MVP is described in 
the next section. TEE provides greater detail than TTE 
(see Fig. 12-5).
228
SECTION IV
Disorders of the Heart
Chest x-ray
The LA and LV are the dominant chambers in chronic 
MR. Late in the course of the disease, the LA may be 
massively enlarged and forms the right border of the 
cardiac silhouette. Pulmonary venous congestion, inter-
stitial edema, and Kerley B lines are sometimes noted. 
Marked calcification of the mitral leaflets occurs com-
monly in patients with long-standing, combined 
rheumatic MR and MS. Calcification of the mitral 
annulus may be visualized, particularly on the lateral 
view of the chest. Patients with acute severe MR may 
have asymmetric pulmonary edema if the regurgitant jet 
is directed predominantly to the orifice of an upper lobe 
pulmonary vein.
treatment	
Mitral Regurgitation
Medical 
Treatment  (See Fig. 20-4 and 
Table  20-2) The management of chronic severe MR 
depends to some degree on its cause. Warfarin should 
be provided once AF intervenes with a target INR of 
2–3. Cardioversion should be considered depending on 
the clinical context and left atrial size. In contrast to the 
acute setting, there are no large, long-term prospective 
studies to substantiate the use of vasodilators for the 
Figure 20-4 
Management strategy for patients with 
chronic severe nonischemic mitral regur-
gitation. ∗Mitral valve (MV) repair may be 
performed in asymptomatic patients with 
normal left ventricular (LV) function if per-
formed by an experienced surgical team 
and if the likelihood of successful MV repair 
is >90%. AF, atrial fibrillation; Echo, echo-
cardiography; EF, ejection fraction; ESD, 
end-systolic dimension; eval, evaluation; 
HT, hypertension; MVR, mitral valve replace-
ment. (From RO Bonow et al: J Am Coll Car-
diol 48:e1, 2006; with permission.)
Clinical evaluation + Echo
Symptoms
LV function?
LV function?
Normal LV function
EF > 0.60
ESD < 40 mm
EF < 0.30 and/or
ESD > 55 mm
EF > 0.30
ESD ≤ 55 mm
LV dysfunction
EF ≤ 0.60 and/or
ESD ≥ 40 mm
Class I
Class I
Chordal preservation
likely?
New-onset AF?
Pulmonary HT?
MV repair
If not possible,
MVR
Class IIa
Class IIa
MV repair
MV repair
likely?*
Medical
therapy
Clinical eval every 6 mos
Echo every 6 mos
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Class IIa
No
Yes*
Yes
CHRONIC SEVERE MITRAL REGURGITATION
Reevaluation
treatment of chronic, isolated severe MR with preserved 
LV systolic function in the absence of systemic hyperten-
sion. The severity of MR in the setting of an ischemic or 
nonischemic dilated cardiomyopathy may diminish with 
aggressive, evidence-based treatment of heart failure, 
including the use of diuretics, beta blockers, angiotensin- 
converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, digitalis, and 
biventricular pacing (cardiac resynchronization therapy 
[CRT]). Asymptomatic patients with severe MR in sinus 
rhythm with normal LV size and systolic function should 
avoid isometric forms of exercise.
Patients with acute severe MR require urgent stabi-
lization and preparation for surgery. Diuretics, intrave-
nous vasodilators (particularly sodium nitroprusside), 
and even intraaortic balloon counterpulsation may be 
needed for patients with post-MI papillary muscle rup-
ture or other forms of acute severe MR.
Surgical Treatment  In the selection of patients 
with chronic, nonischemic, severe MR for surgical treatment, 
the often slowly progressive nature of the condition must 
be balanced against the immediate and long-term risks 
associated with operation. These risks are significantly 
lower for primary valve repair than for valve replace-
ment (Table 20-3). Repair usually consists of valve 
reconstruction using a variety of valvuloplasty tech-
niques and insertion of an annuloplasty ring. Repair 
 
CHAPTER 20
Valvular Heart Disease
229
spares the patient the long-term adverse consequences 
of valve replacement, i.e., thromboembolic and hemor-
rhagic complications in the case of mechanical pros-
theses and late valve failure necessitating repeat valve 
replacement in the case of bioprostheses. In addition, 
by preserving the integrity of the papillary muscles, sub-
valvular apparatus, and chordae tendineae, mitral repair 
and valvuloplasty maintain LV function to a relatively 
greater degree.
Surgery for chronic, nonischemic, severe MR is indi-
cated once symptoms occur, especially if valve repair is 
feasible (Fig. 20-4). Other indications for early consid-
eration of mitral valve repair include recent-onset AF 
and pulmonary hypertension, defined as a PA pressure 
≥50 mmHg at rest or ≥60 mmHg with exercise. Surgical 
treatment of chronic, nonischemic severe MR is indi-
cated for asymptomatic patients when LV dysfunction 
is progressive, with LVEF falling below 60% and/or end-
systolic dimension increasing beyond 40 mm. These 
aggressive recommendations for surgery are predicated 
on the outstanding results achieved with mitral valve 
repair, particularly when applied to patients with myxo-
matous disease, such as that associated with prolapse 
or flail leaflet. Indeed, primary valvuloplasty repair of 
patients younger than 75 years with normal LV systolic 
function and no CAD can now be performed by experi-
enced surgeons with <1% perioperative mortality risk. 
Repair is feasible in up to 95% of patients with myxoma-
tous disease. Long-term durability is excellent; the inci-
dence of reoperative surgery for failed primary repair 
is ∼1% per year for 10 years after surgery. For patients 
with AF, left or bi-atrial Maze surgery or radio-frequency 
isolation of the pulmonary veins is often performed to 
reduce the risk of recurrent, postoperative AF.
The surgical management of patients with isch-
emic MR is more complicated and almost always 
involves simultaneous coronary artery revasculariza-
tion. Although current surgical practice includes annu-
loplasty repair with an undersized ring for patients with 
moderate or greater degrees of MR at the time of coro-
nary artery bypass surgery, the efficacy of this approach 
has not been established in prospective, randomized 
trials. There is also uncertainty as to whether or not 
valve repair or replacement is the preferred strategy, 
given the higher incidence of residual or recurrent MR 
after repair in this context compared with outcomes in 
patients with organic (myxomatous) disease. In patients 
with significantly impaired LV function (EF <30%), the 
risk of surgery increases, the recovery of LV performance 
is incomplete, and the long-term survival is reduced. 
However, conservative management has little to offer 
these patients, so operative treatment may be indicated, 
and the clinical and hemodynamic improvement that 
follows surgical treatment of patients with advanced 
disease is occasionally dramatic, especially when severe 
Figure 20-5 
Clip used to grasp the free edges of the anterior and 
posterior leaflets in their midsections during percutane-
ous repair of selected patients with mitral regurgitation. 
(Courtesy of Abbott Vascular. © 2010 Abbott Laboratories. 
All rights reserved.)
CAD is present and bypass grafting can be performed. 
The routine performance of valve repair in patients with 
significant MR in the setting of severe, dilated cardio-
myopathy has not been shown to improve long-term 
survival. Patients with acute severe MR can often be sta-
bilized temporarily with appropriate medical therapy, 
but surgical correction will be necessary, emergently in 
the case of papillary muscle rupture and within days to 
weeks in most other settings.
When surgical treatment is contemplated, left and 
right heart catheterization and left ventriculography 
may be helpful in confirming the presence of severe MR 
in patients in whom there is a discrepancy between the 
clinical and TTE findings that cannot be resolved with 
TEE or CMR. Coronary angiography identifies patients 
who require concomitant coronary revascularization.
Percutaneous Mitral Valve Repair
A transcatheter approach to the treatment of either 
organic or functional MR may be feasible in selected 
patients with appropriate anatomy, although the proper 
role of current techniques remains under active investi-
gation. One approach involves the deployment of a clip 
delivered via transeptal puncture that grasps the leading 
edges of the mitral leaflets in their midportion (ante-
rior scallop 2–posterior scallop 2 or A2-P2, Fig.  20-5). 
The length and width of the gap between these lead-
ing edges have dictated patient eligibility in the trials 
reported to date. Preliminary results with this technically 
demanding technique have been favorable. A second 
approach involves the deployment of a device within the 
coronary sinus that can be adjusted to reduce its circum-
ference, thus secondarily decreasing the circumference 
230
SECTION IV
Disorders of the Heart
of the mitral annulus and the effective orifice area of the 
valve, much like a surgically implanted ring. Variations 
in the anatomic relationship of the coronary sinus to 
the mitral annulus and circumflex coronary artery have 
limited the applicability of this technique. Attempts to 
reduce the septal-lateral dimension of a dilated annulus 
using adjustable cords placed across the LV in a subval-
vular location have also been investigated.
Mitral Valve Prolapse
MVP, also variously termed the systolic click-murmur syn-
drome, Barlow’s syndrome, floppy-valve syndrome, and bil-
lowing mitral leaflet syndrome, is a relatively common but 
highly variable clinical syndrome resulting from diverse 
pathologic mechanisms of the mitral valve apparatus. 
Among these are excessive or redundant mitral leaflet 
tissue, which is commonly associated with myxomatous 
degeneration and greatly increased concentrations of 
certain glycosaminoglycans.
In most patients with MVP, the cause is unknown, 
but in some it appears to be a genetically determined 
collagen disorder. A reduction in the production of 
type III collagen has been incriminated, and electron 
microscopy has revealed fragmentation of collagen fibrils.
MVP is a frequent finding in patients with herita-
ble disorders of connective tissue, including Marfan’s 
syndrome, osteogenesis imperfecta, and Ehlers-Danlos 
syndrome. MVP may be associated with thoracic skel-
etal deformities similar to but not as severe as those in 
Marfan’s syndrome, such as a high-arched palate and 
alterations of the chest and thoracic spine, including 
the so-called straight back syndrome.
In most patients with MVP, myxomatous degenera-
tion is confined to the mitral valve, although the tricus-
pid and aortic valves may also be affected. The posterior 
mitral leaflet is usually more affected than the anterior, 
and the mitral valve annulus is often dilated. In many 
patients, elongated, redundant, or ruptured chordae ten-
dineae cause or contribute to the regurgitation.
MVP also may occur rarely as a sequel to acute rheu-
matic fever, in ischemic heart disease, and in various 
cardiomyopathies, as well as in 20% of patients with 
ostium secundum atrial septal defect.
MVP may lead to excessive stress on the papillary 
muscles, which, in turn, leads to dysfunction and isch-
emia of the papillary muscles and the subjacent ven-
tricular myocardium. Rupture of chordae tendineae and 
progressive annular dilation and calcification contribute 
to valvular regurgitation, which then places more stress 
on the diseased mitral valve apparatus, thereby creat-
ing a vicious circle. The ECG changes (see later in this 
chapter) and ventricular arrhythmias appear to result 
from regional ventricular dysfunction related to the 
increased stress placed on the papillary muscles.
Clinical Features
MVP is more common in women and occurs most 
frequently between the ages of 15 and 30 years; the 
clinical course is most often benign. MVP may also be 
observed in older (>50 years) patients, often men, in 
whom MR is often more severe and requires surgical 
treatment. There is an increased familial incidence for 
some patients, suggesting an autosomal dominant form 
of inheritance with incomplete penetrance. MVP var-
ies in its clinical expression, ranging from only a systolic 
click and murmur with mild prolapse of the posterior 
leaflet to severe MR due to chordal rupture and leaflet 
flail. The degree of myxomatous change of the leaflets 
can also vary widely. In many patients, the condition 
progresses over years or decades; in others it worsens 
rapidly as a result of chordal rupture or endocarditis.
Most patients are asymptomatic and remain so for 
their entire lives. However, in North America, MVP 
is now the most common cause of isolated severe MR 
requiring surgical treatment. Arrhythmias, most com-
monly ventricular premature contractions and paroxys-
mal supraventricular and ventricular tachycardia, as well 
as AF, have been reported and may cause palpitations, 
light-headedness, and syncope. Sudden death is a very 
rare complication and occurs most often in patients 
with severe MR and depressed LV systolic function. 
There may be an excess risk of sudden death among 
patients with a flail leaflet. Many patients have chest 
pain that is difficult to evaluate; it is often substernal, 
prolonged, and not related to exertion, but may rarely 
resemble angina pectoris. Transient cerebral ischemic 
attacks secondary to emboli from the mitral valve due 
to endothelial disruption have been reported. Infective 
endocarditis may occur in patients with MR and/or 
leaflet thickening.
Auscultation
The most important finding is the mid- or late (non-
ejection) systolic click, which occurs 0.14 s or more 
after S1 and is thought to be generated by the sudden 
tensing of slack, elongated chordae tendineae or by the 
prolapsing mitral leaflet when it reaches its maximum 
excursion. Systolic clicks may be multiple and may be 
followed by a high-pitched, late systolic crescendo-
decrescendo murmur, which occasionally is “whoop-
ing” or “honking” and is heard best at the apex. The 
click and murmur occur earlier with standing, during 
the strain phase of the Valsalva maneuver, and with any 
intervention that decreases LV volume, exaggerating the 
propensity of mitral leaflet prolapse. Conversely, squat-
ting and isometric exercises, which increase LV volume, 
diminish MVP; the click-murmur complex is delayed, 
moves away from S1, and may even disappear. Some 
patients have a mid-systolic click without a murmur; 
 
CHAPTER 20
Valvular Heart Disease
231
others have a murmur without a click. Still others have 
both sounds at different times.
Laboratory Examination
The ECG most commonly is normal but may show 
biphasic or inverted T waves in leads II, III, and aVF, 
and occasionally supraventricular or ventricular pre-
mature beats. TTE is particularly effective in identify-
ing the abnormal position and prolapse of the mitral 
valve leaflets. A useful echocardiographic definition of 
MVP is systolic displacement (in the parasternal long 
axis view) of the mitral valve leaflets by at least 2 mm 
into the LA superior to the plane of the mitral annu-
lus. Color flow and continuous wave Doppler imaging 
is helpful to evaluate the associated MR and provide 
semiquantitative estimates of severity. The jet lesion of 
MR due to MVP is most often eccentric, and assess-
ment of RF and effective regurgitant orifice area can be 
difficult. TEE is indicated when more accurate informa-
tion is required and is performed routinely for intraop-
erative guidance for valve repair. Invasive left ventricu-
lography is rarely necessary but can also show prolapse 
of the posterior and sometimes of both mitral valve 
leaflets.
treatment	
Mitral Valve Prolapse
Infective endocarditis prophylaxis is indicated only 
for patients with a prior history of endocarditis. Beta 
blockers sometimes relieve chest pain and control pal-
pitations. If the patient is symptomatic from severe MR, 
mitral valve repair (or rarely, replacement) is indicated 
(Fig. 20-4). Antiplatelet agents, such as aspirin, should 
be given to patients with transient ischemic attacks, and 
if these are not effective, anticoagulants, such as war-
farin, should be considered. Warfarin is also indicated 
once AF intervenes.
Aortic Stenosis
AS occurs in about one-fourth of all patients with 
chronic valvular heart disease; approximately 80% of 
adult patients with symptomatic valvular AS are male.
Etiology and Pathogenesis
(Table 20-1) AS in adults is due to degenerative cal-
cification of the aortic cusps and occurs most com-
monly on a substrate of congenital disease (bicuspid 
aortic valve [BAV]), chronic (tri-)leaflet deterioration, 
or previous rheumatic inflammation. A recent patho-
logic study of specimens removed at the time of aor-
tic valve replacement for AS showed that 53% were 
bicuspid and 4% unicuspid. Contrary to previous teach-
ings, the process of aortic valve deterioration and calci-
fication is not a passive one, but rather one that shares 
many features with vascular atherosclerosis, including 
endothelial dysfunction, lipid accumulation, inflamma-
tory cell activation, cytokine release, and upregulation 
of several signaling pathways (Fig. 20-6). Eventually, 
valvular myofibroblasts differentiate phenotypically into 
osteoblasts and actively produce bone matrix proteins 
that allow for the deposition of calcium hydroxyapatite 
crystals. Genetic polymorphisms involving the vitamin 
D receptor, the estrogen receptor in postmenopausal 
women, interleukin 10, and apolipoprotein E4 have 
been linked to the development of calcific AS, and a 
strong familial clustering of cases has been reported 
from western France. Several traditional atherosclerotic 
risk factors have also been associated with the devel-
opment and progression of calcific AS, including low- 
density lipoprotein (LDL)-cholesterol, lipoprotein a 
(Lp[a]), diabetes mellitus, smoking, chronic kidney dis-
ease, and the metabolic syndrome. The presence of aor-
tic valve sclerosis (focal thickening and calcification of 
the leaflets not severe enough to cause obstruction) is 
associated with an excess risk of cardiovascular death 
and MI among persons older than age 65. Approxi-
mately 30% of persons older than 65 years exhibit aortic 
valve sclerosis, whereas 2% exhibit frank stenosis.
Rheumatic disease of the aortic leaflets produces commis-
sural fusion, sometimes resulting in a bicuspid-appearing 
valve. This condition, in turn, makes the leaflets more 
susceptible to trauma and ultimately leads to fibrosis, 
calcification, and further narrowing. By the time the 
obstruction to LV outflow causes serious clinical disabil-
ity, the valve is usually a rigid calcified mass, and careful 
examination may make it difficult or even impossible 
to determine the etiology of the underlying process. 
Rheumatic AS is almost always associated with involve-
ment of the mitral valve and with AR. Mediastinal 
radiation can also result in late scarring, fibrosis, and cal-
cification of the leaflets with AS.
Bicuspid Aortic Valve Disease
A bicuspid aortic valve (BAV) is the most common 
congenital heart valve defect and occurs in 0.5–1.4% 
of the population with a 2–4:1 male to female pre-
dominance. The inheritance pattern appears to be 
autosomal dominant with incomplete penetrance, 
although some have questioned an X-linked com-
ponent as suggested by the prevalence of BAV dis-
ease among patients with Turner’s syndrome. The 
prevalence of BAV disease among first-degree rela-
tives of an affected individual is approximately 10%. 
A single gene defect to explain the majority of cases 
has not been identified, although a mutation in the 
NOTCH1 gene has been described in some families. 
232
SECTION IV
Disorders of the Heart
Abnormalities in endothelial nitric oxide synthase and 
NKX2.5 have been implicated, as well. Aortic coarc-
tation or medial degeneration with ascending aortic 
aneurysm formation occurs commonly among patients 
with BAV disease. Patients with BAV disease have 
larger aortas than patients with comparable tricuspid 
aortic valve disease. The aortopathy develops indepen-
dent of the hemodynamic severity of the valve lesion 
and is a risk factor for dissection. A BAV can be a 
component of more complex congenital heart disease 
with or without other left heart obstructing lesions.
Other Forms of Obstruction to Left 
Ventricular Outflow
In addition to valvular AS, three other lesions may be 
responsible for obstruction to LV outflow: hypertro-
phic obstructive cardiomyopathy (Chap. 21), discrete fibro-
muscular/membranous subaortic stenosis, and supravalvular 
AS (Chap. 19). The causes of left ventricular outflow 
obstruction can be differentiated on the basis of the 
cardiac examination and Doppler echocardiographic 
findings.
Pathophysiology
The obstruction to LV outflow produces a systolic pres-
sure gradient between the LV and aorta. When severe 
obstruction is suddenly produced experimentally, the 
LV responds by dilation and reduction of stroke vol-
ume. However, in some patients, the obstruction may 
be present at birth and/or increase gradually over the 
course of many years, and LV contractile performance 
is maintained by the presence of concentric LV hyper-
trophy. Initially, this serves as an adaptive mechanism 
because it reduces toward normal the systolic stress 
developed by the myocardium, as predicted by the 
Laplace relation (S = Pr/h, where S = systolic wall stress, 
P = pressure, r = radius, and h = wall thickness). A large 
transaortic valve pressure gradient may exist for many 
years without a reduction in CO or LV dilation; ulti-
mately, however, excessive hypertrophy becomes mal-
adaptive, LV systolic function declines, abnormalities of 
diastolic function progress, and irreversible myocardial 
fibrosis develops.
A mean systolic pressure gradient >40 mmHg with a 
normal CO or an effective aortic orifice area <∼1 cm2 
LDL redundant
Oxidized LDL
Apoliprotein B
(ACE co-localized
with ApoB)
Foam cell
Monocyte
Macrophage
Osteopontin
Fibroblast
Valvular
myofibroblast
Calcium nodule and
bone formation
T-lymphocyte
Aortic side
Subendothelium
Fibrosa
Endothelium
T-lymphocyte
TGF-1β
TGF-1β
Osteopontin
Oxidized lipids
Other growth factors 
Cell proliferation
and matrix synthesis 
IL-1β
MMP
Tenascin C
Figure 20-6
Pathogenesis of calcific aortic stenosis. Inflammatory 
cells infiltrate across the endothelial barrier and release cyto-
kines that act on fibroblasts to promote cellular prolifera-
tion and matrix remodeling. LDL is oxidatively modified and 
taken up by macrophage scavengers to become foam cells. 
Angiotensin-converting enzyme colocalizes with Apo-B. 
A subset of myofibroblasts differentiate into an osteoblast 
phenotype capable of promoting bone formation. ACE, angio-
tensin-converting enzyme; ApoB, apolipoprotein B; LDL, low-
density lipoprotein; IL, interleukin; MMP, matrix metallopro-
teinase; TGF, transforming growth factor. (From RV Freeman, 
CM Otto: Circulation 111:3316, 2005; with permission.)
 
CHAPTER 20
Valvular Heart Disease
233
(or ∼<0.6 cm2/m2 body surface area in a normal-sized 
adult)—i.e., less than approximately one-third of the 
normal orifice area—is generally considered to repre-
sent severe obstruction to LV outflow. The elevated 
LV end-diastolic pressure observed in many patients 
with severe AS and preserved EF signifies the pres-
ence of diminished compliance of the hypertrophied 
LV. Although the CO at rest is within normal limits in 
most patients with severe AS, it usually fails to rise nor-
mally during exercise. Loss of an appropriately timed, 
vigorous atrial contraction, as occurs in AF or atrio-
ventricular dissociation, may cause rapid progression of 
symptoms. Late in the course, contractile function dete-
riorates because of afterload excess, the CO and LV–
aortic pressure gradient decline, and the mean LA, PA, 
and RV pressures rise. LV performance can be further 
compromised by superimposed CAD.
The hypertrophied LV causes an increase in myocardial 
oxygen requirements. In addition, even in the absence of 
obstructive CAD, coronary blood flow is impaired to the 
extent that ischemia can be precipitated under conditions 
of excess demand. Capillary density is reduced relative to 
wall thickness, compressive forces are increased, and the 
elevated LV end-diastolic pressure reduces the coronary 
driving pressure. The subendocardium is especially vul-
nerable to ischemia by this mechanism.
Symptoms
AS is rarely of clinical importance until the valve orifice 
has narrowed to approximately 1 cm2. Even severe AS 
may exist for many years without producing any symp-
toms because of the ability of the hypertrophied LV to 
generate the elevated intraventricular pressures required 
to maintain a normal stroke volume. Once symptoms 
occur, valve replacement is indicated.
Most patients with pure or predominant AS have 
gradually increasing obstruction over years, but do not 
become symptomatic until the sixth to eighth decades. 
Adult patients with BAV disease, however, develop sig-
nificant valve dysfunction and symptoms one to two 
decades sooner. Exertional dyspnea, angina pectoris, and 
syncope are the three cardinal symptoms. Often, there is 
a history of insidious progression of fatigue and dyspnea 
associated with gradual curtailment of activities. Dyspnea 
results primarily from elevation of the pulmonary capil-
lary pressure caused by elevations of LV diastolic pres-
sures secondary to reduced left ventricular compliance 
and impaired relaxation. Angina pectoris usually devel-
ops somewhat later and reflects an imbalance between 
the augmented myocardial oxygen requirements and 
reduced oxygen availability. CAD may or may not be 
present, although its coexistence is common among AS 
patients older than age 65. Exertional syncope may result 
from a decline in arterial pressure caused by vasodilation 
in the exercising muscles and inadequate vasoconstric-
tion in nonexercising muscles in the face of a fixed CO, 
or from a sudden fall in CO produced by an arrhythmia.
Because the CO at rest is usually well maintained 
until late in the course, marked fatigability, weakness, 
peripheral cyanosis, cachexia, and other clinical mani-
festations of a low CO are usually not prominent until 
this stage is reached. Orthopnea, paroxysmal noctur-
nal dyspnea, and pulmonary edema, i.e., symptoms of 
LV failure, also occur only in the advanced stages of 
the disease. Severe pulmonary hypertension leading to 
RV failure and systemic venous hypertension, hepato-
megaly, AF, and TR are usually late findings in patients 
with isolated severe AS.
When AS and MS coexist, the reduction in CO 
induced by MS lowers the pressure gradient across the 
aortic valve and, thereby, masks many of the clinical 
findings produced by AS.
Physical Findings
The rhythm is generally regular until late in the course; 
at other times, AF should suggest the possibility of asso-
ciated mitral valve disease. The systemic arterial pressure 
is usually within normal limits. In the late stages, how-
ever, when stroke volume declines, the systolic pressure 
may fall and the pulse pressure narrow. The peripheral 
arterial pulse rises slowly to a delayed peak (pulsus parvus 
et tardus). A thrill or anacrotic “shudder” may be palpable 
over the carotid arteries, more commonly the left. In the 
elderly, the stiffening of the arterial wall may mask this 
important physical sign. In many patients, the a wave in 
the jugular venous pulse is accentuated. This results from 
the diminished distensibility of the RV cavity caused by 
the bulging, hypertrophied interventricular septum.
The LV impulse is usually displaced laterally. A 
double apical impulse (with a palpable S4) may be rec-
ognized, particularly with the patient in the left lateral 
recumbent position. A systolic thrill may be present at 
the base of the heart to the right of the sternum when 
leaning forward or in the suprasternal notch.
Auscultation
An early systolic ejection sound is frequently audible in 
children, adolescents, and young adults with congeni-
tal BAV disease. This sound usually disappears when 
the valve becomes calcified and rigid. As AS increases 
in severity, LV systole may become prolonged so that 
the aortic valve closure sound no longer precedes the 
pulmonic valve closure sound, and the two components 
may become synchronous, or aortic valve closure may 
even follow pulmonic valve closure, causing paradoxical 
splitting of S2 (Chap. 9). The sound of aortic valve 
closure can be heard most frequently in patients with 
234
SECTION IV
Disorders of the Heart
AS who have pliable valves, and calcification diminishes 
the intensity of this sound. Frequently, an S4 is audible 
at the apex and reflects the presence of LV hypertrophy 
and an elevated LV end-diastolic pressure; an S3 gener-
ally occurs late in the course, when the LV dilates and 
its systolic function becomes severely compromised.
The murmur of AS is characteristically an ejection 
(mid)-systolic murmur that commences shortly after 
the S1, increases in intensity to reach a peak toward the 
middle of ejection, and ends just before aortic valve clo-
sure. It is characteristically low pitched, rough and rasp-
ing in character, and loudest at the base of the heart, 
most commonly in the second right intercostal space. It 
is transmitted upward along the carotid arteries. Occa-
sionally it is transmitted downward and to the apex, 
where it may be confused with the systolic murmur 
of MR (Gallavardin effect). In almost all patients with 
severe obstruction and preserved CO, the murmur is 
at least grade III/VI. In patients with mild degrees of 
obstruction or in those with severe stenosis with heart 
failure and low CO in whom the stroke volume and, 
therefore, the transvalvular flow rate are reduced, the 
murmur may be relatively soft and brief.
Laboratory Examination
ECG
In most patients with severe AS there is LV hypertro-
phy. In advanced cases, ST-segment depression and 
T-wave inversion (LV “strain”) in standard leads I and 
aVL and in the left precordial leads are evident. How-
ever, there is no close correlation between the ECG 
and the hemodynamic severity of obstruction, and the 
absence of ECG signs of LV hypertrophy does not 
exclude severe obstruction. Many patients with AS have 
systemic hypertension, which can also contribute to the 
development of hypertrophy.
Echocardiogram
The key findings on TTE are thickening, calcifica-
tion, and reduced systolic opening of the valve leaflets 
and LV hypertrophy. Eccentric closure of the aor-
tic valve cusps is characteristic of congenitally bicuspid 
valves. TEE imaging usually displays the obstructed ori-
fice extremely well, but it is not routinely required for 
accurate characterization. The valve gradient and aortic 
valve area can be estimated by Doppler measurement 
of the transaortic velocity. Severe AS is defined by a 
valve area <1 cm2, whereas moderate AS is defined by a 
valve area of 1–1.5 cm2 and mild AS by a valve area of 
1.5–2 cm2. Aortic valve sclerosis, conversely, is accom-
panied by a jet velocity of less than 2.5 meters/s (peak 
gradient <25 mmHg). LV dilation and reduced systolic 
shortening reflect impairment of LV function. There is 
increasing experience with the use of longitudinal strain 
and strain rate to characterize earlier changes in LV sys-
tolic function, well before a decline in EF can be appre-
ciated. Doppler indices of impaired diastolic function 
are frequently seen.
Echocardiography is useful for identifying coexisting 
valvular abnormalities; for differentiating valvular AS 
from other forms of LV outflow obstruction; and for 
measurement of the aortic root and proximal ascending 
aortic dimension. These aortic measurements are partic-
ularly important for patients with BAV disease. Dobuta-
mine stress echocardiography is useful for the evaluation 
of patients with AS and severe LV systolic dysfunction 
(EF <0.35), in whom the severity of the AS can often 
be difficult to judge.
Chest x-ray
The chest x-ray may show no or little overall cardiac 
enlargement for many years. Hypertrophy without dila-
tion may produce some rounding of the cardiac apex in 
the frontal projection and slight backward displacement 
in the lateral view. A dilated proximal ascending aorta 
may be seen along the upper right heart border in the 
frontal view. Aortic valve calcification may be discern-
ible in the lateral view, but is usually readily apparent 
on fluoroscopic examination or by echocardiography; 
the absence of valvular calcification in an adult suggests 
that severe valvular AS is not present. In later stages of 
the disease, as the LV dilates there is increasing roent-
genographic evidence of LV enlargement, pulmonary 
congestion, and enlargement of the LA, PA, and right 
heart chambers.
Catheterization
Right and left heart catheterization for invasive assess-
ment of AS is now performed infrequently but can be 
useful when there is a discrepancy between the clini-
cal and Doppler echocardiographic findings. Appropri-
ate concerns have been raised that attempts to cross the 
aortic valve for measurement of left ventricular pressures 
are associated with a risk of cerebral embolization. Cath-
eterization is also useful in three distinct categories of 
patients: (1) patients with multivalvular disease, in whom the 
role played by each valvular deformity should be defined 
to aid in the planning of operative treatment; (2) young, 
asymptomatic patients with noncalcific congenital AS, to define 
the severity of obstruction to LV outflow, since opera-
tion or percutaneous aortic balloon valvoplasty (PABV) 
may be indicated in these patients if severe AS is pres-
ent, even in the absence of symptoms; balloon valvotomy 
may follow left heart catheterization in the same sitting; 
and (3) patients in whom it is suspected that the obstruction 
to LV outflow may not be at the level of the aortic valve but 
rather at the sub- or supravalvular level.
 
CHAPTER 20
Valvular Heart Disease
235
Coronary angiography is indicated to detect or 
exclude CAD in appropriate patients with severe AS 
who are being considered for surgery. The incidence of 
significant CAD for which bypass grafting is indicated 
at the time of aortic valve replacement (AVR) exceeds 
50% among adult patients.
Natural History
Death in patients with severe AS occurs most com-
monly in the seventh and eighth decades. Based on data 
obtained at postmortem examination in patients before 
surgical treatment became widely available, the average 
time to death after the onset of various symptoms was as 
follows: angina pectoris, 3 years; syncope, 3 years; dys-
pnea, 2 years; congestive heart failure, 1.5–2 years. More-
over, in >80% of patients who died with AS, symptoms 
had existed for <4 years. Among adults dying with val-
vular AS, sudden death, which presumably resulted from 
an arrhythmia, occurred in 10–20%; however, most sud-
den deaths occurred in patients who had previously been 
symptomatic. Sudden death as the first manifestation of 
severe AS is very uncommon (<1% per year) in asymp-
tomatic adult patients. Calcific AS is a progressive disease, 
with an annual reduction in valve area averaging 0.1 cm2 
and annual increases in the peak jet velocity and mean 
valve gradient averaging 0.3 meters/s and 7 mmHg, 
respectively (Table 20-2, Fig. 20-7).
treatment	
Aortic Stenosis
Medical Treatment  In patients with severe 
AS (valve area <1 cm2), strenuous physical activity 
and competitive sports should be avoided, even in 
the asymptomatic stage. Care must be taken to avoid 
dehydration and hypovolemia to protect against a sig-
nificant reduction in CO. Medications used for the treat-
ment of hypertension or CAD, including beta blockers 
and ACE inhibitors, are generally safe for asymptomatic 
patients with preserved left ventricular systolic func-
tion. Nitroglycerin is helpful in relieving angina pectoris 
in patients with CAD. Retrospective studies have shown 
that patients with degenerative calcific AS who receive 
HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors (“statins”) exhibit slower 
progression of leaflet calcification and aortic valve area 
reduction than those who do not. However, random-
ized prospective studies with either high-dose ator-
vastatin or combination simvastatin/ezetimibe have 
failed to show a measurable effect on valve-related out-
comes. The use of statin medications should continue 
to be driven by considerations regarding primary and 
secondary prevention of CAD. ACE inhibitors have not 
been studied prospectively for AS-related outcomes. 
The need for endocarditis prophylaxis is restricted to AS 
patients with a prior history of endocarditis.
Figure 20-7
Management strategy for patients with severe aortic 
stenosis. Preoperative coronary angiography should be per-
formed routinely as determined by age, symptoms, and cor-
onary risk factors. Cardiac catheterization and angiography 
may also be helpful when there is a discrepancy between 
clinical findings and echocardiography. AVA, aortic valve 
area; BP, blood pressure; CABG, coronary artery bypass 
graft surgery; echo, echocardiography; LV, left ventricle; 
Vmax, maximal velocity across aortic valve by Doppler echo-
cardiography. (From RO Bonow et al: Circulation 114:450, 
2006. Modified from CM Otto: J Am Coll Cardiol 47:2141, 
2006.)
Symptoms?
Equivocal
Normal
LV ejection fraction
Normal
Less than 0.50
Symptoms
↓BP
No
No
Yes
Yes
Class IIb
Class I
Class IIb
Class I
Class I
SEVERE AORTIC STENOSIS
Reevaluation
Vmax > 4 m/s
AVA < 1 cm2
Mean gradient > 40 mmHg
Undergoing CABG or 
other heart surgery?
Severe valve calcification, rapid 
progression, and/or expected 
delays in surgery
Clinical follow-up, patient education, 
risk factor modification, annual echo
Aortic valve replacement
Preoperative coronary angiography
Exercise test
236
SECTION IV
Disorders of the Heart
Surgical Treatment  Asymptomatic patients 
with calcific AS and severe obstruction should be fol-
lowed carefully for the development of symptoms and 
by serial echocardiograms for evidence of deteriorat-
ing LV function. Operation is indicated in patients with 
severe AS (valve area <1 cm2 or 0.6 cm2/m2 body surface 
area) who are symptomatic, those who exhibit LV dys-
function (EF <50%), as well as those with BAV disease 
and an aneurysmal or expanding aortic root (maximal 
dimension >4.5 cm or annual increase in size >0.5 cm/
year), even if they are asymptomatic. Patients with 
asymptomatic moderate or severe AS who are referred 
for CABG surgery should also have AVR. In patients with-
out heart failure, the operative risk of AVR is approxi-
mately 3% (Table 20-3) but increases as a function of 
age and the need for concomitant coronary revascu-
larization with bypass grafting. The indications for AVR 
in the asymptomatic patient have been the subject of 
intense debate over the past 5 years, as surgical out-
comes in selected patients have continued to improve. 
Relative indications for which surgery can be considered 
include an abnormal response to treadmill exercise; 
rapid progression of AS, especially when urgent access 
to medical care might be compromised; very severe 
AS defined by a valve area <0.6 cm2; and severe LV 
hypertrophy suggested by a wall thickness of >15 mm.  
Exercise testing can be safely performed in the asymp-
tomatic patient, as many as one-third of whom will 
show signs of functional impairment.
Operation should be carried out within 3–4 months 
of symptom onset and certainly well before frank LV 
failure develops; at this late stage, the aortic valve pres-
sure gradient declines in parallel with the CO and stroke 
volume (low gradient, low output AS). In such patients, 
the perioperative mortality risk is high (15–20%), and 
evidence of myocardial disease may persist even when 
the operation is technically successful. Long-term post-
operative survival correlates with preoperative LV func-
tion. Nonetheless, in view of the even worse prognosis 
of such patients when they are treated medically, there 
is usually little choice but to advise surgical treatment, 
especially in patients in whom contractile reserve can 
be demonstrated by dobutamine echocardiography 
(defined by a ≥20% in stroke volume after dobuta-
mine challenge). In patients in whom severe AS and 
CAD coexist, relief of the AS and revascularization may 
sometimes result in striking clinical and hemodynamic 
improvement (Table 20-3).
Because many patients with calcific AS are elderly, 
particular attention must be directed to the adequacy of 
hepatic, renal, and pulmonary function before AVR is rec-
ommended. Age alone is not a contraindication to AVR 
for AS. The mortality rate depends to a substantial extent 
on the patient’s preoperative clinical and hemodynamic 
state. The 10-year survival rate of patients with AVR is 
approximately 60%. Approximately 30% of biopros-
thetic valves evidence primary valve failure in 10 years, 
requiring re-replacement, and an approximately equal 
percentage of patients with mechanical prostheses 
develop significant hemorrhagic complications as a con-
sequence of treatment with anticoagulants. Homograft 
AVR is usually reserved for patients with aortic valve 
endocarditis.
The Ross procedure involves replacement of the dis-
eased aortic valve with the autologous pulmonic valve 
and implantation of a homograft in the native pulmonic 
position. Its use has declined considerably in the United 
States because of the technical complexity of the proce-
dure and the incidence of late postoperative aortic root 
dilation and autograft failure with AR. There is also a low 
incidence of homograft stenosis.
Percutaneous Balloon Aortic Valvu-
loplasty  This procedure is preferable to opera-
tion in many children and young adults with congenital,  
noncalcific AS (Chap. 19). It is not commonly used in 
adults with severe calcific AS because of a very high 
restenosis rate (80% within 1 year) and the risk of pro-
cedural complications, but on occasion it has been used 
successfully as a “bridge to operation” in patients with 
severe LV dysfunction and shock who are too ill to toler-
ate surgery.
Percutaneous Aortic Valve Replace-
ment  Transcatheter aortic valve implantation (TAVI) 
for treatment of AS has been performed in more than 
20,000 high-risk (Society for Thoracic Surgery mortal-
ity risk >10%) adult patients worldwide using one of 
two available systems, a balloon-expandable valve and 
a self-expanding valve, both of which incorporate a 
pericardial prosthesis (Fig. 20-8). The aorto-iliofemoral 
anatomy must allow for passage of large-bore catheters; 
a direct, trans-LV apical approach under surgical guid-
ance is an alternative means of delivering the valve. 
There are also several reports of the successful use of 
axillary or subclavian artery access with construction of 
a vascular surgical sleeve. Aortic balloon valvuloplasty 
is performed as a first step to create an orifice suffi-
cient for the prosthesis. Procedural success rates now 
exceed 90%, and intermediate-term prosthetic function 
is excellent. A mild degree of paravalvular AR is com-
mon with TAVI; postprocedural heart block is observed 
more frequently with the self-expanding valve. Pre-
liminary results with TAVI have been very favorable  
(Fig. 20-9), and it is anticipated that this technology, 
now clinically available in Canada and Europe, will gain 
regulatory approval in the United States for the treat-
ment of patients with severe AS considered too high 
 
CHAPTER 20
Valvular Heart Disease
237
p < 0.0001
p = 0.88
p = 0.15
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Aortic valve mean gradient (mmHg)
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
Aortic valve area (cm2)
(n = 50)
Baseline
(n = 43)
Valve
implanted
(n = 42)
Pre
discharge
(n = 38)
1 month
(n = 28)
6 month
(n = 16)
12 month
Aortic valve area (cm2)
Aortic valve mean gradient (mmHg)
100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
n = 37
Baseline
n = 37
1 month
n = 35
6 months
n = 17
1 year
% in each NYHA class
5
26
6
4
18
15
17
17
3
7
7
1
p < 0.0001
p = 0.59
NYHA I
NYHA II
NYHA III
NYHA IV
Figure 20-9 
Twelve-month outcomes following percutaneous aortic valve replacement. (Adapted from JG Webb et al: Circulation 
116:755, 2007; with permission.)
Figure 20-8 
(A) Balloon-expandable and (B) and self-expanding valves for percutaneous aortic valve 
replacement. B, inflated balloon; N, nose cone; V, valve. (Part A, courtesy of Edwards 
Lifesciences, Irvine, CA; with permission. RetroFlex 3 is a trademark of Edwards Life-
sciences Corporation. Part B, © Medtronic, Inc. 2010. Medtronic CoreValve Transcatheter 
Aortic Valve. CoreValve is a registered trademark of Medtronic, Inc.)
B
A
B
V
N
risk for surgical AVR. For elderly patients with symptom-
atic, severe AS who are deemed too high risk for sur-
gery, TAVI has been shown in a randomized prospective 
trial to prolong life and improve functionality. The use 
of these devices for the treatment of prosthetic valve 
failure not due to paravalvular regurgitation (“valve-in-
valve”), as an alternative to reoperative valve replace-
ment, is also under active study.
Aortic Regurgitation
Etiology
(Table 20-1) AR may be caused by primary valve dis-
ease or by primary aortic root disease.
Primary valve disease
Rheumatic disease results in thickening, deformity, and 
shortening of the individual aortic valve cusps, changes 
238
SECTION IV
Disorders of the Heart
that prevent their proper opening during systole and 
closure during diastole. A rheumatic origin is much less 
common in patients with isolated AR who do not have 
associated rheumatic mitral valve disease. Patients with 
congenital BAV disease may develop predominant AR, 
and approximately 20% of patients will require aortic 
valve surgery between 10 and 40 years of age. Congeni-
tal fenestrations of the aortic valve occasionally produce 
mild AR. Membranous subaortic stenosis often leads to 
thickening and scarring of the aortic valve leaflets with 
secondary AR. Prolapse of an aortic cusp, resulting in 
progressive chronic AR, occurs in approximately 15% 
of patients with ventricular septal defect (Chap. 19) 
but may also occur as an isolated phenomenon or as 
a consequence of myxomatous degeneration some-
times associated with mitral and/or tricuspid valve 
involvement.
AR may result from infective endocarditis, which 
can develop on a valve previously affected by rheu-
matic disease, a congenitally deformed valve, or on 
a normal aortic valve, and may lead to perforation or 
erosion of one or more leaflets. The aortic valve leaf-
lets may become scarred and retracted during the course 
of syphilis or ankylosing spondylitis and contribute 
further to the AR that derives primarily from the associ-
ated root disease. Although traumatic rupture or avul-
sion of the aortic valve is an uncommon cause of acute 
AR, it does represent the most frequent serious lesion in 
patients surviving nonpenetrating cardiac injuries. The 
coexistence of hemodynamically significant AS with 
AR usually excludes all the rarer forms of AR because it 
occurs almost exclusively in patients with rheumatic or 
congenital AR. In patients with AR due to primary val-
vular disease, dilation of the aortic annulus may occur 
secondarily and lead to worsening regurgitation.
Primary aortic root disease
AR may also be due entirely to marked aortic dilation, 
i.e., aortic root disease, without primary involvement 
of the valve leaflets; widening of the aortic annulus 
and separation of the aortic leaflets are responsible for 
the AR (Chap. 38). Cystic medial degeneration of the 
ascending aorta, which may or may not be associated 
with other manifestations of Marfan’s syndrome; idio-
pathic dilation of the aorta; annuloaortic ectasia; osteo-
genesis imperfecta; and severe hypertension may all 
widen the aortic annulus and lead to progressive AR. 
Occasionally, AR is caused by retrograde dissection 
of the aorta involving the aortic annulus. Syphilis and 
ankylosing spondylitis, both of which may affect aortic 
valves, may also be associated with cellular infiltra-
tion and scarring of the media of the thoracic aorta, 
leading to aortic dilation, aneurysm formation, and 
severe regurgitation. In syphilis of the aorta, now a 
very rare condition, the involvement of the intima 
may narrow the coronary ostia, which in turn may be 
responsible for myocardial ischemia.
Pathophysiology
The total stroke volume ejected by the LV (i.e., the sum 
of the effective forward stroke volume and the volume 
of blood that regurgitates back into the LV) is increased 
in patients with AR. In patients with severe AR, the 
volume of regurgitant flow may equal the effective 
forward stroke volume. In contrast to MR, in which 
a portion of the LV stroke volume is delivered into 
the low-pressure LA, in AR the entire LV stroke vol-
ume is ejected into a high-pressure zone, the aorta. An 
increase in the LV end-diastolic volume (increased pre-
load) constitutes the major hemodynamic compensation 
for AR. The dilation and eccentric hypertrophy of the 
LV allow this chamber to eject a larger stroke volume 
without requiring any increase in the relative shorten-
ing of each myofibril. Therefore, severe AR may occur 
with a normal effective forward stroke volume and a 
normal left ventricular EF (total [forward plus regurgi-
tant] stroke volume/end-diastolic volume), together 
with an elevated LV end-diastolic pressure and vol-
ume. However, through the operation of Laplace’s law, 
LV dilation increases the LV systolic tension required 
to develop any given level of systolic pressure. Chronic 
AR is, thus, a state in which LV preload and afterload 
are both increased. Ultimately, these adaptive measures 
fail. As LV function deteriorates, the end-diastolic vol-
ume rises further and the forward stroke volume and EF 
decline. Deterioration of LV function often precedes the 
development of symptoms. Considerable thickening of 
the LV wall also occurs with chronic AR, and at autopsy 
the hearts of these patients may be among the largest 
encountered, sometimes weighing >1000 g.
The reverse pressure gradient from aorta to LV, 
which drives the AR flow, falls progressively during 
diastole, accounting for the decrescendo nature of the 
diastolic murmur. Equilibration between aortic and 
LV pressures may occur toward the end of diastole in 
patients with chronic severe AR, particularly when the 
heart rate is slow. In patients with acute severe AR, the 
LV is unprepared for the regurgitant volume load. LV 
compliance is normal or reduced, and LV diastolic pres-
sures rise rapidly, occasionally to levels >40 mmHg. 
The LV pressure may exceed the LA pressure toward 
the end of diastole, and this reversed pressure gradient 
closes the mitral valve prematurely.
In patients with chronic severe AR, the effective for-
ward CO usually is normal or only slightly reduced at 
rest, but often it fails to rise normally during exertion. 
An early sign of LV dysfunction is a reduction in the 
EF. In advanced stages there may be considerable eleva-
tion of the LA, PA wedge, PA, and RV pressures and 
lowering of the forward CO at rest.
 
CHAPTER 20
Valvular Heart Disease
239
Myocardial ischemia may occur in patients with AR 
because myocardial oxygen requirements are elevated by 
LV dilation, hypertrophy, and elevated LV systolic ten-
sion, and coronary blood flow may be compromised. A 
large fraction of coronary blood flow occurs during dias-
tole, when arterial pressure is low, thereby reducing cor-
onary perfusion or driving pressure. This combination of 
increased oxygen demand and reduced supply may cause 
myocardial ischemia, particularly of the subendocardium, 
even in the absence of concomitant CAD.
History
Approximately three-fourths of patients with pure or 
predominant valvular AR are men; women predomi-
nate among patients with primary valvular AR who 
have associated rheumatic mitral valve disease. A history 
compatible with infective endocarditis may sometimes 
be elicited from patients with rheumatic or congenital 
involvement of the aortic valve, and the infection often 
precipitates or seriously aggravates preexisting symptoms.
In patients with acute severe AR, as may occur in infec-
tive endocarditis, aortic dissection, or trauma, the LV 
cannot dilate sufficiently to maintain stroke volume, and 
LV diastolic pressure rises rapidly with associated marked 
elevations of LA and PA wedge pressures. Pulmonary 
edema and/or cardiogenic shock may develop rapidly.
Chronic severe AR may have a long latent period, 
and patients may remain relatively asymptomatic for as 
long as 10–15 years. However, uncomfortable aware-
ness of the heartbeat, especially on lying down, may be 
an early complaint. Sinus tachycardia, during exertion 
or with emotion, or premature ventricular contrac-
tions may produce particularly uncomfortable palpita-
tions as well as head pounding. These complaints may 
persist for many years before the development of exer-
tional dyspnea, usually the first symptom of diminished 
cardiac reserve. The dyspnea is followed by orthopnea, 
paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, and excessive diapho-
resis. Anginal chest pain even in the absence of CAD 
may occur in patients with severe AR, even in younger 
patients. Anginal pain may develop at rest as well as 
during exertion. Nocturnal angina may be a particu-
larly troublesome symptom, and it may be accompanied 
by marked diaphoresis. The anginal episodes can be 
prolonged and often do not respond satisfactorily to 
sublingual nitroglycerin. Systemic fluid accumulation, 
including congestive hepatomegaly and ankle edema, 
may develop late in the course of the disease.
Physical Findings
In chronic severe AR, the jarring of the entire body and 
the bobbing motion of the head with each systole can 
be appreciated, and the abrupt distention and collapse 
of the larger arteries are easily visible. The examination 
should be directed toward the detection of conditions 
predisposing to AR, such as bicuspid valve, endocardi-
tis, Marfan’s syndrome, and ankylosing spondylitis.
Arterial pulse
A rapidly rising “water-hammer” pulse, which col-
lapses suddenly as arterial pressure falls rapidly during 
late systole and diastole (Corrigan’s pulse), and capil-
lary pulsations, an alternate flushing and paling of the 
skin at the root of the nail while pressure is applied to 
the tip of the nail (Quincke’s pulse), are characteristic 
of chronic severe AR. A booming “pistol-shot” sound 
can be heard over the femoral arteries (Traube’s sign), 
and a to-and-fro murmur (Duroziez’s sign) is audi-
ble if the femoral artery is lightly compressed with a 
stethoscope.
The arterial pulse pressure is widened as a result of 
both systolic hypertension and a lowering of the dia-
stolic pressure. The measurement of arterial diastolic 
pressure with a sphygmomanometer may be com-
plicated by the fact that systolic sounds are frequently 
heard with the cuff completely deflated. However, 
the level of cuff pressure at the time of muffling of 
the Korotkoff sounds (phase IV) generally corresponds 
fairly closely to the true intraarterial diastolic pressure. 
As the disease progresses and the LV end-diastolic pres-
sure rises, the arterial diastolic pressure may actually rise 
as well, because the aortic diastolic pressure cannot fall 
below the LV end-diastolic pressure. For the same rea-
son, acute severe AR may also be accompanied by only 
a slight widening of the pulse pressure. Such patients are 
invariably tachycardic as the heart rate increases in an 
attempt to preserve the CO.
Palpation
In patients with chronic severe AR, the LV impulse is 
heaving and displaced laterally and inferiorly. The sys-
tolic expansion and diastolic retraction of the apex are 
prominent. A diastolic thrill may be palpable along the 
left sternal border in thin-chested individuals, and a 
prominent systolic thrill may be palpable in the supra-
sternal notch and transmitted upward along the carotid 
arteries. This systolic thrill and the accompanying mur-
mur do not necessarily signify the coexistence of AS. In 
many patients with pure AR or with combined AS and 
AR, the carotid arterial pulse is bisferiens, i.e., with two 
systolic waves separated by a trough (see Fig. 9-2D).
Auscultation
In patients with severe AR, the aortic valve closure 
sound (A2) is usually absent. A systolic ejection sound is 
audible in patients with BAV disease, and occasionally 
240
SECTION IV
Disorders of the Heart
an S4 also may be heard. The murmur of chronic AR 
is typically a high-pitched, blowing, decrescendo dia-
stolic murmur, heard best in the third intercostal space 
along the left sternal border (see Fig. 9-5B). In patients 
with mild AR, this murmur is brief, but as the sever-
ity increases, it generally becomes louder and longer, 
indeed holodiastolic. When the murmur is soft, it can 
be heard best with the diaphragm of the stethoscope 
and with the patient sitting up, leaning forward, and 
with the breath held in forced expiration. In patients in 
whom the AR is caused by primary valvular disease, the 
diastolic murmur is usually louder along the left than 
the right sternal border. However, when the murmur 
is heard best along the right sternal border, it suggests 
that the AR is caused by aneurysmal dilation of the aor-
tic root. “Cooing” or musical diastolic murmurs suggest 
eversion of an aortic cusp vibrating in the regurgitant 
stream.
A mid-systolic ejection murmur is frequently audi-
ble in isolated AR. It is generally heard best at the base 
of the heart and is transmitted along the carotid arter-
ies. This murmur may be quite loud without signifying 
aortic obstruction. A third murmur sometimes heard 
in patients with severe AR is the Austin Flint murmur, a 
soft, low-pitched, rumbling mid-to-late diastolic mur-
mur. It is probably produced by the diastolic displace-
ment of the anterior leaflet of the mitral valve by the 
AR stream and is not associated with hemodynamically 
significant mitral obstruction. The auscultatory features 
of AR are intensified by strenuous and sustained hand 
grip, which augments systemic vascular resistance.
In acute severe AR, the elevation of LV end-diastolic 
pressure may lead to early closure of the mitral valve, a 
soft S1, a pulse pressure that is not particularly wide, and 
a soft, short, early diastolic murmur of AR.
Laboratory Examination
ECG
In patients with chronic severe AR, the ECG signs 
of LV hypertrophy become manifest (Chap. 11). In 
addition, these patients frequently exhibit ST-segment 
depression and T-wave inversion in leads I, aVL, V5, 
and V6 (“LV strain”). Left-axis deviation and/or QRS 
prolongation denote diffuse myocardial disease, gener-
ally associated with patchy fibrosis, and usually signify a 
poor prognosis.
Echocardiogram
LV size is increased in chronic AR and systolic func-
tion is normal or even supernormal until myocardial 
contractility declines, as signaled by a decrease in ejec-
tion or increase in the end-systolic dimension. A rapid, 
high-frequency diastolic fluttering of the anterior mitral 
leaflet produced by the impact of the regurgitant jet is a 
characteristic finding. The echocardiogram is also use-
ful in determining the cause of AR, by detecting dila-
tion of the aortic annulus and root, aortic dissection (see 
Fig. 12-5), or primary leaflet pathology. With severe 
AR, the central jet width assessed by color flow Dop-
pler imaging exceeds 65% of the left ventricular out-
flow tract, the regurgitant volume is ≥60 mL/beat, the 
regurgitant fraction is ≥50%, and there is diastolic flow 
reversal in the proximal descending thoracic aorta. The 
continuous wave Doppler profile shows a rapid decel-
eration time in patients with acute severe AR, due to 
the rapid increase in LV diastolic pressure. Surveillance 
transthoracic echocardiography forms the cornerstone of 
longitudinal follow-up and allows for the early detec-
tion of changes in LV size and/or function. For patients 
in whom echocardiography is limited by poor acousti-
cal windows or inadequate semiquantitative assessment, 
gated cardiac MR imaging can be performed. This 
modality also allows for accurate assessment of aortic 
size and contour.
Chest x-ray
In chronic severe AR, the apex is displaced downward 
and to the left in the frontal projection. In the left ante-
rior oblique and lateral projections, the LV is displaced 
posteriorly and encroaches on the spine. When AR is 
caused by primary disease of the aortic root, aneurysmal 
dilation of the aorta may be noted, and the aorta may 
fill the retrosternal space in the lateral view. Echocar-
diography, cardiac MR, and CT angiography are more 
sensitive than the chest x-ray for the detection of aortic 
root enlargement.
Cardiac catheterization and angiography
When needed, right and left heart catheterization with 
contrast aortography can provide confirmation of the 
magnitude of regurgitation and the status of LV func-
tion. Coronary angiography is performed routinely in 
appropriate patients prior to surgery.
treatment	
Aortic Regurgitation
Acute Aortic Regurgitation  (See Fig. 20-10) 
Patients with acute severe AR may respond to intrave-
nous diuretics and vasodilators (such as sodium nitro-
prusside), but stabilization is usually short-lived and 
operation is indicated urgently. Intraaortic balloon 
counterpulsation is contraindicated. Beta blockers are 
also best avoided so as not to reduce the CO further or 
slow the heart rate. Surgery is the treatment of choice 
and is usually necessary within 24 h of diagnosis.
 
CHAPTER 20
Valvular Heart Disease
241
Chronic 
Aortic 
Regurgitation  Early 
symptoms of dyspnea and effort intolerance respond 
to treatment with diuretics; vasodilators (ACE inhibitors, 
dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers, or hydrala-
zine) may be useful as well. Surgery can then be per-
formed in a more controlled setting. The use of vasodila-
tors to extend the compensated phase of chronic severe 
AR before the onset of symptoms or the development of 
LV dysfunction is more controversial. Expert consensus  
is strong regarding the need to control systolic blood  
pressure (goal <140 mmHg) in patients with chronic 
AR, and vasodilators are an excellent first choice as 
antihypertensive agents. It is often difficult to achieve 
adequate control because of the increased stroke vol-
ume that accompanies severe AR. Cardiac arrhythmias 
and systemic infections are poorly tolerated in patients 
with severe AR and must be treated promptly and vig-
orously. Although nitroglycerin and long-acting nitrates 
are not as helpful in relieving anginal pain as they are 
in patients with ischemic heart disease, they are worth  
Stable?
LV dimensions?
LV function?
Symptoms?
Reevaluation
Stable?
Stable?
Yes
No
Class IIb
Class IIa
Class I
Class I
AVR
RVG or MRI
No symptoms
Exercise test
Symptoms
Equivocal
Clinical evaluation + Echo
EF borderline or uncertain
EF of 50% or less
Normal EF
CHRONIC SEVERE AORTIC REGURGITATION
Clinical 
eval every 
6–12 mo 
Echo every 
12 mo
Reevaluate 
and Echo 3 
mo
Reevaluate 
and Echo 3 
mo
Clinical 
eval every 
6 mo
Echo every 
12 mo
Clinical 
eval every 
6 mo
Echo every 
6 mo
No, or
initial study
No, or
initial study
Consider hemodynamic
response to exercise
Yes
Yes
Yes
Normal
Abnormal
SD < 45 mm or
DD < 60 mm
SD 45–50 mm or
DD 60–70 mm
SD 50–55 mm or
DD 70–75 mm
SD > 55 mm or
DD > 75 mm
Figure 20-10 
Management strategy for patients with chronic severe 
aortic regurgitation. Preoperative coronary angiography 
should be performed routinely, as determined by age, symp-
toms, and coronary risk factors. Cardiac catheterization and 
angiography may also be helpful when there is a discrepancy 
between clinical and echocardiographic findings. “Stable” 
refers to stable echocardiographic measurements. In some 
centers, serial follow-up may be performed with radionuclide 
ventriculography (RVG) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 
rather than echocardiography (echo) to assess left ventricular 
(LV) volume and systolic function. AVR, aortic valve replace-
ment; DD, end-diastolic dimension; EF, ejection fraction; 
eval, evaluation; SD, end-systolic dimension. (Modified from 
RO Bonow et al: Circulation 114:450, 2006.)
242
SECTION IV
Disorders of the Heart
a trial. Patients with syphilitic aortitis should receive a full 
course of penicillin therapy. Beta blockers and the angio-
tensin receptor blocker, losartan, may be useful to retard 
the rate of aortic root enlargement in young patients 
with Marfan’s syndrome and aortic root dilation. Early 
reports of the efficacy of losartan in patients with Mar-
fan’s syndrome have led to its use in other populations of 
patients, including those with BAV disease and aortopathy. 
The use of beta blockers in patients with valvular AR was 
previously felt to be relatively contraindicated due to con-
cerns that the resulting slowing of the heart rate would 
allow more time for diastolic regurgitation. More recent 
observational reports, however, suggest that beta block-
ers may provide functional benefit in patients with chronic 
AR. Beta blockers can sometimes provide incremental 
blood pressure lowering in patients with chronic AR and 
hypertension. Patients with severe AR, particularly those 
with an associated aortopathy, should avoid isometric 
exercises.
Surgical 
Treatment  In deciding on the 
advisability and proper timing of surgical treatment, 
two points should be kept in mind: (1) patients with 
chronic severe AR usually do not become symptomatic 
until after the development of myocardial dysfunction; 
and (2) when delayed too long (defined as >1 year from 
onset of symptoms or LV dysfunction), surgical treat-
ment often does not restore normal LV function. There-
fore, in patients with chronic severe AR, careful clinical 
follow-up and noninvasive testing with echocardiogra-
phy at approximately 6-month intervals are necessary if 
operation is to be undertaken at the optimal time, i.e., 
after the onset of LV dysfunction but prior to the devel-
opment of severe symptoms. Operation can be deferred 
as long as the patient both remains asymptomatic and 
retains normal LV function without severe chamber dila-
tion (end-diastolic dimension >75 mm).
AVR is indicated for the treatment of severe AR in 
symptomatic patients irrespective of LV function. In 
general, the operation should be carried out in asymp-
tomatic patients with severe AR and progressive LV dys-
function defined by an LVEF <50%, an LV end-systolic 
dimension >55 mm or end-systolic volume >55 mL/m2, 
or an LV diastolic dimension >75 mm. Smaller dimen-
sions may be appropriate thresholds in individuals of 
smaller stature. Patients with severe AR without indica-
tions for operation should be followed by clinical and 
echocardiographic examination every 3–12 months.
Surgical options for management of aortic valve and 
root disease have expanded considerably over the past 
decade. AVR with a suitable mechanical or tissue pros-
thesis is generally necessary in patients with rheumatic 
AR and in many patients with other forms of regurgita-
tion. Rarely, when a leaflet has been perforated during 
infective endocarditis or torn from its attachments to 
the aortic annulus by thoracic trauma, primary surgical 
repair may be possible. When AR is due to aneurysmal 
dilation of the root, or proximal ascending aorta, rather 
than to primary valve involvement, it may be possible 
to reduce or eliminate the regurgitation by narrowing 
the annulus or by excising a portion of the aortic root 
without replacing the valve. Elective, valve-sparing aor-
tic root reconstruction generally involves reimplantation 
of the valve in a contoured graft with reattachment of 
the coronary artery buttons into the side of the graft 
and is best undertaken in specialized surgical centers 
(Fig.  20-11). Resuspension of the native aortic valve 
leaflets is possible in approximately 50% of patients 
with acute AR in the setting of type A aortic dissection. 
In other conditions, however, regurgitation can be effec-
tively eliminated only by replacing the aortic valve, the 
dilated or aneurysmal ascending aorta responsible for 
the regurgitation, and implanting a composite valve-
graft conduit. This formidable procedure entails a higher 
risk than isolated AVR.
As in patients with other valvular abnormalities, both 
the operative risk and the late mortality rate are largely 
dependent on the stage of the disease and myocardial 
function at the time of operation. The overall opera-
tive mortality rate for isolated AVR is approximately 3% 
(Table 20-3). However, patients with marked cardiac 
enlargement and prolonged LV dysfunction experience 
an operative mortality rate of approximately 10% and 
a late mortality rate of approximately 5% per year due 
to LV failure despite a technically satisfactory operation. 
Nonetheless, because of the very poor prognosis with 
medical management, even patients with LV systolic 
failure should be considered for operation.
Patients with acute severe AR require prompt surgical 
treatment, which may be lifesaving.
Tricuspid Stenosis
TS, which is much less prevalent than MS in North 
America and Western Europe, is generally rheumatic 
in origin and more common in women than men. It 
does not occur as an isolated lesion and is usually associ-
ated with MS. Hemodynamically significant TS occurs 
in 5–10% of patients with severe MS; rheumatic TS is 
commonly associated with some degree of TR. Non-
rheumatic causes of TS are rare.
Pathophysiology
A diastolic pressure gradient between the RA and 
RV defines TS. It is augmented when the transvalvu-
lar blood flow increases during inspiration and declines 
during expiration. A mean diastolic pressure gradient of 
4 mmHg is usually sufficient to elevate the mean RA 
 
CHAPTER 20
Valvular Heart Disease
243
pressure to levels that result in systemic venous con-
gestion. Unless sodium intake has been restricted and 
diuretics administered, this venous congestion is associ-
ated with hepatomegaly, ascites, and edema, sometimes 
severe. In patients with sinus rhythm, the RA a wave 
may be extremely tall and may even approach the level 
of the RV systolic pressure. The y descent is prolonged. 
The CO at rest is usually depressed, and it fails to rise 
during exercise. The low CO is responsible for the nor-
mal or only slightly elevated LA, PA, and RV systolic 
pressures despite the presence of MS. Thus, the pres-
ence of TS can mask the hemodynamic and clinical fea-
tures of any associated MS.
Symptoms
Because the development of MS generally precedes that 
of TS, many patients initially have symptoms of pulmo-
nary congestion and fatigue. Characteristically, patients 
with severe TS complain of relatively little dyspnea for 
the degree of hepatomegaly, ascites, and edema that 
they have. However, fatigue secondary to a low CO 
and discomfort due to refractory edema, ascites, and 
marked hepatomegaly are common in patients with TS 
and/or TR. In some patients, TS may be suspected for 
the first time when symptoms of right-sided failure per-
sist after an adequate mitral valvotomy.
Physical Findings
Because TS usually occurs in the presence of other 
obvious valvular disease, the diagnosis may be missed 
unless it is considered. Severe TS is associated with 
marked hepatic congestion, often resulting in cirrho-
sis, jaundice, serious malnutrition, anasarca, and ascites. 
Congestive hepatomegaly and, in cases of severe tricus-
pid valve disease, splenomegaly are present. The jugular 
veins are distended, and in patients with sinus rhythm 
there may be giant a waves. The v waves are less con-
spicuous, and because tricuspid obstruction impedes RA 
Figure 20-11 
Valve-sparing aortic root reconstruc-
tion (David procedure). (From P Stelt-
zer et al [eds]: Valvular Heart Disease: A 
Companion to Braunwald’s Heart Disease, 
3rd ed, Fig 12-27, p. 200.)
A
B
C
D
244
SECTION IV
Disorders of the Heart
emptying during diastole, there is a slow y descent. In 
patients with sinus rhythm there may be prominent pre-
systolic pulsations of the enlarged liver as well.
On auscultation, an OS of the tricuspid valve may 
rarely be heard approximately 0.06 s after pulmonic 
valve closure. The diastolic murmur of TS has many 
of the qualities of the diastolic murmur of MS, and 
because TS almost always occurs in the presence of MS, 
it may be missed. However, the tricuspid murmur is 
generally heard best along the left lower sternal border 
and over the xiphoid process, and is most prominent 
during presystole in patients with sinus rhythm. The 
murmur of TS is augmented during inspiration, and it 
is reduced during expiration and particularly during the 
strain phase of the Valsalva maneuver, when tricuspid 
transvalvular flow is reduced.
Laboratory Examination
The ECG features of RA enlargement (see Fig. 11-8) 
include tall, peaked P waves in lead II, as well as promi-
nent, upright P waves in lead V1. The absence of ECG 
evidence of right ventricular hypertrophy (RVH) in a 
patient with right-sided heart failure who is believed to 
have MS should suggest associated tricuspid valve dis-
ease. The chest x-ray in patients with combined TS and 
MS shows particular prominence of the RA and supe-
rior vena cava without much enlargement of the PA 
and with less evidence of pulmonary vascular conges-
tion than occurs in patients with isolated MS. On echo-
cardiographic examination, the tricuspid valve is usually 
thickened and domes in diastole; the transvalvular gra-
dient can be estimated routinely by continuous wave 
Doppler echocardiography. TTE provides additional 
information regarding mitral valve structure and func-
tion, LV and RV size and function, and PA pressure.
treatment	
Tricuspid Stenosis
Patients with TS generally exhibit marked systemic 
venous congestion; intensive salt restriction, bed rest, 
and diuretic therapy are required during the preop-
erative period. Such a preparatory period may diminish 
hepatic congestion and thereby improve hepatic func-
tion sufficiently so that the risks of operation, particularly 
bleeding, are diminished. Surgical relief of the TS should 
be carried out, preferably at the time of surgical mitral 
valvotomy or MVR, in patients with moderate or severe 
TS who have mean diastolic pressure gradients exceed-
ing ∼4 mmHg and tricuspid orifice areas <1.5–2 cm2. 
TS is almost always accompanied by significant TR. 
Operative repair may permit substantial improvement 
of tricuspid valve function. If repair cannot be accom-
plished, the tricuspid valve may have to be replaced 
with a prosthesis, preferably a large bioprosthetic valve. 
Mechanical valves in the tricuspid position are more 
prone to thromboembolic complications than in other 
positions.
Tricuspid Regurgitation
Most commonly, TR is secondary to marked dilation 
of the tricuspid annulus from RV enlargement due to 
PA hypertension. Functional TR may complicate RV 
enlargement of any cause, including an inferior MI that 
involves the RV. It is commonly seen in the late stages 
of heart failure due to rheumatic or congenital heart 
disease with severe PA hypertension (pulmonary artery 
systolic pressure >55 mmHg), as well as in ischemic 
and idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathies. It is revers-
ible in part if PA hypertension can be relieved. Rheu-
matic fever may produce organic (primary) TR, often 
associated with TS. Infarction of RV papillary muscles, 
tricuspid valve prolapse, carcinoid heart disease, endo-
myocardial fibrosis, radiation, infective endocarditis, 
and trauma all may produce TR. Less commonly, TR 
results from congenitally deformed tricuspid valves, 
and it occurs with defects of the atrioventricular canal, 
as well as with Ebstein’s malformation of the tricus-
pid valve (Chap. 19). TR also develops eventually in 
patients with chronic RV apical pacing.
As is the case for TS, the clinical features of TR 
result primarily from systemic venous congestion and 
reduction of CO. With the onset of TR in patients 
with PA hypertension, symptoms of pulmonary con-
gestion diminish, but the clinical manifestations of 
right-sided heart failure become intensified. The neck 
veins are distended with prominent v waves and rapid 
y descents, marked hepatomegaly, ascites, pleural effu-
sions, edema, systolic pulsations of the liver, and a posi-
tive hepatojugular reflex. A prominent RV pulsation 
along the left parasternal region and a blowing holosys-
tolic murmur along the lower left sternal margin, which 
may be intensified during inspiration and reduced dur-
ing expiration or the strain of the Valsalva maneuver, 
are characteristic findings; AF is usually present.
The ECG may show changes characteristic of the 
lesion responsible for the enlargement of the RV that 
leads to TR, e.g., an inferior Q-wave MI or RVH. 
Echocardiography may be helpful by demonstrating RV 
dilation and prolapsing, flail, scarred, or displaced tricus-
pid leaflets; the diagnosis and assessment of TR can be 
made by color flow Doppler imaging (see Fig. 12-8). 
Severe TR is accompanied by hepatic vein systolic flow 
reversal. Continuous wave Doppler of the TR veloc-
ity profile is useful in estimating PA systolic pressure. 
Roentgenographic examination usually reveals enlarge-
ment of both the RA and RV.
 
CHAPTER 20
Valvular Heart Disease
245
In patients with severe TR, the CO is usually mark-
edly reduced, and the RA pressure pulse may exhibit no 
x descent during early systole but a prominent c-v wave 
with a rapid y descent. The mean RA and the RV end-
diastolic pressures are often elevated.
treatment	
Tricuspid Regurgitation
Isolated TR, in the absence of PA hypertension, such as 
that occurring as a consequence of infective endocar-
ditis or trauma, is usually well tolerated and does not 
require operation. Indeed, even total excision of an 
infected tricuspid valve may be well tolerated for sev-
eral years if the PA pressure and resistance are normal. 
Treatment of the underlying cause of left heart failure 
usually reduces the severity of functional TR, by reduc-
ing the size of the tricuspid annulus. In patients with 
mitral valve disease and TR secondary to PA hyperten-
sion and RV enlargement, effective surgical correction 
of the mitral valve abnormality results in lowering of 
the PA pressures and a gradual reduction or disappear-
ance of the TR without direct treatment of the tricuspid 
valve. However, recovery may be more rapid in patients 
with severe functional TR if, at the time of mitral valve 
surgery and especially when there is enlargement of 
the tricuspid valve annulus, tricuspid valve annulo-
plasty (generally with the insertion of a ring) or in the 
rare instance of severe organic tricuspid valve disease, 
tricuspid valve replacement, is performed (Table 20-3). 
Tricuspid valve annuloplasty or replacement may rarely 
be required for severe, primary TR.
Pulmonic Valve Disease
The pulmonic valve is affected by rheumatic fever 
far less frequently than are the other valves, and it is 
uncommonly a nidus for infective endocarditis. The 
most common acquired abnormality affecting the pul-
monic valve is regurgitation secondary to dilation of 
the pulmonic valve ring as a consequence of severe PA 
hypertension. This dilation produces the Graham Steell 
murmur, a high-pitched, decrescendo, diastolic blowing 
murmur along the left sternal border, which is difficult 
to differentiate from the far more common murmur 
produced by AR. Pulmonic regurgitation is usually 
of little hemodynamic significance; indeed, surgical 
removal or destruction of the pulmonic valve by infec-
tive endocarditis does not produce heart failure unless 
significant PA hypertension is also present.
Carcinoid syndrome may cause pulmonic stenosis and/
or regurgitation. Pulmonic regurgitation occurs uni-
versally among patients who have undergone child-
hood repair of tetralogy of Fallot with reconstruction of 
the RV outflow tract. Congenital pulmonic stenosis is 
discussed in Chap. 19.
Percutaneous pulmonic valve replacement has been 
successfully performed in many patients with severe PR 
after childhood repair of tetralogy of Fallot or pulmonic 
valve stenosis or atresia. This procedure was introduced 
clinically prior to percutaneous aortic valve replacement.
Multiple and Mixed Valvular 
Heart Disease
Many acquired and congenital cardiac lesions may result 
in stenosis and/or regurgitation of one or more heart 
valves. For example, rheumatic fever may present with 
mitral (MS, MR, MS and MR), aortic (AS, AR, AS 
and AR), and/or tricuspid (TS, TR, TS and TR) valve 
involvement. The common association of secondary TR 
with significant mitral valve disease has been discussed 
previously. Aortic valve infective endocarditis may sec-
ondarily involve the mitral apparatus. Mediastinal radia-
tion may result in aortic, mitral, and even tricuspid valve 
disease, most often with mixed stenosis and regurgita-
tion. Ergotamines, and the previously used combination 
of fenfluramine and phentermine, may result in mixed 
valve lesions, as are also seen in patients with carcinoid 
heart disease. Patients with Marfan’s syndrome may have 
both AR from root dilation and MR due to MVP.
The clinical assessment of patients with multiple or 
mixed valve disease can be challenging. With com-
bined mitral and aortic valve disease, the hemodynamic 
derangements associated with the mitral lesion(s) may 
mask the full expression of the aortic valve disease. For 
example, severe mitral stenosis may decrease LV pre-
load to the extent that the severity of AS or AR can 
be underappreciated. Alternatively, the development of 
AF during the course of MS can lead to sudden wors-
ening in a patient whose aortic valve disease was not 
previously felt to be significant. In patients with mixed 
MS/MR or AS/AR, the regurgitant lesion usually pre-
dominates, and can be followed primarily as the trigger 
for surgical or transcatheter intervention as appropriate. 
Nevertheless, there are frequent exceptions to the rules, 
and careful assessment is indicated. The LV in a patient 
with hypertrophy in the setting of both AS and AR 
may not be able to dilate in response to the volume load 
imposed by the regurgitant lesion and, thus, show signs 
or lead to the development of symptoms of compromise 
at a relatively earlier point in the natural history. Serial 
echocardiography can aid in decision making.
Similar considerations pertain to the evaluation 
of patients with heart valve disease and other cardiac 
and systemic disorders that can contribute to impaired 
exercise tolerance, such as hypertension, coronary 
artery disease, obesity, sleep apnea, and skeletal muscle 
deconditioning.
246
SECTION IV
Disorders of the Heart
Valve Replacement And Repair
The results of valve replacement surgery are depen-
dent on (1) the patient’s myocardial function and gen-
eral medical condition at the time of operation; (2) the 
technical abilities of the operative team and the qual-
ity of the postoperative care; and (3) the durability, 
hemodynamic characteristics, and thrombogenicity of 
the prosthesis. Increased perioperative mortality rate 
is associated with advanced age and comorbidity rate 
(e.g., pulmonary or renal disease, the need for nonval-
vular cardiovascular surgery, diabetes mellitus) as well 
as with greater levels of preoperative functional disabil-
ity and PA hypertension. Late complications of valve 
replacement include thromboemboli, bleeding due to 
anticoagulants, mechanical valve thrombosis, pannus 
ingrowth, paravalvular leak, hemolysis, structural dete-
rioration, infective endocarditis, and prosthesis-patient 
mismatch (functional prosthetic valve stenosis that 
occurs when the prosthesis is too small relative to the 
patient’s anatomy).
The choice between a tissue and mechanical pros-
thesis is essentially a trade-off between the risk of struc-
tural valve deterioration and the possible need for reop-
eration with a tissue valve versus the obligate need for 
lifelong anticoagulation and its attendant risks with a 
mechanical valve. The incidence of structural valve 
deterioration varies inversely with patient age and may 
be accelerated further by pregnancy or end-stage renal 
disease. Failure of a tissue prosthesis results in the need 
for reoperation in up to 30% of patients by 10 years and 
in 50% by 15 years. Rates of structural valve deterio-
ration are higher for mitral than for aortic bioprosthe-
ses. This phenomenon may be due in part to the greater 
closing pressure to which a mitral prosthesis is exposed.
Traditionally, a mechanical prosthesis was considered 
preferable for a patient younger than age 65 who could 
take anticoagulants reliably. Bioprostheses were recom-
mended for older patients (>65 years) who did not oth-
erwise have an indication for anticoagulation (e.g., AF). 
Recent surveys of cardiac surgery in the United States, 
as reflected in the Society of Thoracic Surgeons database, 
show a clear and progressive trend favoring the implan-
tation of bioprosthetic valves in younger (<65 years) 
patients. Reasons for this development include 
improved durability of newer generation bioprostheses, 
decreased risk of death or major complication at time of 
reoperation, the hazards of long-term anticoagulation, 
and patient preference to avoid anticoagulation for life-
style reasons. Patient preference must be factored into 
any decision regarding the type of valve replacement. A 
mechanical prosthesis is reasonable for aortic or mitral 
valve replacement in patients younger than 65 years 
without a contraindication to anticoagulation. A bio-
prosthesis is equally reasonable for aortic or mitral valve 
replacement in patients younger than 65 years who elect 
this strategy for lifestyle reasons with full knowledge of 
the likely need for reoperation over time.
Bioprostheses remain the preferred valve choice 
for patients older than 65 years, in both the aortic and 
mitral position. Bioprosthetic valves are also indicated 
for women who expect to become pregnant, as well 
as for others who refuse to take anticoagulation or for 
whom anticoagulation may be contraindicated. Types 
of bioprostheses include xenografts (e.g., porcine aor-
tic valves; cryopreserved, mounted bovine pericardial 
valves), homograft (allograft) aortic valves obtained from 
cadavers, and pulmonary autografts transplanted into the 
aortic position (Ross procedure). Homograft replace-
ment may be preferred for the management of compli-
cated aortic valve infective endocarditis.
In patients without contraindications to antico-
agulants, particularly those younger than 65 years, a 
mechanical prosthesis is reasonable. Many surgeons now 
select the St. Jude prosthesis, a double-disk tilting pros-
thesis, for replacement of both aortic and mitral valves 
because of favorable hemodynamic characteristics and 
possible association with lower thrombogenicity. A tis-
sue valve is preferred for tricuspid replacement.
The decision to proceed with valve replacement 
should be finalized only after an experienced surgeon 
has agreed that valve repair is either not appropriate or 
not feasible. As noted previously, valve repair techniques 
have improved considerably over the past 10–15 years, 
for both mitral and aortic lesions. Primary repair is often 
associated with a lower risk of postoperative LV func-
tional impairment, particularly for patients with MR, 
and avoids the long-term risks of a prosthesis.
Antibiotic prophylaxis prior to dental procedures that 
involve manipulation of gingival tissue or the periapi-
cal region of teeth or perforation of the oral mucosa is 
indicated for patients after valve replacement or ring 
annuloplasty. Prosthetic valve and ventricular function 
should be assessed with transthoracic echocardiography 
3 months after surgery and a baseline complete blood 
count, reticulocyte count, and serum lactate dehydro-
genase (LDH) test obtained to serve as a baseline set 
of values should the question of hemolysis arise in the 
future. The intensity of anticoagulation should follow 
recommended guidelines.
Global Burden of Valvular Heart 
Disease
Primary valvular heart disease ranks well below 
coronary heart disease, stroke, hypertension, 
obesity, and diabetes as major threats to the 
public health. Nevertheless, it is the source of signifi-
cant morbidity and mortality rates. Rheumatic fever is 
 
CHAPTER 20
Valvular Heart Disease
247
the dominant cause of valvular heart disease in devel-
oping countries. Its prevalence has been estimated to 
range from as low as 1 per 100,000 school-age children 
in Costa Rica to as high as 150 per 100,000 in China. 
Rheumatic heart disease accounts for 12–65% of hos-
pital admissions related to cardiovascular disease and 
2–10% of hospital discharges in some developing coun-
tries. Prevalence and mortality rates vary among com-
munities even within the same country as a function 
of crowding and the availability of medical resources 
and population-wide programs for detection and treat-
ment of group A streptococcal pharyngitis. In eco-
nomically deprived areas, tropical and subtropical cli-
mates (particularly on the Indian subcontinent), Central 
America, and the Middle East, rheumatic valvular dis-
ease progresses more rapidly than in more developed 
nations and frequently causes serious symptoms in 
patients younger than 20 years of age. This accelerated 
natural history may be due to repeated infections with 
more virulent strains of rheumatogenic streptococci. 
Approximately 16 million people live with rheumatic 
heart disease worldwide. As of 2000, worldwide death 
rates for rheumatic heart disease approximated 5.5 per 
100,000 population (n = 332,000), with the highest 
rates reported from Southeast Asia (7.6 per 100,000).
Although there have been recent reports of isolated 
outbreaks of streptococcal infection in North America, 
valve disease in developed countries is now dominated 
by degenerative or inflammatory processes that lead to 
valve thickening, calcification, and dysfunction. The 
prevalence of valvular heart disease increases with age. 
Important left-sided valve disease may affect as many 
as 12–13% of adults older than the age of 75. In the 
United States, there were 1.5 million hospital discharges 
with any diagnosis of valvular heart disease in 2005, 
and 94,000 of these were related to surgical procedures 
for heart valve disease (mostly involving the aortic and 
mitral valves).
The incidence of infective endocarditis (Chap. 25) 
has increased with the aging of the population, the more 
widespread prevalence of vascular grafts and intracardiac 
devices, the emergence of more virulent multidrug- 
resistant microorganisms, and the growing epidemic 
of diabetes. Infective endocarditis has become a more 
frequent cause of acute valvular regurgitation. Bicus-
pid aortic valve disease affects as many as 0.5–1.4% of 
the population, and an increasing number of childhood 
survivors of congenital heart disease present later in life 
with valvular dysfunction. The global burden of valvu-
lar heart disease is expected to progress.
As is true for other health conditions, disparities in 
access to and quality of care for patients with valvular 
heart disease have been well documented. Management 
decisions and outcome differences based on age, gender, 
and race require educational efforts across all levels of 
providers.
248
 CARDIOMYOPATHY AND MYOCARDITIS 
 CHAPTER 21 
1From BJ Maron et al: Circulation 113:1807, 2006.
 Lynne Warner Stevenson  I   Joseph Loscalzo 
 DEFINITION AND CLASSIFICATION 
 Cardiomyopathy is a disease of the heart muscle. It is 
estimated that cardiomyopathy accounts for 5–10% of 
the 5–6 million patients already diagnosed with heart 
failure in the United States. This term is intended to 
exclude cardiac dysfunction that results from other 
structural heart disease, such as coronary artery disease, 
primary valve disease, or severe hypertension; how-
ever, in general usage the phrase  ischemic cardiomyopa-
thy is sometimes applied to describe diffuse dysfunction 
occurring in the presence of multivessel coronary artery 
disease, and  nonischemic cardiomyopathy to describe cardio-
myopathy from other causes. As of 2006, cardiomyopa-
thies are deﬁ ned as “a heterogeneous group of diseases 
of the myocardium associated with mechanical and/or 
electrical dysfunction that usually (but not invariably) 
exhibit inappropriate ventricular hypertrophy or dilata-
tion and are due to a variety of causes that frequently are 
genetic.” 1  
 The traditional classiﬁ cation of cardiomyopathies into 
a triad of dilated, restrictive, and hypertrophic was based 
initially on autopsy specimens and later on echocardio-
graphic ﬁ ndings. Dilated and hypertrophic cardiomy-
opathies can be distinguished on the basis of left ven-
tricular wall thickness and cavity dimension; however, 
restrictive cardiomyopathy can have variably increased 
wall thickness and chamber dimensions that range 
from reduced to slightly increased, with prominent 
atrial enlargement. Restrictive cardiomyopathy is now 
deﬁ ned more on the basis of abnormal diastolic func-
tion, which is also present but initially less prominent 
in dilated and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Restric-
tive cardiomyopathy can overlap in presentation, gross 
morphology, and etiology with both hypertrophic and 
dilated cardiomyopathies ( Table 21-1 ). 
 Expanding information renders this classiﬁ cation triad 
based on phenotype increasingly inadequate to deﬁ ne 
disease or therapy. Identiﬁ cation of more genetic deter-
minants of cardiomyopathy has suggested a four-way 
classiﬁ cation scheme of etiology as primary (affecting pri-
marily the heart) and secondary to other systemic disease. 
The primary causes are then divided into genetic, mixed 
genetic and acquired, and acquired; however, in current 
practice the genetic information is often unavailable at 
the time of initial presentation, particularly in the absence 
of extracardiac manifestations. Many mutated genes can 
be associated with the same general phenotype, and one 
defective gene may manifest as multiple phenotypes. In 
addition, the bases of evidence for most therapies are still 
driven by clinical phenotypes. Although the proposed 
genetic classiﬁ cation does not yet guide many current 
clinical strategies, it will become increasingly relevant as 
classiﬁ cation of disease moves beyond individual organ 
pathology to more integrated systems approaches. 
 GENERAL PRESENTATION 
 For all cardiomyopathies, the early symptoms often 
relate to exertional intolerance with breathlessness or 
fatigue, usually from inadequate cardiac reserve during 
exercise. These symptoms may initially go unnoticed or 
be attributed to other causes, commonly pulmonary. As 
ﬂ uid retention leads to elevation of resting ﬁ lling pres-
sures, shortness of breath may occur during routine daily 
activity, such as dressing, and may manifest as dyspnea 
or cough in the supine position. Although often consid-
ered the hallmark of congestion, peripheral edema may 
not appear despite severe ﬂ uid retention, particularly in 
younger patients. The nonspeciﬁ c term  congestive heart 
failure describes only the resulting syndrome of ﬂ uid 
retention, which is common to the three types of car-
diomyopathy and also to other cardiac diseases associated 
with elevated ﬁ lling pressures. Despite the different 
 
CHAPTER 21
Cardiomyopathy and Myocarditis
249
particularly regarding siblings and cousins, who may 
tend to manifest disease at similar ages.
Most familial cardiomyopathies are inherited in an 
autosomal dominant pattern, with occasional autoso-
mal recessive and X-linked inheritance (Table 21-3). 
The penetrance and phenotype of a given mutation var-
ies with other genetic, epigenetic, and environmental 
determinants. Some mutations are associated with pri-
mary conduction system disease as well as dilated car-
diomyopathy (CDDC). With rare exceptions, such as 
the replacements for defective metabolic enzymes, cur-
rent therapy is based on the phenotype rather than the 
genetic defect. However, knowledge of the genetic 
defect may influence prognosis and in some cases pro-
vide indication for implantable defibrillators.
Defects in sarcomeric proteins of myosin, actin, and 
troponin are the best characterized. While the major-
ity of these are associated with hypertrophic cardiomy-
opathy, an increasing number of sarcomeric mutations 
have now been implicated in dilated cardiomyopathy, 
and some have also been associated with left ventricu-
lar noncompaction. Thus far, few mutations have been 
identified in excitation-contraction coupling proteins, 
perhaps because they are too crucial for survival to 
allow variation.
Many of the proteins encoded by abnormal structural 
genes span more than one functional area of the myo-
cyte (Fig. 21-1). Proteins contributing to the Z-disk 
structural basis, all three types of cardiomyopathy can 
be associated with atrioventricular valve regurgitation, 
typical and atypical chest pain, atrial and ventricular 
tachyarrhythmias, and embolic events (Table 21-1). Ini-
tial evaluation begins with a detailed clinical history and 
examination, looking for clues to cardiac, extracardiac, 
and familial disease (Table 21-2). The initial evalua-
tion, prognosis, and therapy are generally defined by the 
severity of cardiac and clinical dysfunction, with some 
distinctive features according to etiology.
Genetic Etiologies of 
Cardiomyopathy
The estimated prevalence of a genetic etiology for 
cardiomyopathy continues to increase with increas-
ing awareness of the importance of the family history 
and the availability of genetic testing. Well recognized 
in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, heritability is pres-
ent in at least 30% of dilated cardiomyopathies without 
other clear etiology. Careful family history should elicit 
not only known cardiomyopathy and heart failure, but 
also family members who have had sudden death, often 
incorrectly attributed to “a massive heart attack,” who 
have had atrial fibrillation or pacemaker implantation by 
middle age, or who have muscular dystrophy. The fam-
ily history should be reviewed at subsequent intervals 
Table 21-1 
Presentation with Symptomatic Cardiomyopathy
Dilated
Restrictive
Hypertrophic
Ejection fraction  
(normal >55%)
Usually <30% when 
symptoms severe
25–50%
>60%
Left ventricular diastolic 
dimension (normal <55 mm)
ê60 mm
<60 mm (may be decreased)
Often decreased
Left ventricular wall thickness
Decreased
Normal or increased
Markedly increased
Atrial size
Increased
Increased; may be massive
Increased; related to 
abnormal
Valvular regurgitation
Related to annular dilation; 
mitral appears earlier, during 
decompensation; tricuspid 
regurgitation in late stages
Related to endocardial 
involvement; frequent mitral 
and tricuspid regurgitation, 
rarely severe
Related to valve-septum 
interaction; mitral 
regurgitation
Common first symptoms
Exertional intolerance
Exertional intolerance, fluid 
retention early
Exertional intolerance; may 
have chest pain
Congestive symptomsa
Left before right, except right 
prominent in young adults
Right often dominates
Left-sided congestion may 
develop late
Arrhythmia
Ventricular tachyarrhythmia; 
conduction block in Chagas’ 
disease, and some families; 
atrial fibrillation.
Ventricular uncommon except 
in sarcoidosis conduction 
block in sarcoidosis and 
amyloidosis; atrial fibrillation.
Ventricular tachyarrhythmias; 
atrial fibrillation
aLeft-sided symptoms of pulmonary congestion; dyspnea on exertion, orthopnea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea. Right-sided symptoms of sys-
temic versus congestion: discomfort on bending, hepatic and abdominal distention, peripheral edema.
Section IV
Disorders of the Heart
250
cardiomyopathy. Most of the identified genetic defects 
in the Z-disk and cytoskeleton are associated with 
dilated cardiomyopathy.
Proteins in the sarcolemmal membrane are associ-
ated with dilated cardiomyopathy. The best known is 
the X-linked dystrophin, abnormalities of which cause 
Duchenne’s and Becker’s muscle dystrophy. (Interest-
ingly, abnormal dystrophin can be acquired when the 
coxsackievirus cleaves dystrophin during viral myocar-
ditis.) This protein provides a network that supports the 
sarcolemma and also connects to the sarcomere. The 
progressive functional defect in both cardiac and skel-
etal muscle reflects vulnerability to mechanical stress. 
Dystrophin is associated at the membrane with a com-
plex of other proteins, such as metavinculin, abnor-
malities of which cause dilated cardiomyopathy with 
autosomal dominant inheritance. Defects in the sarco-
lemmal channel proteins (channelopathies) are generally 
associated with primary arrhythmias, but mutations in 
SCN5A, distinct from those which cause the Brugada 
or long-QT syndromes, have been implicated in dilated 
cardiomyopathy.
Nuclear membrane protein defects in the myocyte 
can also cause skeletal myopathy in either autosomal 
dominant (lamin proteins) or X-linked (emerin) pat-
terns. These are associated with a high prevalence of 
atrial arrhythmias and conduction system disease which, 
in some family members, occur without detectable 
cardiomyopathy.
Intercalated disks between cardiac myocytes allow 
mechanical and electrical coupling between cells and 
also connect to desmin filaments within the cell. Muta-
tions in proteins of the desmosomal complex compro-
mise attachment of the myocytes, which can become 
disconnected and die, to be replaced by fat and fibrous 
tissue. These areas are highly arrhythmogenic and may 
go on to aneurysm formation. Although it is more 
noticeable in the thinner right ventricle, this condition 
often affects both ventricles. As desmosomes are also 
important for elasticity of hair and skin, some defec-
tive desmosomal proteins are associated with striking 
“woolly hair” and thickened skin on the palms and soles.
Owing to the conservation of signaling pathways 
in multiple systems, we may expect to discover more 
extracardiac manifestations of genetic abnormalities ini-
tially considered to manifest exclusively in the heart. In 
contrast, the monogenic disorders of metabolism that 
affect the heart are already clearly recognized to affect 
multiple organ systems (Table 21-4). The most impor-
tant currently are those defective enzymes for which 
specific enzyme replacement therapy can now amelio-
rate the course of disease, as with alpha-galactosidase-A 
(Fabry’s disease). Abnormalities of mitochondrial DNA 
(maternally transmitted) impair energy production with 
multiple clinical manifestations, including impaired cog-
nitive function and skeletal myopathy. The phenotypic 
organize and stabilize the sarcomeres. Multiple other 
proteins are involved in connecting and maintaining 
the cytoskeleton of the myocyte. For example, des-
min forms intermediate filaments that connect the 
nuclear and plasma membranes, Z-lines, and the inter-
calated disks between muscle cells. Desmin muta-
tions impair the transmission of force and signaling for 
both cardiac and skeletal muscle, and are, thus, asso-
ciated with a peripheral myopathy as well as a dilated 
Table 21-2
Initial Evaluation of Cardiomyopathy
Clinical Evaluation
Thorough history and physical examination to identify 
cardiac and noncardiac disordersa
Detailed family history of heart failure, cardiomyopathy, 
skeletal myopathy, conduction disorders and 
tachyarrhythmias, sudden death
History of alcohol, illicit drugs, chemotherapy or radiation 
therapya
Assessment of ability to perform routine and desired 
activitiesa
Assessment of volume status, orthostatic blood pressure, 
body mass indexa
Laboratory Evaluation
Electrocardiograma
Chest radiographa
Two-dimensional and Doppler echocardiograma
Chemistry:
  Serum sodium,a potassium,a calcium,a magnesiuma
  Fasting glucose (glycohemoglobin in DM)
  Creatinine,a blood urea nitrogena
  Albumin,a total protein,a liver function testsa
  Lipid profile
  Thyroid-stimulating hormonea
  Serum iron, transferrin saturation
  Urinalysis
  Creatine kinase
Hematology:
  Hemoglobin/hematocrita
  White blood cell count with differential,a 
  including eosinophils
  Erythrocyte sedimentation rate
Initial Evaluation Only in Patients Selected for Possible 
Specific Diagnosis
Titers for infection in presence of clinical suspicion:
  Acute viral (coxsackievirus, echovirus, influenza virus)
  Human immunodeficiency virus,
  Chagas’ disease, Lyme disease, toxoplasmosis
Catheterization with coronary angiography in patients with 
angina who are candidates for interventiona
Serologies for active rheumatologic disease
Endomyocardial biopsy including sample for electron 
microscopy when suspecting specific diagnosis with 
therapeutic implications
Screening for sleep-disordered breathing
aLevel I Recommendations from ACC/AHA Practice Guidelines for 
Chronic Heart Failure in the adult.
Source: From SA Hunt et al: Circulation 112:e154, 2005.
 
CHAPTER 21
Cardiomyopathy and Myocarditis
251
Table 21-3
Inherited Genetic Defects Associated With Cardiomyopathy
Gene Product
Inheritance
Cardiac 
Phenotype
Isolated 
Cardiac 
Phenotype
Extracardiac 
Manifestations
Sarcomere
MYH7 (β myosin heavy chain)
AD
HCM, DCM, 
LVNC
yes
Skeletal myopathy
MYBPC3 (myosin-binding protein C)
AD
HCM, (DCM)
yes
TNNT2 (cardiac troponin T)
AD
HCM, DCM, 
LVNC
yes
TNNI3 (cardiac troponin I)
AD, AR
HCM, DCM, 
RCM
yes
TTN (Titin)
AD
HCM, DCM
yes
TPM1 (α-tropomyosin)
AD
HCM, DCM
yes
TNNC1 (slow troponin C)
AD
DCM
yes
ACTC (α-actin)
AD
HCM, DCM, 
(LVNC)
yes
MYL2 (myosin regulatory 
light chain)
AD
HCM
yes
Skeletal myopathy
MYL3 (myosin essential 
light chain)
AD
HCM
yes
MYH6 (α-myosin heavy chain)
AD
HCM, (DCM)
yes
Z-disk and 
Cytoskeleton
DES (Desmin)
AD
DCM
yes
Skeletal myopathy
LDB3 (Cypher-ZASP)
AD
DCM, LVNC
yes
Skeletal myopathy
MYOZ2 (Myozenin)
AD
HCM
yes
TCAP (Telethonin)
AD
DCM, HCM
yes
ANKRD1 (CARP)
AD
HCM, (DCM)
yes
CSRP3 (MLP)
AD
DCM, (HCM)
yes
OBSCN (Obscurin)
AD
HCM
yes
ACTN2 (α-actinin-2)
AD
DCM
yes
CRYAB (αB-crystallin)
AD
DCM
yes
Nuclear 
Membrane
LMNA (Lamin A/C)
AD
CDDC
yes
Skeletal myopathy
EMD (Emerin)
X-linked
CDDC
no
Skeletal myopathy, 
contractures
TMPO (Thymopoietin)
AD
DCM
yes
Excitation-
Contraction 
Coupling
PLN (Phospholamban)
AD
DCM
yes
SCN5A (NAV 1.5)
AD
CDDC
yes
RYR2 (cardiac ryanodine receptor)
AD
ARVC
yes
(continued)
Section IV
Disorders of the Heart
252
Table 21-3
Inherited Genetic Defects Associated With Cardiomyopathy (continued)
Gene Product
Inheritance
Cardiac 
Phenotype
Isolated 
Cardiac 
Phenotype
Extracardiac 
Manifestations
Cellular 
Metabolism
PRKAG2 (γ-subunit of 
AMP Kinase)
AD
HCM+
yes
LAMP2 (lysosomal associated 
membrane protein)
X-linked
HCM+
noa
Danon’s disease: 
skeletal myopathy, 
cognitive impairment
TAZ (Tafazzin)
X-linked
DCM, LVNC
no
Barth’s syndrome: 
skeletal myopathy, 
cognitive impair-
ment, neutropenia
FXN (Frataxin)
AR
HCM
no
Friedreich’s ataxia: 
ataxia, diabetes 
mellitus type 2
ABCC9 (sulfonylurea receptor 2)
AD
DCM
yes
TMEM43 (transmembrane protein 43)
AD
ARVC
yes
GLA (α-galactosidase-A) 
(other systemic metabolic defects, 
see Table 21-4)
X-linked
HCM
yes
Fabry’s disease: renal 
failure, angiokerato-
mas and painful neu-
ropathy
Mitochondria
Mitochondrial DNA
Maternal 
transmis-
sion
DCM, HCMc
no
MELAS, MERRF, 
Kearns-Sayre  
syndrome, ocular 
myopathy
Sarcolemmal 
Membrane
DMD (Dystrophin)
X-linked
DCM
noa
Duchenne’s and 
Becker’s muscular 
dystrophy
DMPK (dystrophica myotonica 
protein kinase)
AD
DCM
no
Myotonic dystrophy 
type 1
SGCD (δ-sarcoglycan)
AD
DCM
yes
VCL (Metavinculin)
AD
DCM
yes
Desmosome
DSP (Desmoplakin)
AD, AR
ARVC
yes
Carvajal syndrome 
(AR)
DSG2 (Desmoglein 2)
AD
ARVC
yes
DSC2 (Desmocollin 2)
AD
ARVC
yes
PKP2 (Plakophilin 2)
AD
ARVC
yes
JUP (Plakoglobin)
AD, AR
ARVC
yes
Naxos syndrome (AR)
Other
EYA4 (Eyes absent 4)
AD
DCM
no
Sensorineural 
deafness
RBM20 (RNA-binding motif 20)
AD
DCM
yes
PSEN1 (Presenilin-1,2)
AD
DCM
yes
Dementia
aIndicates that isolated cardiac phenotype can occur in women with the X-linked defects.
Abbreviations: AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; ARVC, arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy; CDDC, conduction 
disease with dilated cardiomyopathy; DCM, dilated cardiomyopathy; HCM+, HCM with preexcitation; HCMc, HCM with conduction disease; 
LVNC, left ventricular noncompaction; MELAS, (mitochondrial) myopathy, encephalopathy, lactic acidosis, and stroke-like episodes syndrome; 
MERRF, myoclonic epilepsy with ragged red fibers; RCM, restrictive cardiomyopathy.
Source: From Neal Lakdawala, MD, Cardiovascular Genetics, Brigham and Women’s Hospital.
 
CHAPTER 21
Cardiomyopathy and Myocarditis
253
Dilated Cardiomyopathy
An enlarged left ventricle with decreased systolic func-
tion as measured by left ventricular ejection fraction 
characterizes dilated cardiomyopathy (Figs. 21-2, 21-3, 
and 21-4). Systolic failure is more marked than the fre-
quently accompanying diastolic dysfunction, although 
the latter may be functionally severe in the setting of 
marked volume overload. The syndrome of dilated 
cardiomyopathy has multiple etiologies (Table 21-5). 
Up to one-third of cases may be familial, as discussed 
later. Acquired cardiomyopathy is often attributed to 
a brief primary injury such as infection or toxin expo-
sure. Some myocytes may die during the initial injury, 
expression is highly variable depending on the distribu-
tion of the maternal mitochondria during embryonic 
development. Heritable systemic diseases, such as familial 
amyloidosis and hemochromatosis, can affect the heart 
without abnormal expression of specific cardiac genes.
For any patient with suspected or proven genetic dis-
ease, family members should be considered and evaluated 
in a longitudinal fashion. Screening includes an echocar-
diogram and electrocardiogram (ECG). The indications 
and implications for confirmatory specific genetic testing 
vary depending upon the specific mutation. The pro-
found questions raised by families about diseases shared 
and passed down merit serious and sensitive discussion, 
ideally provided by a trained genetic counselor.
Frizzled
Cell Junctions
SCNB1
SCN5A
Caveolin
Sarcospan
Integrin
Adenovirus
Coxsackievirus
and adenovirus
receptor
B1ADR
L-type Ca++
channels
Laminin
-Dystroglycan
Sarcoglycan
Sarcoglycan
-Dystroglycan
Wnt
ATP
α-Catenin
C
I
Tropomyosin
Myosin heavy
chain (MHC)
body
MHC head (ATPase)
Neck: Myosin light chains
(MLC-1, MLC-2)
Myosin binding protein C
T
Desmocollins
Plakophilin
Desmoplakin
Desmogleins
Ca++
G-Proteins
Ryanodine
receptors
Ryanodine
receptors
Integral
membrane
protein
Phospho
lamban
Sarcoplasmic
recticulum
Ankyrin
Filamin
Filamin
Titin
Non-
sarcoplasmic
actin
Vinculin
Talin
Spectrin
MLP
Myopalladin
Nebulette
Actin
Desmosome
Complexes
Sarcomeric
Proteins
Myofibril
Nucleus
Z-line
I-Band
Desmin
Emerin
Outer nuclear
membrane
Titin
Actinin
Dystrobrevin
Syntrophin
Plakoglobin
Plakophilin
β-Catenin
Plectin
Dystrophin
Dystrophin Complexes
Ca++
Ca++
Inner nuclear
membrane
Troponin 
Lamin A/C
SERCA2
ZASP
Figure 21-1 
Drawing of myocyte indicating multiple sites of abnormal 
gene products associated with cardiomyopathy. Major 
functional groups include the sarcomeric proteins (actin, 
myosin, tropomyosin, and the associated regulatory pro-
teins), the dystrophin complex stabilizing and connecting the 
cell membrane to intracellular structures, the desmosome 
complexes associated with cell-cell connections and sta-
bility, and multiple cytoskeletal proteins that integrate and 
stabilize the myocyte. ATP, adenosine triphosphate. (Figure 
adapted from Jeffrey A. Towbin, MD, University of Cincinnati, 
with permission.)
Section IV
Disorders of the Heart
254
after a year or more of mechanical circulatory support. 
The diagnosis and therapy for dilated cardiomyopathy is 
generally dictated by the stage of heart failure (Chap. 17), 
with specific aspects discussed with the relevant etiology 
later in this chapter.
Infective Myocarditis
Myocarditis is an inflammatory process, most commonly 
attributed to infectious organisms that can invade the 
myocardium directly, produce cardiotoxins, and trigger 
chronic inflammatory responses. Infective myocardi-
tis has been reported with almost all types of infectious 
agents, but is most commonly associated with viral infec-
tions, the protozoan Trypanosoma cruzi in South America, 
and endomyocardial fibrosis in equatorial Africa.
Viral myocarditis in murine models begins with 
acute infection. After viruses enter the circulation through 
the respiratory or gastrointestinal tract, they can infect 
other organs possessing specific receptors, such as the 
coxsackie-adenovirus receptor on the heart. Viral inva-
sion and replication can lead directly to myocardial injury 
and lysis. Viral proteases have multiple actions, of which 
while others survive only to have later programmed cell 
death, (apoptosis). As the surviving myocytes hyper-
trophy to accommodate the increased burden of wall 
stress, local and circulating factors stimulate deleteri-
ous responses that contribute to progression of disease, 
even in the absence of further primary injury. Dynamic 
remodeling of the interstitial scaffolding affects diastolic 
function and the amount of ventricular dilation. Mitral 
regurgitation commonly develops as the valvular appa-
ratus is distorted by ventricular dilation and sometimes 
by focal injury to underlying myocardium and is usu-
ally substantial by the time heart failure is severe. Many 
cases that present “acutely” have progressed silently 
through these stages over months to years.
Regardless of the nature and degree of direct cell 
injury, the resulting functional impairment often includes 
some contribution from secondary responses that may 
be reversible. The potential reversibility of cardiomyopathy 
in the absence of ongoing injury remains a subject of 
active controversy. Almost half of all patients with truly 
recent onset cardiomyopathy demonstrate substantial 
spontaneous recovery. Some patients have dramatic 
improvement to near-normal ejection fractions during 
pharmacologic therapy, particularly notable with the 
β-adrenergic antagonists coupled with renin-angiotensin 
system inhibition. Interest in the potential for recov-
ery of cardiomyopathy in the absence of coronary 
artery disease has been further stimulated by occasional 
“recovery” of left ventricular function in young patients 
Table 21-4
Examples of Inherited Defects in Metabolic 
Pathways Associated With Cardiomyopathy, 
Usually Restrictive or Pseudohypertrophic 
Phenotype
Glycogen Storage Diseases
  II—Pompe’s (alpha 1,4 glucosidase)
  III –Forbes: debranching enzyme (amylo 1,6 glucosidase)
Glucose Metabolism (Defective PRKAG2a)
Fatty acid metabolism
  Carnitine transport defect
  Medium-chain Acyl-CoA dehydrogenase
  Long-chain Acyl-CoA dehydrogenase
Sphingolipidoses
  Fabry’s disease (alpha galactosidase A)
  Gaucher disease (beta-glucocerebroside)
Disorders of lysosomal function
  Danon’s disease—(lysosome-associated membrane  
  protein, LAMP2)
Miscellaneous
  Hemochromatosis—Fe metabolism
  Familial amyloidosis—abnormal transthyretin
  Barth syndrome—tafazzin defect affecting cardiolipin
  Friedreich’s ataxia—frataxin
aGamma-2 regulatory subunit of the AMP-activated protein kinase 
important for glucose metabolism.
Figure 21-2 
Dilated cardiomyopathy. This gross specimen of a heart 
removed at the time of transplantation shows massive left 
ventricular dilation and moderate right ventricular dila-
tion. Although the left ventricular wall in particular appears 
thinned, there is significant hypertrophy of this heart, which 
weighs more than 800 gm (upper limit of normal = 360 g). 
A defibrillator lead is seen traversing the tricuspid valve into 
the right ventricular apex. (Image courtesy of Robert Padera, 
MD, PhD, Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women’s 
Hospital, Boston.)
 
CHAPTER 21
Cardiomyopathy and Myocarditis
255
receptors bind more avidly to certain viruses, particu-
larly coxsackievirus and adenovirus.
The typical clinical picture of myocarditis is a young 
adult with progressive dyspnea and weakness over a few 
days to weeks after a recent viral syndrome with fevers 
and often myalgias indicative of skeletal muscle inflam-
mation. Some patients present with atypical or anginal-
type chest pain, or with pleuritic, positional chest pain 
due to pericarditis with some degree of underlying 
myocarditis. Patients in whom ventricular tachyarrhyth-
mias dominate the presentation may have viral myocar-
ditis but should be evaluated for sarcoidosis or giant cell 
myocarditis. Patients presenting with pulmonary or sys-
temic embolic events from intracardiac thrombi gener-
ally already have chronic, severe cardiac dysfunction.
A small number of patients present with acute fulmi-
nant myocarditis, with rapid progression from a severe 
febrile respiratory syndrome to cardiogenic shock from 
which multiple organ system failure, including coagu-
lopathy, may develop. Such patients have often been 
discharged from the emergency department with antibi-
otic therapy only to return in extremis. Prompt triage is 
vital to provide aggressive support with high-level intra-
venous inotropic therapy and on occasion, mechani-
cal circulatory support; importantly, more than half of 
patients with this acute presentation can survive with 
marked improvement within the first few weeks, often 
returning to near-normal systolic function.
Many patients presenting with heart failure after a 
viral illness actually have a long-standing cardiomy-
opathy that was acutely exacerbated but not caused 
by the new viral illness. Heart failure from any cause 
one is to degrade the protein, dystrophin, in the myocyte 
membrane complex that is genetically abnormal in some 
muscular dystrophies. Viral antigens activate immune 
responses that help to contain the initial infection but 
may persist into later phases. Components include non-
specific cytokines, specific antibodies, and cytotoxic 
T-lymphocytes, which in some cases recognize myocyte 
proteins. There is varying evidence for a latent phase of 
ongoing infection with persistence of the viral genome 
and some viral proteins. The relative contributions of viral 
persistence and deleterious host immune responses to pro-
gressive dysfunction have not been clearly delineated in 
human disease (Fig. 21-5). The late stages are dominated 
by nonspecific secondary changes in gene expression, and 
by local and systemic neurohormonal responses, as seen 
for other etiologies of heart failure.
Although viral myocarditis is generally considered 
to be an acquired cardiomyopathy, families have been 
reported whose clinical disease appeared after a syn-
drome consistent with viral myocarditis. One pos-
sible explanation for this apparent mixed etiology is 
that some genetic variants of myocardial cell surface 
LV
LA
RV
RA
Figure 21-3 
Dilated cardiomyopathy. This echocardiogram of a young 
man with dilated cardiomyopathy shows massive global dila-
tion and thinning of the walls of the left ventricle (LV). The 
left atrium (LA) is also enlarged compared to normal. Note 
that the echocardiographic and pathologic images are verti-
cally opposite, such that the LV is by convention on the top 
right in the echocardiographic image and bottom right in 
the pathologic images. (Image courtesy of Justina Wu, MD, 
Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston.)
Figure 21-4 
Dilated cardiomyopathy. Microscopic specimen of a dilated 
cardiomyopathy showing the nonspecific changes of inter-
stitial fibrosis and myocyte hypertrophy characterized by 
increased myocyte size and enlarged, irregular nuclei. Hema-
toxylin and eosin stained section, 100ë original magnifica-
tion. (Image courtesy of Robert Padera, MD, PhD, Depart-
ment of Pathology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston.)
Section IV
Disorders of the Heart
256
Endomyocardial biopsy criteria for myocarditis require 
lymphocytic infiltration with evidence of myocyte 
necrosis (Fig. 21-6), but are met in only about 10–20% 
of classic presentations. Most biopsies in fulminant myo-
carditis show only marked tissue edema without a cel-
lular infiltrate, and it is likely that many less acute cases 
may similarly be characterized by tissue edema and 
cytokine depression of myocardial function, possibly 
including some antibody-mediated endothelial injury, 
without marked cellular infiltrates. Acute and convales-
cent viral titers are usually sent but are more likely to 
be important from the public health standpoint than for 
the individual.
Viral myocarditis treatment is initially directed 
toward stabilizing the hemodynamic status and then 
toward adjusting neurohormonal antagonists for the 
treatment of heart failure as tolerated. Presentation 
with fulminant disease requires rapid evaluation and 
therapy as discussed earlier. For patients with subacute 
presentation, randomized trials have shown no benefit 
often worsens transiently during infection, presumably 
due to the myocardial depressant effects of circulating 
cytokines. Marked left ventricular dilation and the pres-
ence of severely elevated left-ventricular filling pressures 
without frank pulmonary edema suggest chronic, slowly 
progressive disease, which is often further supported by 
a history of gradual changes in exercise tolerance before 
the viral syndrome.
For the usual subacute presentation, the diagnosis 
of cardiomyopathy is confirmed by echocardiography, 
and further evaluation is directed to ascertain whether 
myocarditis is present. Troponin is often mildly ele-
vated, and creatine kinase may be released from the 
cardiac injury or skeletal muscle involvement. In some 
cases, cardiac catheterization is performed to rule out 
acute ischemia. Magnetic resonance imaging is increas-
ingly used for the diagnosis of myocarditis, which is 
supported by evidence of increased tissue edema and 
gadolinium enhancement, particularly in the mid-
wall distinct from the usual coronary artery territories. 
Table 21-5
Major Causes of Dilated Cardiomyopathy (With Common Examples)
Inflammatory Myocarditis
Metabolica
Infective
  Viral (coxsackie, adenovirus, HIV, hepatitis C)
  Parasitic (T. cruzi—Chagas’ disease, toxoplasmosis)
  Bacterial (diphtheria)
  Spirochetal (Borellia burgdorferi—Lyme disease)
  Rickettsial—(Q fever)
  Fungal (with systemic infection)
Noninfective
  Granulomatous inflammatory disease
    Sarcoidosis
    Giant cell myocarditis
  Hypersensitivity myocarditis
  Polymyositis, dermatomyositis
  Collagen vascular disease
  Peripartum cardiomyopathy
  Transplant rejection
Nutritional deficiencies: thiamine, selenium, carnitine
Electrolyte deficiencies: calcium, phosphate, magnesium
Endocrinopathy:
  Thyroid disease
  Pheochromocytoma
  Diabetes
Obesity
Hemochromatosis
Inherited Metabolic Pathway Defects (See Table 21-4)
Familiala (See Table 21-3)
Skeletal and cardiac myopathy
Dystrophin-related dystrophy (Duchenne’s, Becker’s)
Mitochondrial myopathies (e.g., Kearns-Sayre syndrome)
Arrhythmogenic ventricular dysplasia
Hemochromatosis
Associated with other systemic diseases
Susceptibility to immune-mediated myocarditis
Toxic
Alcohol
Catecholamines: amphetamines, cocaine
Chemotherapeutic agents: (anthracyclines, trastuzumab)
  Interferon
  Other therapeutic agents (hydroxychloroquine,  
  chloroquine)
Drugs of misuse (emetine, anabolic steroids)
Heavy metals: lead, mercury
Occupational exposure: hydrocarbons, arsenicals
Overlap with Restrictive Cardiomyopathy
“Minimally dilated cardiomyopathy”
Hemochromatosis
Amyloidosis
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (“burned-out”)
“Idiopathic”a
Miscellaneous (Shared Elements of above Etiologies)
Arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia (may also affect 
left ventricle)a
Left ventricular noncompactiona
Peripartum cardiomyopathy
aSome specific cases can be linked now to specific genetic mutation in a familial cardiomyopathy; others with similar phenotypes that appear to 
be acquired or idiopathic may represent genetic factors not yet identified.
 
CHAPTER 21
Cardiomyopathy and Myocarditis
257
of immunosuppression with glucocorticoid combina-
tions or intravenous immunoglobulin, even when the 
biopsy is positive for lymphocytic infiltrates; yet, immu-
nosuppression is often used even in the absence of evi-
dence of benefit, in part due to perceived analogy to 
acute cardiac transplant rejection. Animal models have 
shown that viral replication and myocardial injury can 
be worsened by immunosuppression during the early 
phase of infection; however, patients with persistent 
inflammatory myocarditis and a progressive downhill 
course over weeks may be treated empirically with glu-
cocorticoids in an attempt to avoid the need for cardiac 
transplantation.
The true prognosis of viral myocarditis is not known, 
as most unrecognized cases probably resolve spontane-
ously, while others progress to cardiomyopathy with-
out other obvious cause. However, among patients 
who have truly recent onset cardiomyopathy of less 
than 3–6 months’ duration without other apparent eti-
ology, almost half will have major improvement in 
left ventricular ejection fraction during the subsequent 
6–12 months. Those patients in whom left ventricular 
ejection fraction and dimensions return to normal are 
usually considered to have residual subclinical cardio-
myopathy. Neurohormonal antagonist therapy is usually 
continued indefinitely as tolerated, with dose adjust-
ments to avoid side effects.
Figure 21-6 
Acute myocarditis. Microscopic image of an endomyocar-
dial biopsy showing massive infiltration with mononuclear 
cells and occasional eosinophils associated with clear myo-
cyte damage. The myocyte nuclei are enlarged and reac-
tive. Such extensive involvement of the myocardium would 
lead to extensive replacement fibrosis even if the inflamma-
tory response could be suppressed. Hematoxylin and eosin 
stained section, 200ë original magnification. (Image cour-
tesy of Robert Padera, MD, PhD, Department of Pathology, 
Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston.)
Figure 21-5 
Schematic diagram demonstrating the possible progres-
sion from infection through direct, secondary, and auto-
immune responses to dilated cardiomyopathy. Most of 
the supporting evidence for this sequence is derived from 
animal models. It is not known to what degree persistent 
infection and/or ongoing immune responses contribute to 
ongoing myocardial injury in the chronic phase.
Antibodies
Against pathogen
Against surface antigens
Against myocyte proteins
Antibodies
Against
pathogen
Lymphocytes
Cytokines
Entry into   myocytes
Chronic dilated
cardiomyopathy
Persistent or latent
infection
Delayed apoptosis
Myocyte lysis
Viral replication
and protein expression
Viremia
Infection
Immune Responses
Extracellular
Matrix 
Section IV
Disorders of the Heart
258
insect vector have decreased the prevalence from about 
16 million to less than 10 million in South America, 
cases are increasingly recognized in Western developed 
countries. Approximately 100,000 affected individuals 
are currently living in the United States, most of whom 
contracted the disease in endemic areas.
The acute phase of Chagas’ disease with parasitemia 
is usually unrecognized, but in fewer than 5% of cases 
presents clinically within a few weeks of infection, with 
nonspecific symptoms or occasionally with acute myo-
carditis and meningoencephalitis. In the absence of anti-
parasitic therapy, the silent stage progresses slowly over 
10–30 years in almost half of patients to manifest in the 
cardiac and gastrointestinal systems in the chronic stages. 
Survival is less than 30% at 5 years after the onset of 
overt clinical heart failure.
Multiple pathogenetic mechanisms are implicated. 
The parasite itself can cause myocyte lysis and primary 
neuronal damage, and specific immune responses may 
recognize the parasites or related antigens and lead to 
chronic immune activation in the absence of detectable 
parasites. Molecular techniques have revealed persistent 
parasite DNA fragments in infected individuals. Further 
evidence for persistent infection is the eruption of para-
sitic skin lesions during immunosuppression after cardiac 
transplantation. As in postviral myocarditis, the relative 
roles of persistent infection and of secondary autoim-
mune injury have not been resolved (Fig. 21-5). An 
additional factor in progression of Chagas’ disease is the 
autonomic dysfunction and microvascular damage that 
may contribute to cardiac and gastrointestinal disease.
Features typical of Chagas’ disease are conduction sys-
tem abnormalities, particularly sinus node and atrioven-
tricular (AV) node dysfunction and right bundle branch 
block. Atrial fibrillation and ventricular tachyarrhythmias 
also occur. Small ventricular aneurysms are common, 
particularly at the apex. The dilated ventricles are par-
ticularly thrombogenic, giving rise to pulmonary and 
systemic emboli. The serologic enzyme-linked immuno-
sorbent assay (ELISA) for the IgM has largely replaced 
the previous complement fixation test for diagnosis.
Treatment of the advanced stages focused on the clini-
cal manifestations of the disease, with heart failure regi-
mens, pacemaker-defibrillators, and anticoagulation; how-
ever, increasing emphasis is placed on antiparasitic therapy 
even in chronic disease. The most common effective anti-
parasitic therapies are benznidazole and nifurtimox, both 
associated with multiple severe reactions, including der-
matitis, gastrointestinal distress, and neuropathy. Patients 
without major extracardiac disease have occasionally 
undergone transplantation, after which they require life-
long therapy to suppress reactivation of infection.
African trypanosomiasis infection results from the tsetse 
fly bite and can occur in travelers exposed during trips to 
Africa. The West African form is caused by Trypanosoma 
brucei gambiense and progresses silently over years. 
Specific viruses
In humans, viruses are often suspected but rarely con-
firmed as the direct cause of myocarditis. Often impli-
cated is the picornavirus family of RNA viruses, with 
the enteroviruses Coxsackie, echovirus, and poliovirus. Influ-
enza, another RNA virus, is implicated in myocarditis 
with varying frequency from year to year as the epitopes 
change. Of the DNA viruses, adenovirus, variola (small-
pox) and vaccinia (smallpox vaccine), and the herpesviruses 
(Varicella zoster, Cytomegalovirus, and Epstein-Barr virus) are 
well recognized as causes of myocarditis. From genetic 
analyses of biopsy tissue, parvovirus B19, coxsackie, ade-
novirus, and Epstein-Barr virus are the agents most often 
implicated. The role of parvovirus B19 as a cause of myo-
carditis or cardiomyopathy is difficult to determine, as 
almost half of individuals show evidence of prior infec-
tion with this small DNA virus that causes “fifth disease” 
in children.
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) has been associ-
ated with echocardiographic abnormalities in 10–40% 
patients with clinical disease. Cardiomyopathy in HIV 
may result from cardiac involvement with other asso-
ciated viruses, such as cytomegalovirus and hepatitis C. 
Antiviral drugs to treat chronic HIV can cause cardio-
myopathy, both directly as cardiotoxins and through 
drug hypersensitivity. The clinical picture may be com-
plicated by pericardial effusions and pulmonary hyper-
tension. There is a high frequency of lymphocytic myo-
carditis found at autopsy, and viral particles have been 
demonstrated in the myocardium in some cases, consis-
tent with direct causation.
Hepatitis C has been repeatedly implicated in cardio-
myopathy, particularly in Germany and Asia. Cardiac 
function may improve after interferon therapy. As this 
cytokine itself often depresses cardiac function transiently, 
careful coordination of administration and ongoing clini-
cal evaluation are critical. Involvement of the heart with 
hepatitis B is uncommon but can be seen when associ-
ated with systemic vasculitis (polyarteritis nodosa).
Other viral infections in which cardiac involvement 
is specifically implicated, beyond the depression of car-
diac function during any systemic cytokine activation, 
include mumps, respiratory syncytial virus, the arboviruses 
(dengue fever and yellow fever), and arenaviruses (Lassa fever).
Parasitic myocarditis
Chagas’ disease is the third most common parasitic 
infection in the world and the most common cause 
of 
cardiomyopathy. 
The 
protozoan 
Trypanosoma 
cruzi (T. cruzi) is usually transmitted by the bite of the 
reduviid bug, endemic in the rural areas of South and 
Central America. Transmission can also occur through 
blood transfusion, organ donation, from mother to fetus, 
and occasionally orally. While programs to eradicate the 
 
CHAPTER 21
Cardiomyopathy and Myocarditis
259
and salmonellosis, for which treatment is directed at the 
systemic infection.
Clostridial infections cause myocardial damage from 
the released toxin. Gas bubbles can be detected in the 
myocardium, and occasionally abscesses can form in the 
myocardium and pericardium. Streptococcal infection with 
β-hemolytic streptococci is most commonly associ-
ated with acute rheumatic fever, and is characterized by 
inflammation and fibrosis of cardiac valves and systemic 
connective tissue, but can also lead to a myocarditis 
with focal or diffuse infiltrates of mononuclear cells.
Tuberculosis can involve the myocardium directly as 
well as through tuberculous pericarditis, but rarely does 
so when the disease is treated with antibiotics. Whipple’s 
disease is caused by Tropheryma whippleii. The usual man-
ifestations are in the gastrointestinal tract, but pericardi-
tis, coronary arteritis, valvular lesions, and occasionally 
clinical heart failure may also occur. Multidrug antitu-
berculous regimens are effective, but the disease tends 
to relapse even with appropriate treatment.
Other infections
Spirochetal myocarditis has been diagnosed from 
myocardial biopsies containing Borrelia burgdorferi that 
causes Lyme disease. Lyme carditis most often pres-
ents with arthritis and conduction system disease that 
resolves within 1–2 weeks of antibiotic treatment, only 
rarely causing clinical heart failure.
Fungal myocarditis can occur due to hematog-
enous or direct spread of infection from other sites, as 
has been described for aspergillosis, actinomycosis, blas-
tomycosis, candidiasis, coccidioidomycosis, cryptococ-
cosis, histoplasmosis, and mucormycosis. However, car-
diac infection is rarely the dominant clinical feature of 
these infections.
The rickettsial infections, Q fever, Rocky Mountain 
spotted fever, and scrub typhus, are frequently accompanied 
by ECG changes, but most clinical manifestations relate 
to systemic vascular involvement.
Noninfective Myocarditis
Myocardial inflammation can occur without apparent 
preceding infection. The paradigm of noninfectious 
inflammation without infection is cardiac transplant 
rejection, from which we have learned that myocardial 
depression can develop and reverse quickly, that non-
cellular mediators such as antibodies and cytokines play 
a major role in addition to lymphocytes, and that myo-
cardial antigens are exposed by prior physical injury and 
viral infection.
The most commonly diagnosed noninfectious 
inflammation is granulomatous myocarditis, including 
both sarcoidosis and giant cell myocarditis. Sarcoidosis 
is a multisystem disease most commonly affecting the 
The East African form caused by T. brucei rhodesiense 
can progress rapidly through perivascular infiltration to 
myocarditis and heart failure, with frequent arrhyth-
mias. The diagnosis is made by identification of trypano-
somes in blood, lymph nodes, or other affected sites. 
Development of optimal drug regimens remains limited, 
and depends on the type and the stage (hemolymphatic 
or neurologic).
Toxoplasmosis is contracted through undercooked 
infected beef or pork, transmission from feline feces, 
organ transplantation, transfusion, or maternal-fetal 
transmission. Immunocompromised hosts are at great-
est risk for reactivation of latent infection from cysts. 
The cysts have been found in up to 40% of autopsies 
of patients dying from HIV infection. Toxoplasmo-
sis may present with encephalitis or chorioretinitis, and 
in the heart can cause myocarditis, pericardial effusion, 
constrictive pericarditis, and heart failure. The diagno-
sis may be suspected in an immunocompromised patient 
with myocarditis and serologic evidence of toxoplas-
mosis. Fortuitous sampling may reveal the cysts in the 
myocardium. Combination therapy can include pyri-
methamine and sulfadiazine or clindamycin.
Trichinellosis is caused by Trichinella spiralis larva 
ingested with undercooked meat. Larva migrating into 
skeletal muscles cause myalgias, weakness, and fever. 
Periorbital and facial edema, and conjunctival and retinal 
hemorrhage may also be seen. Although the larva may 
occasionally invade the myocardium, clinical heart failure 
is rare, and when observed, attributed to the eosinophilic 
inflammatory response. The diagnosis is made from the 
specific serum antibody and is further supported by the 
presence of eosinophilia. Treatment includes antihelmin-
thic drugs and glucocorticoids if inflammation is severe.
Cardiac involvement with Echinococcus is rare, but cysts 
can form and rupture in the myocardium and pericardium.
Bacterial infections
Most bacterial infections can involve the heart occasion-
ally through direct invasion and abscess formation, but 
do so rarely. More commonly, contractility is depressed 
globally in severe infection and sepsis through systemic 
inflammatory responses. Diphtheria specifically affects the 
heart in almost one-half of cases and is the most common 
cause of death in patients with this infection. Once a dis-
ease of children, the prevalence of vaccines has shifted 
the incidence of this disease to countries where immu-
nization is not routine and to older populations who 
have lost their immunity. The bacillus releases a toxin 
that impairs protein synthesis and may particularly affect 
the conduction system. The specific antitoxin should 
be administered as soon as possible, with higher priority 
than antibiotic therapy. Other systemic bacterial infec-
tions that can involve the heart include brucellosis, chla-
mydophila, legionella, meningococcus, mycoplasma, psittacosis, 
Section IV
Disorders of the Heart
260
Glucocorticoid therapy is less effective than for sarcoid-
osis, and is sometimes combined with other immuno-
suppressive agents. The course is generally of rapid 
deterioration requiring urgent transplantation. Although 
the severity of presentation and myocardial histology are 
more fulminant than sarcoidosis, the occasional finding 
of giant cell myocarditis after sarcoidosis suggests that 
they may in some cases represent different stages of a 
similar disease.
Hypersensitivity myocarditis is usually an unexpected 
diagnosis, made when the biopsy reveals infiltration 
with lymphocytes and mononuclear cells with a high 
proportion of eosinophils. (Sometimes called eosino-
philic myocarditis, this should not be confused with 
hypereosinophilic syndrome in which very high cir-
culating, often clonal populations of eosinophils cause 
endomyocardial fibrosis.) Most commonly the reac-
tion is attributed to antibiotics, particularly those taken 
chronically, but thiazides, anticonvulsants, indometha-
cin, and methyldopa have also been implicated. High-
dose glucocorticoids can be curative.
Myocarditis can be associated with systemic inflam-
matory diseases such as polymyositis and dermatomyosi-
tis. While sometimes considered as an explanation for 
cardiac findings in patients with other inflammatory 
disease, such as systemic lupus erythematosus, the more 
common causes are pericarditis, vasculitis, pulmonary 
hypertension, or accelerated coronary artery disease.
Peripartum cardiomyopathy develops during the 
last trimester or within the first 6 months after preg-
nancy, with a frequency between 1:3000 and 1:15,000 
lungs, presenting in young adults with higher preva-
lence in African-American males. Patients with pulmo-
nary sarcoid are at high risk for cardiac involvement, 
but cardiac sarcoidosis may also occur without clinical 
lung disease in middle-aged whites of both genders. 
Regional clustering of the disease supports the sus-
picion that the granulomatous reaction is triggered 
by an infectious or environmental allergen not yet 
identified.
The sites and density of cardiac granulomata, the 
time course, and the degree of extracardiac involve-
ment are remarkably variable. Patients may present 
with rapid onset heart failure and ventricular tachyar-
rhythmias, conduction block, chest pain syndromes, or 
minor cardiac findings in the setting of ocular involve-
ment, an infiltrative skin rash, or a nonspecific febrile 
illness. They may also present less acutely after months 
to years of fluctuating cardiac symptoms. When ventric-
ular tachycardia or conduction block dominate the ini-
tial presentation of heart failure without coronary artery 
disease, suspicion should be high for these granuloma-
tous myocarditides.
Depending on the time course, the ventricles may 
appear restrictive or dilated, at times with right ven-
tricular predominance. Small ventricular aneurysms 
are common. Computed tomography of the chest 
often reveals pulmonary lymphadenopathy even in the 
absence of clinical lung disease. Metabolic imaging (pos-
itron emission tomography [PET]) of the whole chest 
can highlight active sarcoid lesions that are avid for glu-
cose. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the heart 
can identify areas likely to be inflammatory. To rule out 
chronic granulomatous infections, the diagnosis usually 
requires pathologic confirmation. Biopsy of enlarged 
mediastinal nodes may provide the highest yield. The 
scattered granulomata of sarcoidosis can be missed on 
cardiac biopsy (Fig. 21-7).
Immunosuppressive treatment for sarcoidosis is ini-
tiated with high-dose glucocorticoids, which are often 
more effective for arrhythmias than for the heart failure. 
Pacemakers and implantable defibrillators are generally 
indicated to prevent life-threatening heart block or ven-
tricular tachycardia, respectively. Because the inflamma-
tion often resolves into extensive fibrosis that impairs 
cardiac function and provides pathways for reentrant 
arrhythmias, the prognosis is best when the granulomata 
are not extensive.
Giant cell myocarditis is less common than sarcoid-
osis, but accounts for 10–20% of biopsy-positive cases 
of myocarditis. Giant cell myocarditis typically presents 
with rapidly progressive heart failure and tachyarrhyth-
mias. Diffuse granulomatous lesions are surrounded by 
extensive inflammatory infiltrate unlikely to be missed 
on endomyocardial biopsy. Associated conditions are 
thymomas, thyroiditis, pernicious anemia, other auto-
immune diseases, and occasionally recent infections. 
Figure 21-7 
Sarcoidosis. Microscopic image of an endomyocardial 
biopsy showing a noncaseating granuloma and associated 
interstitial fibrosis typical of sarcoidosis. No microorganisms 
were present on special stains, and no foreign material was 
identified. Hematoxylin and eosin stained section, 200ë origi-
nal magnification. (Image courtesy of Robert Padera, MD, 
PhD, Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women’s Hos-
pital, Boston.)
 
CHAPTER 21
Cardiomyopathy and Myocarditis
261
should be supervised to avoid exacerbations of heart 
failure or arrhythmias, and ongoing support arranged. 
Even with severe disease, marked improvement can 
occur within 3–6 months of abstinence. Implantable 
defibrillators are generally deferred until an adequate 
period of abstinence, after which they may not be nec-
essary if the ejection fraction has improved. With con-
tinued consumption, the prognosis is grim.
Cocaine, amphetamines, and related catecholaminer-
gic stimulants can produce chronic cardiomyopathy as 
well as acute ischemia and tachyarrhythmias. Pathol-
ogy reveals tiny microinfarcts consistent with small 
vessel ischemia. Similar findings can be seen with 
pheochromocytoma.
Chemotherapy agents are the most common drugs 
implicated in cardiomyopathy. Judicious use of these 
drugs requires balancing the risks of the malignancy and 
the risks of cardiotoxicity, as many cancers have a chronic 
course with prognosis no worse than heart failure.
Anthracyclines cause characteristic histologic changes 
of vacuolar degeneration and myofibrillar loss. Genera-
tion of reactive oxygen species involving heme com-
pounds is currently the favored explanation for myocyte 
injury and fibrosis. Disruption of the large titin pro-
tein may contribute to loss of sarcomere organization. 
There are three different presentations of anthracycline-
induced cardiomyopathy. Acute heart failure develop-
ing during administration of a single dose can be severe, 
but may clinically resolve in a few weeks. Early onset 
doxorubicin cardiotoxicity develops in about 3% of 
patients during or shortly after a chronic course, relat-
ing closely to total dose. It may be rapidly progressive, 
but may also improve to restore reasonable ventricular 
function. The chronic presentation differs according 
to whether therapy was given before or after puberty. 
Patients who received doxorubicin while still growing 
may have inadequate development of the heart to sup-
port cardiac function into the early twenties. Late after 
adult exposure, patients may develop the gradual onset 
of symptoms or an acute onset precipitated by a revers-
ible insult, such as influenza or atrial fibrillation. Doxo-
rubicin cardiotoxicity leads to a relatively nondilated 
ventricle, perhaps due to the accompanying fibrosis. 
Thus, the stroke volume may be severely reduced with 
an ejection fraction of 30–40%, which would be well 
tolerated in a patient with a more dilated ventricle typi-
cal of other cardiomyopathies. Therapy is that for heart 
failure, with careful suppression of “inappropriate” sinus 
tachycardia, and attention to postural hypotension that 
can occur in these patients. Once thought to have an 
inexorable downward course, some patients with doxo-
rubicin cardiotoxicity improve under careful manage-
ment to near-normal clinical function for many years.
Trastuzumab is a monoclonal antibody that inter-
feres with cell surface receptors crucial for some tumor 
growth and for cardiac adaptation. The incidence of 
deliveries. The mechanisms remain controversial, but 
inflammation has been implicated. Risk factors are 
increased maternal age, increased parity, twin preg-
nancy, malnutrition, use of tocolytic therapy for prema-
ture labor, and preeclampsia or toxemia of pregnancy. 
As the increased circulatory demand of pregnancy can 
aggravate other cardiac disease that was clinically unrec-
ognized, it is crucial to the diagnosis that there be no 
evidence for preexisting cardiac disorder.
Heart failure early after delivery was previously com-
mon in Nigeria, when the custom for new mothers 
included salt ingestion while reclining on a warm bed, 
which likely impaired mobilization of the excess cir-
culating volume after delivery. In the Western world, 
lymphocytic myocarditis has often been found on myo-
cardial biopsy. This inflammation has been hypothesized 
to reflect increased susceptibility to viral myocarditis or 
an autoimmune myocarditis due to cross-reactivity of 
anti-uterine antibodies against cardiac muscle. Another 
mechanism involving a prolactin cleavage fragment has 
been proposed based on an animal model.
Toxic Cardiomyopathy
Cardiotoxicity has been reported with multiple envi-
ronmental and pharmacologic agents. Often these asso-
ciations are seen only with very high levels of exposure 
or acute overdoses, respectively, in which acute elec-
trocardiographic and hemodynamic abnormalities may 
reflect both direct drug effect and systemic toxicity.
Alcohol is the most common toxin implicated in 
chronic dilated cardiomyopathy. Excess consumption 
may contribute to more than 10% of cases of heart fail-
ure, including exacerbation of cases with other primary 
etiologies such as valvular disease or previous infarction. 
Toxicity is attributed both to alcohol and to its primary 
metabolite acetaldehyde. Polymorphisms of the genes 
encoding alcohol dehydrogenase and the angiotensin-
converting enzyme increase the likelihood of alcoholic 
cardiomyopathy. Superimposed vitamin deficiencies and 
toxic alcohol additives are rarely implicated. The alcohol 
consumption necessary to produce cardiomyopathy in an 
otherwise normal heart has been estimated to be six drinks 
(about 4 ounces of pure ethanol) daily for 5–10 years, 
but frequent binge drinking may also be sufficient. Many 
patients with alcoholic cardiomyopathy are fully functional 
without apparent stigmata of alcoholism.
Diastolic dysfunction, mild ventricular dilation, 
and subclinical depression of contractility can be seen 
before the development of clinical heart failure. Atrial 
fibrillation occurs commonly. The cardiac impairment 
in severe alcoholic cardiomyopathy is the sum of both 
permanent damage and a substantial component that is 
reversible after cessation of alcohol consumption. Medi-
cal therapy includes neurohormonal antagonists and 
diuretics as needed for fluid management. Withdrawal 
Section IV
Disorders of the Heart
262
blood pressure and heart rate, sometimes with episodic 
palpitations. Most patients with pheochromocytoma 
have postural hypotension. In addition to α-adrenergic 
receptor antagonists, definitive therapy requires surgical 
extirpation. Very high renin states, such as those caused 
by renal artery stenosis, can lead to modest depression in 
ejection fraction with little or no ventricular dilation and 
markedly labile symptoms with flash pulmonary edema, 
related to sudden shifts in vascular tone and intravascular 
volume.
Controversies remain regarding whether diabetes and 
obesity are sufficient to cause cardiomyopathy. Most heart 
failure in diabetes results from epicardial coronary dis-
ease, with further increase in coronary artery risk due to 
accompanying hypertension and renal dysfunction. Car-
diomyopathy may result in part from insulin resistance 
and increased advanced-glycosylation end products, 
which impair both systolic and diastolic function. How-
ever, much of the dysfunction can be attributed to scat-
tered focal ischemia resulting from distal coronary artery 
tapering and limited microvascular perfusion even with-
out proximal focal stenoses. Diabetes is a typical factor, 
along with hypertension, advanced age, and female gen-
der, in heart failure with “preserved” ejection fraction.
The existence of a cardiomyopathy due to obesity is 
generally accepted. In addition to cardiac involvement 
from associated diabetes, hypertension, and vascular 
inflammation of the metabolic syndrome, obesity alone 
is associated with impaired excretion of excess volume 
load, which, over time, can lead to increased wall stress 
and secondary adaptive neurohumoral responses. The 
rapid clearance of natriuretic peptides by adipose tis-
sue may contribute to fluid retention. In the absence of 
another obvious cause of cardiomyopathy in an obese 
patient with systolic dysfunction without marked ven-
tricular dilation, effective weight reduction is often 
associated with major improvement in ejection fraction 
and clinical function.
Nutritional deficiencies can occasionally cause 
dilated cardiomyopathy but are not commonly impli-
cated in developed Western countries. Beri-beri heart 
disease due to thiamine deficiency can result from poor 
nutrition in undernourished populations, and in patients 
deriving most of their calories from alcohol, and has 
been reported in teenagers subsisting only on highly 
processed foods. This disease is initially a vasodilated 
state with very high output heart failure that can later 
progress to a low output state; thiamine repletion can 
lead to prompt recovery of cardiovascular function. 
Abnormalities in carnitine metabolism can cause dilated 
or restrictive cardiomyopathies, usually in children. 
Deficiency of trace elements such as selenium can cause 
cardiomyopathy (Keshan’s disease).
Calcium is essential for excitation-contraction cou-
pling, serving as an inotrope when administered. 
Chronic deficiencies of calcium, such as can occur with 
cardiotoxicity is lower than for anthracyclines but 
enhanced by coadministration with them. Although 
considered to be more often reversible, trastuzumab 
cardiotoxicity does not always resolve, and some 
patients progress to clinical heart failure and death. As 
with anthracycline cardiotoxicity, therapy is as usual for 
heart failure, but it is not clear whether or not the spon-
taneous rate of improvement is enhanced by neurohor-
monal antagonists.
Cardiotoxicity with cyclophosphamide and ifosfamide 
generally occurs acutely and with very high doses. 
5-Fluorouracil, cisplatin, and some other alkylating 
agents can cause recurrent coronary spasm that occa-
sionally leads to depressed contractility. Many small 
molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitors are under develop-
ment for different malignancies. Although these agents 
are “targeted” at specific tumor receptors or path-
ways, the biologic conservation of signaling pathways 
can cause inhibitors to have “off-target” effects that 
include the heart and vasculature. Acute administration 
of interferon-α can cause hypotension and arrhythmias. 
Clinical heart failure occurring during repeated chronic 
administration usually resolves after discontinuation.
Other therapeutic drugs that can cause cardiotox-
icity during chronic use include hydroxychloroquine, 
chloroquine, emetine, and antiretroviral therapies.
Toxic exposures are most commonly implicated 
in arrhythmias or respiratory injury acutely during acci-
dents. Chronic exposures that can cause cardiotoxicity 
include hydrocarbons, fluorocarbons, arsenicals, lead, 
and mercury.
Metabolic Causes of Dilated 
Cardiomyopathy
Endocrine disorders affect multiple organ systems, 
including the heart. Hyperthyroidism and hypothyroid-
ism do not often cause clinical heart failure in an oth-
erwise normal heart, but commonly exacerbate heart 
failure. The most common, current reason for thyroid 
abnormalities in the heart failure population is the use 
of amiodarone, a drug with substantial iodine content. 
Clinical signs of thyroid disease may be masked, so tests 
of thyroid function are part of the routine evaluation 
of cardiomyopathy. Hypothyroidism should be treated 
with very slow escalation of doses to avoid exacerbat-
ing tachyarrhythmias and heart failure. Hyperthyroidism 
should always be considered with new onset atrial fibril-
lation or ventricular tachycardia, or atrial fibrillation in 
which the rapid ventricular response is difficult to con-
trol. Hyperthyroidism and heart failure are a dangerous 
combination that merits very close supervision, often 
hospitalization, during titration of antithyroid medica-
tions, which may lead to precipitous worsening of heart 
failure. Pheochromocytoma is rare, but should be consid-
ered when a patient has heart failure and very labile 
 
CHAPTER 21
Cardiomyopathy and Myocarditis
263
of which are associated with creatine kinase elevations. 
Mitochondrial myopathies are associated with varying 
degrees of skeletal involvement, biopsies of which show 
the characteristic “ragged red fiber” appearance. Some 
patients with mitochondrial myopathy have character-
istic drooping eyelids. The energy deficits associated 
with mitochondrial abnormalities lead to multiple sys-
temic syndromes. Other familial metabolic defects more 
often present as restrictive disease, but can sometimes be 
identified on electron microscopy of endomyocardial 
biopsies.
Families with a history of atrial arrhythmias, con-
duction system disease, and cardiomyopathy may have 
abnormalities of the nuclear membrane lamin proteins. 
While all dilated cardiomyopathies carry a risk of sud-
den death, a family history of cardiomyopathy with 
sudden death raises suspicion for a particularly arrhyth-
mogenic mutation; affected family members may be 
considered for implantable defibrillators even before 
meeting the reduced ejection fraction threshold for pri-
mary prevention of sudden death.
A prominent family history of sudden death or ven-
tricular tachycardia before clinical cardiomyopathy sug-
gests genetic defects in the desmosomal proteins causing 
arrhythmogenic ventricular dysplasia (Fig. 21-9). Originally 
described as affecting the right ventricle (arrhythmo-
genic right ventricular dysplasia [ARVD]), this disorder 
can affect either or both ventricles. Patients often pres-
ent first with ventricular tachycardia. Genetic defects 
in proteins of the desmosomal complex disrupt myo-
cyte junctions and adhesions, leading to replacement of 
myocardium by deposits of fat. Thin ventricular walls 
may be recognized on echocardiography but are better 
visualized on MRI. The same protein also affects hair 
hypoparathyroidism (particularly postsurgical) or intesti-
nal dysfunction (from diarrheal syndromes and follow-
ing extensive resection), can cause severe chronic heart 
failure that responds over days or weeks to vigorous 
calcium repletion. Phosphate is a component of high-
energy compounds needed for efficient energy transfer 
and multiple signaling pathways. Hypophosphatemia 
can develop during starvation and early refeeding fol-
lowing a prolonged fast, and occasionally during hyper-
alimentation. Magnesium is a cofactor for thiamine-
dependent reactions and for the sodium-potassium 
adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase), but hypomagnese-
mia rarely becomes sufficiently profound to cause clini-
cal cardiomyopathy.
Hemochromatosis is variably classified as a metabolic 
or storage disease. It is included among the causes of 
restrictive cardiomyopathy, but the clinical presentation 
is often that of a dilated cardiomyopathy. The autoso-
mal recessive form is related to the HFE gene. With up 
to 10% of the population heterozygous for one muta-
tion, the clinical prevalence might be as high as 1 in 
500. The lower rates observed highlight the limited 
penetrance of the disease, suggesting the role of addi-
tional genetic and environmental factors for clinical 
expression. The clinical syndrome includes cirrhosis, 
diabetes, and hypogonadism. Hemochromatosis can 
also be acquired from iron overload due to hemolytic 
anemia and transfusions. Excess iron is deposited in 
the perinuclear compartment of cardiomyocytes, with 
resulting disruption of intracellular architecture and 
mitochondrial function. Diagnosis is easily made from 
measurement of serum iron and transferrin saturation, 
with a threshold of >60% for men, and >45–50% for 
women. Magnetic resonance imaging can help to quanti-
tate iron stores in the liver and heart, and endomyocardial 
biopsy tissue can be stained for iron (Fig. 21-8). If diag-
nosed early, hemochromatosis can often be managed by 
repeated phlebotomy to remove iron. For more severe 
iron overload, iron chelation therapy with desferriox-
amine (deferoxamine) or deferasirox can help to improve 
cardiac function if myocyte loss and replacement fibrosis 
are not too severe. Inborn disorders of metabolism occa-
sionally present with dilated cardiomyopathy, although 
are most often associated with restrictive cardiomyopathy 
(Table 21-4).
Familial Dilated Cardiomyopathy
The recognized frequency of familial involvement in 
dilated cardiomyopathy has now increased to an esti-
mated 30% (Table 21-3). The most recognizable familial 
syndromes are the muscular dystrophies. Both Duchenne’s 
and the milder Becker’s dystrophy result from abnor-
malities in the X-linked dystrophin gene of the sarco-
lemmal membrane. Skeletal myopathy is present in mul-
tiple other genetic cardiomyopathies (Table 21-3), some 
Figure 21-8 
Hemochromatosis. Microscopic image of an endomyocardial 
biopsy showing extensive iron deposition within the cardiac 
myocytes with the Prussian blue stain (400ë original magnifi-
cation). (Image courtesy of Robert Padera, MD, PhD, Depart-
ment of Pathology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston.)
Section IV
Disorders of the Heart
264
and skin, leading in some cases to a distinct syndrome of 
“woolly hair,” and thickened palms and soles. Implant-
able defibrillators are usually indicated to prevent sud-
den death. There is variable progression to right, left, or 
biventricular failure.
Left ventricular noncompaction is a condition of 
unknown prevalence that is increasingly revealed by 
better imaging techniques, first by two-dimensional 
echocardiography and more recently by magnetic res-
onance imaging. The diagnostic criteria includes the 
presence of multiple trabeculations in the left ventri-
cle distal to the papillary muscles, creating a “spongy” 
appearance of the apex; it has been associated with mul-
tiple genetic variants in the sarcomeric and other pro-
teins such as tafazzin. The condition may be diagnosed 
incidentally or in patients carrying previous diagnoses 
of dilated, restrictive, or hypertrophic cardiomyopa-
thy. The three cardinal clinical features are ventricular 
arrhythmias, embolic events, and heart failure. Treat-
ment generally includes anticoagulation and consider-
ation for an implantable defibrillator.
Some families inherit a susceptibility to viral-induced 
myocarditis. This propensity may relate to abnormalities 
in cell surface receptors, such as the coxsackie-adenovirus 
receptor, that bind viral proteins. Some may have partial 
homology with viral proteins such that an autoimmune 
response is triggered against the myocardium.
The therapy of familial dilated cardiomyopathy is 
dictated primarily by the stage of clinical disease and the 
risk for sudden death. In some cases, the familial etiol-
ogy facilitates prognostic decisions, particularly regard-
ing the likelihood of recovery after a new diagnosis, 
which is unlikely for familial disease and frequent if the 
disease is acquired. The rate of progression of disease is 
to some extent heritable, although marked variation can 
be seen; however, there have been cases of remarkable 
clinical remission after acute presentation, likely after a 
reversible insult, such as infective myocarditis.
Genetic testing is less robust for dilated cardiomy-
opathy, for which our current understanding is similar 
to that for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy a decade ago. 
Newer molecular techniques, animal models, and data 
banks of cardiomyopathy patients are all contributing to 
the rapid expansion of the data presented in Table 21-3. 
However, serendipitous identification of inherited car-
diomyopathy, its systemic signature, and clinical course 
remain crucial to continue to advance the field, one 
family and one gene at a time.
Tako-Tsubo Cardiomyopathy
The apical ballooning syndrome, or stress-induced car-
diomyopathy, occurs typically in older women after 
sudden intense emotional or physical stress. The ventri-
cle shows global ventricular dilation with basal contrac-
tion, forming the shape of the narrow-necked jar (tako-
tsubo) used in Japan to trap octopi. Originally described 
there, it is increasingly recognized in other countries 
and may go unrecognized during intensive care unit 
(ICU) admission for noncardiac conditions. Presenta-
tions include pulmonary edema, hypotension, and chest 
pain with ECG changes mimicking an acute infarction. 
The left ventricular dysfunction extends beyond a spe-
cific coronary artery distribution and generally resolves 
within days to weeks, but may recur in up to 10% of 
patients. Animal models and ventricular biopsies suggest 
that this acute cardiomyopathy may result from intense 
sympathetic activation with heterogeneity of myocardial 
autonomic innervation, diffuse microvascular spasm, 
and/or direct catecholamine toxicity. Coronary angi-
ography may be required to rule out acute coronary 
occlusion. No therapies have been proven beneficial, 
but reasonable strategies include nitrates for pulmo-
nary edema, intraaortic balloon pump if needed for low 
output, combined alpha and beta blockers rather than 
selective beta blockade if hemodynamically stable, and 
Figure 21-9 
Arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia. (A) Cross-
sectional slice of a pathology specimen removed at trans-
plantation, showing severe dysplasia of the right ventricle 
(RV) with extensive fatty replacement of right ventricular 
myocardium. The remarkably thin right ventricular free wall is 
revealed by transillumination (B). (Images courtesy of Gayle 
Winters, MD, and Richard Mitchell, MD, PhD, Division of 
Pathology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston.)
A
B
LV
RV
 
CHAPTER 21
Cardiomyopathy and Myocarditis
265
magnesium for arrhythmias related to QT prolongation. 
Anticoagulation is generally withheld due to the occa-
sional occurrence of ventricular rupture.
Idiopathic Dilated Cardiomyopathy
Idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy is a diagnosis 
of exclusion, when all other known factors have been 
excluded. Approximately two-thirds of dilated cardio-
myopathies are still labeled as idiopathic; however, a 
substantial proportion of these may reflect unrecognized 
genetic disease. Continued reconsideration of etiology 
often reveals specific causes later in a patient’s course.
Overlap Between 
Cardiomyopathies
The limitations of our phenotypic classification are 
revealed through the multiple overlaps between the 
etiologies and presentations of the three types. Cardio-
myopathy with reduced systolic function but without 
severe dilation can represent early dilated cardiomyopa-
thy, “minimally dilated cardiomyopathy,” or restrictive 
diseases without marked increases in ventricular wall 
thickness. For example, sarcoidosis and hemochroma-
tosis can present as dilated or restrictive disease. Early 
stages of amyloidosis sometimes appear as dilated car-
diomyopathy, but can also be mistaken for hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy. Progression of hypertrophic cardio-
myopathy into a “burned-out” phase occurs occasion-
ally, with decreased contractility and modest ventricu-
lar dilation. Overlaps are particularly common with the 
inherited metabolic disorders, which can present as any 
of the three major phenotypes (Fig. 21-4).
Restrictive Cardiomyopathy
The least common of the triad of cardiomyopathies is 
restrictive cardiomyopathy, which is dominated by 
abnormal diastolic function, often with mildly decreased 
contractility and ejection fraction (usually >30–50%). 
Both atria are enlarged, sometimes massively. Modest 
left ventricular dilation can be present, usually with an 
end-diastolic dimension <6 cm. End-diastolic pressures 
are elevated in both ventricles, with preservation of 
cardiac output until late in the disease. Subtle exercise 
intolerance is usually the first symptom but is often not 
recognized until after clinical presentation with con-
gestive symptoms. The restrictive diseases often pres-
ent with relatively more right-sided symptoms, such as 
edema, abdominal discomfort, and ascites, although fill-
ing pressures are elevated in both ventricles. The cardiac 
impulse is less displaced than in dilated cardiomyopathy 
and less dynamic than in hypertrophic cardiomyopa-
thy. A fourth heart sound is more common than a third 
heart sound in sinus rhythm, but atrial fibrillation is 
common. Jugular venous pressures often show rapid 
Y descents, and may increase during inspiration (posi-
tive Kussmaul’s sign). Most restrictive cardiomyopathies 
are due to infiltration of abnormal substances between 
myocytes, storage of abnormal metabolic products 
within myocytes, or fibrotic injury (Table 21-6).
Infiltrative Disease
Amyloidosis is the major cause of restrictive cardiomyopa-
thy (Figs. 21-10, 21-11, and 21-12), most often due to 
“primary amyloidosis” caused by abnormal production of 
immunoglobulin light chains. Familial amyloidosis results 
from an autosomal dominant mutation in transthyretin, 
a carrier protein for thyroxine and retinol, that is more 
common in African Americans than whites. Amyloido-
sis secondary to other chronic diseases rarely involves 
the heart. Senile amyloidosis with deposition of normal 
transthyretin or atrial natriuretic peptide usually has an 
Table 21-6
Causes of Restrictive Cardiomyopathies
Infiltrative (Between Myocytes)
Amyloidosis
  Primary (light-chain amyloid)
  Familial (abnormal transthyretin)a
  Senile (normal transthyretin or atrial peptides)
Inherited metabolic defectsa (see Table 21-4)
Storage (Within Myocytes)
Hemochromatosis (iron)a
Inherited metabolic defectsa (see Table 21-4)
  Fabry’s disease
  Glycogen storage disease (II, III)
Fibrotic
Radiation
Scleroderma
Endomyocardial
Possibly related fibrotic diseases
  Tropical endomyocardial fibrosis
  Hypereosinophilic syndrome (Löffler’s endocarditis)
Carcinoid syndrome
Radiation
Drugs: e.g., serotonin, ergotamine
Overlap with Other Cardiomyopathies
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy/“pseudohypertrophic”a
“Minimally dilated” cardiomyopathy
  Early-stage dilated cardiomyopathy
  Partial recovery from dilated cardiomyopathy
Sarcoidosis
Idiopathica
aCan be familial.
Section IV
Disorders of the Heart
266
side effects in light of frequent autonomic neuropa-
thy and dependence on heart rate reserve. The risk of 
intracardiac thrombi may warrant chronic anticoagula-
tion. Once heart failure develops, the median survival is 
6–12 months in primary amyloidosis. Multiple myeloma 
is treated with chemotherapy (prednisone, melphalan, 
bortezomib), the extent of which is usually limited by 
the potential of worsening cardiac dysfunction. Colchi-
cine can be of some benefit in inflammation-associated 
(AA) amyloid. Transthyretin-associated cardiac amy-
loid requires heart and liver transplantation, while senile 
cardiac amyloid is treated with conventional heart fail-
ure regimens. Immunoglobulin-associated amyloid has 
occasionally been treated with sequential heart trans-
plantation and delayed bone marrow transplant, with 
frequent recurrence of amyloid in the transplanted heart.
Disorders of Metabolic Pathways
Multiple genetic disorders of metabolic pathways can 
cause myocardial disease, due to infiltration of abnor-
mal products or cells containing them between the 
indolent course and is very common beyond the seventh 
decade.
Amyloid fibrils infiltrate the myocardium, especially 
around the conduction system and coronary vessels. 
Typical clinical features are conduction block, auto-
nomic neuropathy, renal involvement, and occasion-
ally thickened skin lesions. Cardiac amyloid is suspected 
from thickened ventricular walls in conjunction with 
an electrocardiogram that shows low voltage. A charac-
teristic refractile brightness in the septum on echocar-
diography is suggestive, but neither sensitive nor spe-
cific. Both atria are dilated, often dramatically so. The 
diagnosis of primary or familial can be made from biop-
sies of an abdominal fat pad or the rectum, but cardiac 
amyloidosis is most reliably identified from the myo-
cardium (Fig. 21-12). Therapy is largely symptomatic, 
using diuretics as needed to treat fluid retention, which 
often requires high doses. Digoxin bound to the amy-
loid fibrils can reach toxic levels, and should therefore 
be used only in very low doses, if at all. There is no 
evidence regarding use of neurohormonal antagonists 
in amyloid heart disease, where the possible theoreti-
cal benefit has to be balanced against their potential 
Figure 21-10 
Restrictive cardiomyopathy—amyloidosis. Gross speci-
men of a heart with amyloidosis. The heart is firm and rub-
bery with a waxy cut surface. The atria are markedly dilated 
and the left atrial endocardium, normally smooth, has yellow-
brown amyloid deposits that give texture to the surface. 
(Image courtesy of Robert Padera, MD, PhD, Department of 
Pathology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston.)
LV
LA
Septum
RA
RV
Pacing
lead in
RV
Lateral
wall of
LV
Pericardial
effusion
Figure 21-11 
Restrictive cardiomyopathy—amyloidosis. Echocardio-
gram showing thickened walls of both ventricles without 
major chamber dilation. The atria are markedly dilated, con-
sistent with chronically elevated ventricular filling pressures. 
In this example, there is a characteristic hyper-refractile 
“glittering” of the myocardium typical of amyloid infiltration, 
which is often absent (especially with more recent echocar-
diographic systems of better resolution). The mitral and tri-
cuspid valves are thickened. A pacing lead is visible in the 
right ventricle and a pericardial effusion is evident. Note 
that the echocardiographic and pathologic images are verti-
cally opposite, such that the LV is by convention on the top 
right in the echocardiographic image and bottom right in 
the pathologic images. (Image courtesy of Justina Wu, MD, 
Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston.)
 
CHAPTER 21
Cardiomyopathy and Myocarditis
267
Carnitine is an essential cofactor in long-chain fatty 
acid metabolism. Multiple defects have been described 
that lead to carnitine deficiency, causing intracellular 
lipid inclusions and restrictive or dilated cardiomyopa-
thy, often presenting in children. Fatty acid oxidation 
requires many metabolic steps with specific enzymes 
that can be deficient, with complex interactions with 
carnitine. Depending on the defect, cardiac and skeletal 
myocytes, and storage disease, due to their accumula-
tion within cells (Tables 21-4 and 21-6). The restrictive 
phenotype is most common but mildly dilated cardio-
myopathy may occur. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy 
may be mimicked by the myocardium thickened with 
these abnormal products causing “pseudohypertrophy.” 
Most of these diseases are diagnosed during childhood.
Fabry’s disease results from a deficiency of the lysosomal 
enzyme alpha-galactosidase A caused by one of more than 
160 mutations. This disorder of glycosphingolipid metabo-
lism is an X-linked recessive disorder that may also cause 
clinical disease in female carriers. Glycolipid accumulation 
may be limited to the cardiac tissues or may also involve 
the skin and kidney. Electron microscopy of endomyocar-
dial biopsy tissue shows diagnostic vesicles containing con-
centric lamellar figures (Fig. 21-13). Diagnosis is crucial 
because enzyme replacement can reduce abnormal deposits 
and improve cardiac and clinical function. Enzyme replace-
ment can also improve the course of Gaucher’s disease, in 
which cerebroside-rich cells accumulate in multiple organs 
due to a deficiency of beta-glucosidase. Cerebroside-rich 
cells infiltrate the heart, which can also lead to a hemor-
rhagic pericardial effusion and valvular disease.
Glycogen storage diseases lead to accumulation of 
lysosomal storage products and intracellular glycogen 
accumulation, particularly with glycogen storage disease 
type III, due to a defective debranching enzyme. There 
are more than 10 types of mucopolysaccharidoses, in which 
autosomal dominant or X-linked deficiencies of lyso-
somal enzymes lead to the accumulation of glycosami-
noglycans in the skeleton, nervous system, and heart. 
With characteristic facies, short stature, and frequent 
cognitive impairment, most individuals are diagnosed 
early in childhood and die before adulthood.
A
B
Figure 21-12 
Amyloidosis—microscopic images of amyloid involv-
ing the myocardium. The left panel (hematoxylin-eosin 
stain) shows glassy, grey-pink amorphous material infiltrat-
ing between cardiomyocytes, which stain a darker pink. 
The right panel shows a sulfated blue stain that highlights 
the amyloid green and stains the cardiac myocytes yellow. 
(The Congo red stain can also be used to highlight amyloid; 
under polarized light, amyloid will have an apple-green bire-
fringence when stained with Congo red.) Images at 100ë 
original magnification. (Image courtesy of Robert Padera, 
MD, PhD, Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women’s 
Hospital, Boston.)
Figure 21-13 
Fabry’s disease. Transmission electron micrograph of a 
right ventricular endomyocardial biopsy specimen at high 
magnification showing the characteristic concentric lamellar 
inclusions of glycosphingolipids accumulating as a result of 
deficiency of the lysosomal enzyme alpha-galactosidase A. 
Image taken at 15,000ë original magnification. (Image cour-
tesy of Robert Padera, MD, PhD, Department of Pathology, 
Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston.)
Section IV
Disorders of the Heart
268
hypereosinophilia of >1500 eos/mm3 for at least 
6 months can cause an acute phase of eosinophilic 
injury in the endocardium, with systemic illness and 
injury to other organs. There is usually no obvious 
cause, but the hypereosinophilia can occasionally be 
explained by allergic, parasitic, or malignant disease. It is 
postulated to be followed by a period in which cardiac 
inflammation is replaced by evidence of fibrosis with 
superimposed thrombosis. In severe disease, the dense 
fibrotic layer can obliterate the ventricular apices and 
extend to thicken and tether the atrioventricular valve 
leaflets. The clinical disease may present with heart fail-
ure, embolic events, and atrial arrhythmias. While plau-
sible, the sequence of transition has not been clearly 
demonstrated.
In tropical countries, up to one-quarter of heart fail-
ure may be due to endomyocardial fibrosis, affecting either 
or both ventricles. This condition shares with the pre-
vious condition the partial obliteration of the ventricu-
lar apex with fibrosis extending into the valvular inflow 
tract and leaflets; however, it is not clear that the etiolo-
gies are the same for all cases. Pericardial effusions fre-
quently accompany endomyocardial fibrosis but are not 
common in Löffler’s endocarditis. For endomyocardial 
fibrosis, there is no gender difference, but a higher prev-
alence in African-American populations. While tropical 
endomyocardial fibrosis could represent the end stage of 
previous hypereosinophilic disease triggered by endemic 
parasites, neither prior parasitic infection nor hypereo-
sinophilia is usually documented. Geographic nutritional 
deficiencies have also been proposed as an etiology.
Medical treatment focuses on glucocorticoids and 
chemotherapy to suppress hypereosinophilia when pres-
ent. Fluid retention may become increasingly resistant 
to diuretic therapy. Anticoagulation is recommended. 
Atrial fibrillation is associated with worse symptoms 
and prognosis, but may be difficult to suppress. Surgical 
resection of the apices and replacement of the fibrotic 
valves can improve symptoms, but surgical morbidity 
and mortality and later recurrence rates are high.
The serotonin secreted by carcinoid tumors can pro-
duce fibrous plaques in the endocardium and right-
sided cardiac valves, occasionally affecting left-sided 
valves, as well. Valvular lesions may be stenotic or 
regurgitant. Systemic symptoms include flushing and 
diarrhea. Liver disease from hepatic metastases may play 
a role by limiting hepatic function and thereby allowing 
more serotonin to reach the venous circulation.
Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is characterized by marked 
left ventricular hypertrophy in the absence of other 
causes, such as hypertension or valve disease (Figs. 21-14 
and 21-15). The systolic function as measured by 
myopathy can be ameliorated with replacement of fatty 
acid intermediates and carnitine.
Two monogenic metabolic cardiomyopathies have 
recently been described as causes of increased ventric-
ular wall thickness without an increase of muscle sub-
units or an increase in contractility. Mutations in the 
gamma-2 regulatory subunit of the adenosine mono-
phosphate (AMP)-activated protein kinase important for 
glucose metabolism (PRKAG2) have been associated 
with a high prevalence of conduction abnormalities, 
such as AV block and ventricular preexcitation (Wolff-
Parkinson-White syndrome). Several defects have been 
reported in an X-linked lysosome-associated membrane 
protein (LAMP2). This defect can be maternally trans-
mitted or sporadic and has occasionally been isolated 
to the heart, although it often leads to a syndrome of 
skeletal myopathy, mental retardation, and hepatic dys-
function referred to as Danon’s disease. Left ventricu-
lar hypertrophy appears early, often in childhood, and 
can progress rapidly to end-stage heart failure with low 
ejection fraction. Electron microscopy of these meta-
bolic disorders shows that the myocytes are enlarged by 
multiple intracellular vacuoles of metabolic by-products.
Fibrotic restrictive cardiomyopathy
Progressive fibrosis can cause restrictive myocardial 
disease without dilation. Thoracic radiation, common 
for breast and lung cancer or mediastinal lymphoma, 
can produce early or late restrictive cardiomyopathy. 
Patients with radiation cardiomyopathy may present with 
a possible diagnosis of constrictive pericarditis, as the 
two conditions often coexist. Careful hemodynamic 
evaluation and, often, endomyocardial biopsy should be 
performed if considering pericardial stripping surgery, 
which is unlikely to be successful in the presence of 
underlying restrictive cardiomyopathy.
Scleroderma causes small vessel spasm and ischemia 
that can lead to a small, stiff heart with reduced ejection 
fraction without dilation. Doxorubicin causes direct 
myocyte injury usually leading to dilated cardiomyopa-
thy, but the limited degree of dilation may result from 
increased fibrosis, which restricts remodeling.
Endomyocardial Disease
The physiologic picture of elevated filling pressures 
with atrial enlargement and preserved ventricular con-
tractility with normal or reduced ventricular volumes 
can also result from extensive fibrosis of the endocar-
dium, without transmural myocardial disease. For 
patients who have not lived in the equatorial regions, 
this picture is rare, and when seen is usually asso-
ciated with a history of chronic hypereosinophilic 
syndrome (Löffler’s endocarditis), which is more com-
mon in men than women. In this disease, persistent 
 
CHAPTER 21
Cardiomyopathy and Myocarditis
269
characterized genetic cardiomyopathy, for which more 
than 400 individual mutations have been identified in 
11 sarcomeric genes. More than 80% of the mutations 
are in the beta-myosin heavy chain, the cardiac myosin-
binding protein C, or cardiac troponin T. Some families 
may demonstrate a higher incidence of early progression 
to end-stage heart failure or death, suggesting that their 
mutations are more “malignant.” However, the hetero-
geneity of phenotypic expression within and between 
families confirms the influence of modifying factors 
from other genes and the environment.
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is characterized hemo­
dynamically by diastolic dysfunction, originally attrib-
uted to the hypertrophy, fibrosis, and intraventricular 
gradient when present. However, studies of asymptom-
atic family members indicate that diastolic dysfunction 
is a more fundamental abnormality that can precede 
evidence of hypertrophy. Resting ejection fraction and 
cardiac output are usually normal, but peak cardiac 
ejection fraction is often supranormal, at times with vir-
tual obliteration of the left ventricular cavity during sys-
tole. The hypertrophy may be asymmetric, involving the 
septum more than the free wall of the ventricle. Approxi-
mately one-third of symptomatic patients demonstrate 
a resting intraventricular gradient that impedes outflow 
during systole and is exacerbated by increased contractil-
ity. This was previously termed hypertrophic obstructive car-
diomyopathy (HOCM), as distinguished from nonobstructive 
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Other terms that have been 
used include asymmetric septal hypertrophy (ASH) and idio-
pathic hypertrophic subaortic stenosis (IHSS). However, the 
accepted terminology is now hypertrophic cardiomyopa-
thy with or without an obstructive gradient. Classically, 
the microscopic picture shows marked disarray of indi-
vidual fibers in a characteristic whorled pattern and dis-
array, also at the level of the larger bundles, interspersed 
with fibrosis (Fig. 21-16).
The prevalence of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy 
is 1:500 adults. Approximately one-half of these cases 
occur in a recognizable autosomal dominant pattern, 
and spontaneous mutations also arise. This is the best 
LV Chamber
LV free
wall
IVS
RV Chamber
RV free
wall
Mitral valve
Tricuspid valve
Figure 21-14 
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Gross specimen of a heart 
with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy removed at the time of 
transplantation, showing asymmetric septal hypertrophy 
(septum much thicker than left ventricular free wall) with the 
septum bulging into the left ventricular outflow tract causing 
obstruction. The forceps are retracting the anterior leaflet of 
the mitral valve, demonstrating the characteristic plaque of 
systolic anterior motion, manifest as endocardial fibrosis on 
the interventricular septum in a mirror-image pattern to the 
valve leaflet. There is patchy replacement fibrosis, and small 
thick walled arterioles can be appreciated grossly, especially 
in the interventricular septum. IVS, interventricular septum; 
LV, left ventricle; RV, right ventricle. (Image courtesy of Rob-
ert Padera, MD, PhD, Department of Pathology, Brigham and 
Women’s Hospital, Boston.)
LV
LA
MV
Septum
Figure 21-15 
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. This echocardiogram of 
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy shows asymmetric hypertro-
phy of the septum compared to the lateral wall of the left 
ventricle (LV). The mitral valve is moving anteriorly toward 
the hypertrophied septum in systole. The left atrium (LA) is 
enlarged. Note that the echocardiographic and pathologic 
images are vertically opposite, such that the LV is by conven-
tion on the top right in the echocardiographic image and bot-
tom right in the pathologic images. (Image courtesy of Jus-
tina Wu, MD, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston.)
Section IV
Disorders of the Heart
270
or hand grip. A fourth heart sound is commonly heard 
due to decreased ventricular compliance. In patients 
with a significant outflow tract gradient, palpation of the 
carotid pulse may reveal a bifid systolic impulse, from 
early and delayed ejection. Patients with chronic, severe 
elevations in filling pressures may show signs of systemic 
fluid retention.
The electrocardiogram usually shows left ventricu-
lar hypertrophy, often with prominent septal Q waves 
that can be misdiagnosed as indicative of infarction. The 
diagnosis of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is confirmed 
by echocardiography demonstrating left ventricular 
hypertrophy, which may or may not be more marked 
in the septum (Fig. 21-15). Intraventricular gradients 
to outflow can be identified by Doppler echocardiog-
raphy at rest or during provocative maneuvers, such as 
the Valsalva maneuver. Systolic anterior motion (SAM) 
of the mitral valve is a classic finding on the echocardio-
gram. Mitral regurgitation may become severe. Cardiac 
catheterization can be performed to quantify the gradi-
ent, which characteristically increases after a premature 
ventricular contraction.
Apical hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is a variant that is 
uncommon in the United States; however, this variant 
accounts for about one-fourth of patients with hyper-
trophic cardiomyopathy in Japan. The electrocardio-
gram shows deep T-wave inversions in the precordial 
leads, and the echocardiogram shows a characteristic 
spade-like appearance with apical obliteration. It has 
been associated with a specific genetic defect in cardiac 
actin (Glu 101 Lys), but may occur with other sarco-
mere mutations.
The differential diagnosis of hypertrophic cardiomy-
opathy is limited in most patients once other cardiovas-
cular causes for secondary hypertrophy are excluded. 
However, other diseases that result in thickened myo-
cardium can appear indistinguishable on echocardiog-
raphy, and are considered “pseudohypertrophic,” par-
ticularly the inherited metabolic diseases (Table 21-4). 
The differential diagnosis between hypertrophic and 
restrictive cardiomyopathy may be particularly difficult 
when considering a diagnosis of “burned-out” hyper-
trophic cardiomyopathy in which systolic function has 
decreased. Overlap with infiltrative and restrictive myo-
cardial diseases should be considered in the evaluation 
of increased left ventricular wall thickness on echocar-
diography, particularly when clinical features are atypi-
cal for classic hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. The meta-
bolic defects in PRKAG2, alpha-galactosidase (Fabry’s 
disease), and LAMP2 mutations (Tables 21-3 and 21-4) 
should routinely be considered during evaluation of 
apparent hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. With late onset 
without a family history of hypertrophic cardiomyopa-
thy, amyloidosis should be carefully considered.
output during exercise may be reduced due to inade-
quate ventricular filling at high heart rates.
Diagnosis
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy usually presents between 
the ages of 20 and 40 years. Dyspnea on exertion is the 
most common presenting symptom, reflecting elevated 
intracardiac filling pressures. Chest pain with either an 
atypical or typical exertional pattern occurs in more 
than half of symptomatic patients and is attributed to 
myocardial ischemia from high demand and abnor-
mal intramural coronary arteries in the hypertrophied 
myocardium. Palpitations may result from atrial fibril-
lation or ventricular arrhythmias. Much less common 
are episodes of presyncope or syncope, often related to 
heavy exertion. Of grave concern is the possibility that 
the first manifestation of disease may be sudden death 
from ventricular tachycardia or fibrillation. Hypertro-
phic cardiomyopathy is the most common lesion found 
at autopsy of young athletes dying suddenly.
The physical examination typically reveals a harsh 
murmur heard best at the left lower sternal border, aris-
ing from both the outflow tract turbulence during ven-
tricular ejection and the commonly associated mitral 
regurgitation. The gradient and the murmur may be 
enhanced by maneuvers that decrease ventricular vol-
ume, such as the Valsalva maneuver, or standing after 
squatting. They may be decreased by increasing ventric-
ular volume or vascular resistance, such as with squatting 
Figure 21-16 
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Microscopic image of hyper-
trophic cardiomyopathy showing the characteristic disor-
dered myocyte architecture with swirling and branching 
rather than the usual parallel arrangement of myocyte fibers. 
Myocyte nuclei vary markedly in size and interstitial fibrosis is 
present. (Image courtesy of Robert Padera, MD, PhD, Depart-
ment of Pathology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston.)
 
CHAPTER 21
Cardiomyopathy and Myocarditis
271
will usually be necessary, but requires careful titration 
to avoid hypovolemia, particularly in the presence of a 
resting or inducible obstruction to ventricular outflow. 
When symptoms persist and an outflow gradient is pres-
ent, addition of disopyramide is sometimes effective. 
Amiodarone can also improve symptoms, but is usually 
initiated for control of arrhythmias rather than symptoms. 
Anticoagulation is recommended to prevent embolic 
events for patients who have had atrial fibrillation.
Symptoms that limit routine daily life despite adjust-
ment of medical therapies develop in fewer than 5–10% 
of patients, generally those with substantial obstruction 
to ventricular outflow. Further therapies are directed 
to reduce this obstruction by changing ventricular 
Treatment	
Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy
Therapy of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is directed to 
symptom management and the prevention of sudden 
death (Fig. 21-17); it is not known whether treatment 
will decrease disease progression in asymptomatic family 
members. Exertional dyspnea and chest pain are treated 
by medication to reduce heart rate and ventricular con-
tractility with hopes of improving diastolic filling pat-
terns. Beta-adrenergic blocking drugs and verapamil are 
most commonly used as initial therapy. These agents 
both act to decrease heart rate and increase the length 
of time for diastolic filling, as well as to decrease the ino-
tropic state. If there is fluid retention, diuretic therapy 
Figure 21-17 
Treatment algorithm for hypertrophic cardiomyopa-
thy depending on the presence and severity of symp-
toms, and the presence of an intraventricular gradient 
with obstruction to outflow. Note that all patients with 
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy should be evaluated for risk 
of sudden death, whether or not they require treatment for 
symptoms. ICD, implantable cardioverter-defibrillator; LV, 
left ventricular.
Use diuretics with caution
to avoid hypovolemia,
particularly in presence of
outflow gradient
Evidence of
fluid retention?
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
Septal ablation
Mitral surgery
In all pts, evaluate
risk for sudden death
Symptomatic?
If low follow with
serial evaluation
Reevaluate cause
of symptoms
Rarely, consider
cardiac transplantation
Try disopyramide
or amiodarone
Refractory
severe symptoms
Consider procedure
Evidence of severe
progressive LV dysfunction?
Titrate beta
blocker or calcium
channel blocker
If high,
consider ICD
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
Persistent
symptoms
Outflow
gradient?
Section IV
Disorders of the Heart
272
This outcome is attributed primarily to ventricular 
tachyarrhythmias, for which a myocardium with abnor-
mal disorganized myocytes with patchy fibrosis is at 
exceptional risk, possibly further compromised by 
impaired coronary perfusion and aggravated by sudden 
increases in wall stress. Sudden death may precede 
the diagnosis of the disease, as in the death of young 
athletes. The highest risk is in patients with previous 
sustained ventricular tachyarrhythmias, a family history 
of sudden death, or, in cases of common mutations, 
a genetic mutation associated with sudden death 
(although the association of specific genotypes with 
the risk of sudden death remains controversial). Septal 
wall thickness >30 mm, recurrent syncope, exercise-
induced hypotension, and nonsustained ventricular 
tachycardia are also risk factors. Areas of ventricular 
fibrosis detected on MRI may further identify suscep-
tibility to life-threatening arrhythmias. Implantable 
cardioverter-defibrillators should be considered for 
those at highest risk (Table 21-7). Although low-
risk patients can engage in regular physical activity 
with casual intent, it has been recommended that all 
patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy avoid 
intense training and competition.
mechanics. Most of the reported symptom improvement 
with dual chamber pacing is now attributed to placebo 
effect. Cardiac surgery can be directed to reduce the size 
of the upper septum that contributes to the obstruc-
tion (myomectomy), which generally also dominates 
the contribution of the anterior mitral leaflet to outflow 
tract obstruction. Reduction of the septum has also been 
accomplished by a catheter-based procedure in which 
ethanol is injected into a septal artery to cause a con-
trolled septal infarction. The purpose of these interven-
tions is to improve symptoms; none has been shown to 
prolong survival.
Cardiac transplantation is considered in fewer than 
5% of patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. It is 
rarely necessary to control symptoms in patients with 
preserved contractility and is more often considered for 
patients who progress to “burned-out” cardiomyopathy 
with decreased ejection fraction.
Therapy to Prevent Sudden Death In 
Hypertrophic 
Cardiomyopathy  Origi-
nally reported as 3–4% in referral populations, the annual 
incidence of sudden death in less selected populations 
of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is approximately 1%.  
Table 21-7
Risk Factors for Sudden Death in Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy
Major Risk Factor
Screening Technique
History of cardiac arrest or spontaneous 
sustained ventricular tachycardia
History
Syncope
Usually with or after exertion
History
Family history of sudden cardiac death
Or possibly with a documented gene 
mutation associated with high risk
Family history
Spontaneous nonsustained ventricular 
tachycardia
>3 beats at rate >120
Exercise or 24–48 h ambulatory  
recording
LV thickness >30 mm
Present in about 10% of patients, but 
many sudden deaths occur with wall 
thickness <30 mm
Echocardiography
Abnormal blood pressure response  
to exercise
Systolic blood pressure fall or failure to 
increase at peak exercise
Maximal upright exercise testing
Abbreviation: LV, left ventricle.
 Eugene Braunwald 
273
 normal funCtions of the PeriCardium 
 The normal pericardium is a double-layered sac; the 
visceral pericardium is a serous membrane that is sepa-
rated by a small quantity (15–50 mL) of fl uid, an ultra-
fi ltrate of plasma, from the fi brous parietal pericardium. 
The normal pericardium, by exerting a restraining 
force, prevents sudden dilation of the cardiac chambers, 
especially the right atrium and ventricle, during exercise 
and with hypervolemia. It also restricts the anatomic 
position of the heart, minimizes friction between the 
heart and surrounding structures, prevents displacement 
of the heart and kinking of the great vessels, and prob-
ably retards the spread of infections from the lungs and 
pleural cavities to the heart. Nevertheless, total absence 
of the pericardium, either congenital or after surgery, 
does not produce obvious clinical disease. In partial left 
pericardial defects, the main pulmonary artery and left 
atrium may bulge through the defect; very rarely, her-
niation and subsequent strangulation of the left atrium 
may cause sudden death. 
 aCute PeriCarditis 
 Acute pericarditis, by far the most common pathologic 
process involving the pericardium, may be classifi ed 
both clinically and etiologically  ( Table 22-1 ) . There 
are four principal diagnostic features: 
1.  Chest pain is an important but not invariable 
symptom in various forms of acute pericarditis 
( Chap. 4 ); it is usually present in the acute infec-
tious types and in many of the forms presumed to be 
related to hypersensitivity or autoimmunity. Pain is 
often absent in slowly developing tuberculous, post-
irradiation, neoplastic, and uremic pericarditis. The 
pain of acute pericarditis is often severe, retrosternal 
and left precordial, and referred to the neck, arms, 
or left shoulder. Often the pain is pleuritic, conse-
quent to accompanying pleural infl ammation (i.e., 
sharp and aggravated by inspiration and coughing), 
but sometimes it is a steady, constricting pain that 
radiates into either arm or both arms and resembles 
that of myocardial ischemia; therefore, confusion 
with acute myocardial infarction (AMI) is com-
mon. Characteristically, however, pericardial pain 
may be relieved by sitting up and leaning forward 
and is intensifi ed by lying supine. The differentiation 
of AMI from acute pericarditis becomes perplex-
ing when, with acute pericarditis, serum biomark-
ers of myocardial damage such as creatine kinase and 
troponin rise, presumably because of concomitant 
involvement of the epicardium in the infl ammatory 
process (an epi-myocarditis) with resulting myocyte 
necrosis. However, these elevations, if they occur, 
are quite modest given the extensive electrocardio-
graphic ST-segment elevation in pericarditis. This 
dissociation is useful in differentiating between these 
conditions. 
2.  A  pericardial friction rub is audible in about 85% of 
these patients, may have up to three components 
per cardiac cycle, is high pitched, and is described 
as rasping, scratching, or grating ( Chap. 9 ); it can 
be elicited sometimes when the diaphragm of the 
stethoscope is applied fi rmly to the chest wall at the 
left lower sternal border. It is heard most frequently 
at end expiration with the patient upright and 
leaning forward. The rub is often inconstant, and the 
 PERICARDIAL DISEASE 
 ChaPter 22 
274
SECTION IV
Disorders of the Heart
loud to-and-fro leathery sound may disappear within 
a few hours, possibly to reappear on the next day. 
A pericardial rub is heard throughout the respiratory 
cycle, whereas a pleural rub disappears when respira-
tion is suspended.
3.	 The electrocardiogram (ECG) in acute pericardi-
tis without massive effusion usually displays changes 
secondary to acute subepicardial inflammation 
(Fig.  22-1). It typically evolves through four 
stages. In stage 1, there is widespread elevation of 
the ST segments, often with upward concavity, 
involving two or three standard limb leads and V2 
to V6, with reciprocal depressions only in aVR 
and sometimes V1, as well as depression of the PR 
segment below the TP segment reflecting atrial 
involvement. Usually, there are no significant 
changes in QRS complexes. In stage 2, after sev-
eral days, the ST segments return to normal, and 
only then, or even later, do the T waves become 
inverted (stage 3). Ultimately, weeks or months 
after the onset of acute pericarditis, the ECG 
returns to normal in stage 4. In contrast, in AMI, 
ST elevations are convex, and reciprocal depres-
sion is usually more prominent; QRS changes 
occur, particularly the development of Q waves, 
as well as notching and loss of R-wave amplitude, 
and T-wave inversions are usually seen within 
hours before the ST segments have become isoelec-
tric. Sequential ECGs are useful in distinguishing 
acute pericarditis from AMI. In the latter, ele-
vated ST segments return to normal within hours 
(Chaps. 34 and 35).
    Early repolarization is a normal variant and may 
also be associated with widespread ST-segment 
elevation, most prominent in left precordial leads. 
However, in this condition the T waves are usually 
tall and the ST/T ratio is <0.25; importantly, this 
ratio is higher in acute pericarditis.
4.	 Pericardial effusion is usually associated with pain 
and/or the ECG changes mentioned earlier, as well 
as with an enlargement of the cardiac silhouette. 
Pericardial effusion is especially important clini-
cally when it develops within a relatively short 
time as it may lead to cardiac tamponade (see later). 
Differentiation from cardiac enlargement may be dif-
ficult on physical examination, but heart sounds may 
be fainter with pericardial effusion. The friction rub 
may disappear, and the apex impulse may vanish, 
but sometimes it remains palpable, albeit medial to 
the left border of cardiac dullness. The base of the 
left lung may be compressed by pericardial fluid, pro-
ducing Ewart’s sign, a patch of dullness and increased 
fremitus (and egophony) beneath the angle of the 
left scapula. The chest roentgenogram may show a 
“water bottle” configuration of the cardiac silhouette 
(Fig. 22-2) but may be normal.
Table 22-1
Classification of Pericarditis
Clinical Classification
  I. Acute pericarditis (<6 weeks)
A. Fibrinous
B. Effusive (serous or sanguineous)
 II. Subacute pericarditis (6 weeks to 6 months)
A. Effusive-constrictive
B. Constrictive
III. Chronic pericarditis (>6 months)
A. Constrictive
B. Effusive
C. Adhesive (nonconstrictive)
Etiologic Classification
  I. Infectious pericarditis
A. Viral (coxsackievirus A and B, echovirus, mumps, 
adenovirus, hepatitis, HIV)
B. Pyogenic (pneumococcus, streptococcus,  
staphylococcus, Neisseria, Legionella)
C. Tuberculous
D. Fungal (histoplasmosis, coccidioidomycosis,  
Candida, blastomycosis)
E. Other infections (syphilitic, protozoal, parasitic)
 II. Noninfectious pericarditis
A. Acute myocardial infarction
B. Uremia
C. Neoplasia
1. Primary tumors (benign or malignant, mesothelioma)
2. Tumors metastatic to pericardium (lung and breast 
cancer, lymphoma, leukemia)
D. Myxedema
E. Cholesterol
F. Chylopericardium
G. Trauma
1. Penetrating chest wall
2. Nonpenetrating
H. Aortic dissection (with leakage into pericardial sac)
 I. Postirradiation
J. Familial Mediterranean fever
K. Familial pericarditis
1. Mulibrey nanisma
L. Acute idiopathic
M. Whipple’s disease
N. Sarcoidosis
III. Pericarditis presumably related to hypersensitivity or 
autoimmunity
A. Rheumatic fever
B. Collagen vascular disease (systemic lupus erythema-
tosus, rheumatoid arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, 
scleroderma, acute rheumatic fever, granulomatosis 
with polyangiitis (Wegener’s)
C. Drug-induced (e.g., procainamide, hydralazine, phenyt-
oin, isoniazide, minoxidil, anticoagulants, methysergide)
D. Post-cardiac injury
1. Postmyocardial infarction (Dressler’s syndrome)
2. Postpericardiotomy
3. Posttraumatic
aAn autosomal recessive syndrome characterized by growth failure, 
muscle hypotonia, hepatomegaly, ocular changes, enlarged cerebral 
ventricles, mental retardation, ventricular hypertrophy, and chronic 
constrictive pericarditis.
 
CHAPTER 22
Pericardial Disease
275
Diagnosis
Echocardiography (Chap. 12) is the most widely used 
imaging technique since it is sensitive, specific, simple, 
and noninvasive; may be performed at the bedside; and 
can identify accompanying cardiac tamponade (see later) 
(Fig. 22-3). The presence of pericardial fluid is recorded 
by two-dimensional transthoracic echocardiography 
Figure 22-1
Acute pericarditis often produces diffuse ST-segment 
elevations (in this case in leads I, II, aVF, and V2 to V6) due 
to a ventricular current of injury. Note also the characteristic 
Figure 22-2
Chest radiogram from a patient with a pericardial effusion 
showing typical “water bottle” heart. There is also a right 
pleural effusion. (From SS Kabbani, M LeWinter, in MH Craw-
ford et al [eds]: Cardiology. London, Mosby, 2001.)
Figure 22-3
Apical four-chamber echocardiogram recorded in a 
patient with a moderate pericardial effusion and evidence of 
hemodynamic compromise. The frame is recorded in early 
ventricular systole, immediately after atrial contraction. Note 
that the right atrial wall is indented inward and its curvature 
is frankly reversed (arrow), implying elevated intrapericardial 
pressure above right atrial pressure. LA, left atrium; LV, left 
ventricle; RV, right ventricle. (From WF Armstrong: Echo-
cardiography, in DP Zipes et al [eds]: Braunwald’s Heart 
Disease, 7th ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2005.)
PR-segment deviation (opposite in polarity to the ST seg-
ment) due to a concomitant atrial injury current.
I
II
III
aVR
aVL
aVF
V1
V2
V3
V4
V5
V6
PR
ST
ST
PR
as a relatively echo-free space between the posterior 
pericardium and left ventricular epicardium in patients 
with small effusions and as a space between the ante-
rior right ventricle and the parietal pericardium just 
beneath the anterior chest wall in those with larger effu-
sions. In the latter, the heart may swing freely within the 
276
SECTION IV
Disorders of the Heart
pericardial sac. When severe, the extent of this motion 
alternates and may be associated with electrical alternans. 
Echocardiography allows localization and estimation of 
the quantity of pericardial fluid.
The diagnosis of pericardial fluid or thickening may 
be confirmed by computed tomography (CT) or mag-
netic resonance imaging (MRI) (Fig. 22-4). These 
techniques may be superior to echocardiography in 
detecting loculated pericardial effusions, pericardial 
thickening, and the presence of pericardial masses.
Cardiac Tamponade
The accumulation of fluid in the pericardial space in a 
quantity sufficient to cause serious obstruction to the 
inflow of blood to the ventricles results in cardiac tam-
ponade. This complication may be fatal if it is not rec-
ognized and treated promptly. The three most common 
causes of tamponade are neoplastic disease, idiopathic 
pericarditis, and renal failure. Tamponade may also 
result from bleeding into the pericardial space after car-
diac operations, trauma, and treatment of patients with 
acute pericarditis with anticoagulants.
Figure 22-4
Chronic pericardial effusion in a 54-year-old female patient 
with Hodgkin’s disease seen in contrast-enhanced 64-slice 
CT. The arrows point at the pericardial effusion (LV, left ven-
tricle; RV, right ventricle; RA, right atrium). Due to the tim-
ing of the scan relative to contrast injection, only the blood 
in the left ventricle is contrast-enhanced, hence, the low 
attenuation in the right-sided chambers. (From Achenbach S, 
Daniel WG: Computed Tomography of the Heart, in P Libby 
et al [eds]: Braunwald’s Heart Disease, 8th ed. Philadelphia, 
Elsevier, 2008.)
The three principal features of tamponade (Beck’s 
triad) are hypotension, soft or absent heart sounds, and 
jugular venous distention with a prominent x descent 
but an absent y descent. There are both limitation of 
ventricular filling and reduction of cardiac output. 
The quantity of fluid necessary to produce this critical 
state may be as small as 200 mL when the fluid devel-
ops rapidly or >2000 mL in slowly developing effu-
sions when the pericardium has had the opportunity to 
stretch and adapt to an increasing volume. Tamponade 
may also develop more slowly, and in these circum-
stances the clinical manifestations may resemble those 
of heart failure, including dyspnea, orthopnea, and 
hepatic engorgement. A high index of suspicion for 
cardiac tamponade is required since in many instances 
no obvious cause for pericardial disease is apparent, 
and it should be considered in any patient with other-
wise unexplained enlargement of the cardiac silhouette, 
hypotension, and elevation of jugular venous pressure. 
There may be reduction in amplitude of the QRS com-
plexes, and electrical alternans of the P, QRS, or T waves 
should raise the suspicion of cardiac tamponade.
Table 22-2 lists the features that distinguish acute 
cardiac tamponade from constrictive pericarditis.
Paradoxical pulse
This important clue to the presence of cardiac tampon-
ade consists of a greater than normal (10 mmHg) inspi-
ratory decline in systolic arterial pressure. When severe, 
it may be detected by palpating weakness or disappear-
ance of the arterial pulse during inspiration, but usually 
sphygmomanometric measurement of systolic pressure 
during slow respiration is required.
Since both ventricles share a tight incompressible 
covering, i.e., the pericardial sac, the inspiratory 
enlargement of the right ventricle in cardiac tamponade 
compresses and reduces left ventricular volume; leftward 
bulging of the interventricular septum further reduces 
the left ventricular cavity as the right ventricle enlarges 
during inspiration. Thus, in cardiac tamponade the nor-
mal inspiratory augmentation of right ventricular vol-
ume causes an exaggerated reciprocal reduction in left 
ventricular volume. Also, respiratory distress increases 
the fluctuations in intrathoracic pressure, which exag-
gerates the mechanism just described. Right ventricular 
infarction (Chap. 35) may resemble cardiac tamponade 
with hypotension, elevated jugular venous pressure, an 
absent y descent in the jugular venous pulse, and, occa-
sionally, pulsus paradoxus. The differences between 
these two conditions are shown in Table 22-2.
Paradoxical pulse occurs not only in cardiac tampon-
ade but also in approximately one-third of patients with 
constrictive pericarditis (see later). This physical finding 
is not pathognomonic of pericardial disease because it 
may be observed in some cases of hypovolemic shock, 
 
CHAPTER 22
Pericardial Disease
277
acute and chronic obstructive airway disease, and pul-
monary embolus.
Low-pressure tamponade refers to mild tamponade in 
which the intrapericardial pressure is increased from 
its slightly subatmospheric levels to +5 to +10 mmHg; 
in some instances, hypovolemia coexists. As a conse-
quence, the central venous pressure is normal or only 
slightly elevated, whereas arterial pressure is unaf-
fected and there is no paradoxical pulse. These patients 
are asymptomatic or complain of mild weakness and 
dyspnea. The diagnosis is aided by echocardiography, 
and both hemodynamic and clinical manifestations 
improve after pericardiocentesis.
Diagnosis
Since immediate treatment of cardiac tamponade may 
be lifesaving, prompt measures to establish the diagnosis 
by echocardiography should be undertaken (Fig. 22-3). 
When pericardial effusion causes tamponade, Doppler 
Table 22-2
Features That Distinguish Cardiac Tamponade from Constrictive Pericarditis and Similar 
Clinical Disorders
Characteristic
Tamponade
Constrictive 
Pericarditis
Restrictive 
Cardiomyopathy
RVMI
Clinical
Pulsus paradoxus
Common
Usually absent
Rare
Rare
Jugular veins
  Prominent y descent
Absent
Usually present
Rare
Rare
  Prominent x descent
Present
Usually present
Present
Rare
Kussmaul’s sign
Absent
Present
Present
Present
Third heart sound
Absent
Absent
Rare
May be present
Pericardial knock
Absent
Often present
Absent
Absent
Electrocardiogram
Low ECG voltage
May be present
May be present
May be present
Absent
Electrical alternans
May be present
Absent
Absent
Absent
Echocardiography
Thickened pericardium
Absent
Present
Absent
Absent
Pericardial calcification
Absent
Often present
Absent
Absent
Pericardial effusion
Present
Absent
Absent
Absent
RV size
Usually small
Usually normal
Usually normal
Enlarged
Myocardial thickness
Normal
Normal
Usually increased
Normal
Right atrial collapse and RVDC
Present
Absent
Absent
Absent
Increased early filling, ↑ mitral 
flow velocity
Absent
Present
Present
May be present
Exaggerated respiratory  
variation in flow velocity
Present
Present
Absent
Absent
CT/MRI
Thickened/calcific pericardium
Absent
Present
Absent
Absent
Cardiac catheterization
Equalization of diastolic  
pressures
Usually present
Usually present
Usually absent
Absent or present
Cardiac biopsy helpful?
No
No
Sometimes
No
Abbreviations: ECG, electrocardiograph; RV, right ventricle; RVDC, right ventricular diastolic collapse; RVMI, right ventricular myocardial 
infarction.
Source: From GM Brockington et al: Cardiol Clin 8:645, 1990; with permission.
278
SECTION IV
Disorders of the Heart
ultrasound shows that tricuspid and pulmonic valve 
flow velocities increase markedly during inspiration, 
whereas pulmonic vein, mitral, and aortic flow veloci-
ties diminish. Often the right ventricular cavity is 
reduced in diameter, and there is late diastolic inward 
motion (collapse) of the right ventricular free wall and 
the right atrium. Transesophageal echocardiography 
may be necessary to diagnose a loculated or hemor-
rhagic effusion responsible for cardiac tamponade.
treatment	
Cardiac Tamponade
Patients with acute pericarditis should be observed fre-
quently for the development of an effusion; if a large 
effusion is present, the patient should be hospitalized 
and pericardiocentesis carried out or the patient should 
be watched closely for signs of tamponade. Arterial and 
venous pressures and heart rate should be monitored or 
followed carefully, and serial echocardiograms obtained.
Pericardiocentesis  If manifestations of tam-
ponade appear, echocardiographically or fluoroscopically 
guided pericardiocentesis using an apical, parasternal, 
or, most commonly, subxiphoid approach must be carried  
out at once as reduction of the elevated intrapericar-
dial pressure may be lifesaving. Intravenous saline may 
be administered as the patient is being readied for 
the procedure, but the pericardiocentesis must not be 
delayed. If possible, intrapericardial pressure should be 
measured before fluid is withdrawn, and the pericardial 
cavity should be drained as completely as possible. A 
small, multiholed catheter advanced over the needle 
inserted into the pericardial cavity may be left in place to 
allow draining of the pericardial space if fluid reaccumu-
lates. Surgical drainage through a limited (subxiphoid) 
thoracotomy may be required in recurrent tampon-
ade, when it is necessary to remove loculated effu-
sions, and/or when it is necessary to obtain tissue for 
diagnosis.
Pericardial fluid obtained from an effusion often has 
the physical characteristics of an exudate. Bloody fluid is 
most commonly due to neoplasm in the United States 
and tuberculosis in developing nations but may also 
be found in the effusion of acute rheumatic fever, post- 
cardiac injury, and postmyocardial infarction, as well as 
in the pericarditis associated with renal failure or dialy-
sis. Transudative pericardial effusions may occur in heart 
failure.
The pericardial fluid should be analyzed for red and 
white blood cells, and cytologic studies for cancer, micro-
scopic studies, and cultures should be obtained. The 
presence of DNA of Mycobacterium tuberculosis deter-
mined by polymerase chain reaction or an elevated ade-
nosine deaminase activity (>30 U/L) strongly supports 
the diagnosis of tuberculous pericarditis.
Viral or Idiopathic Form of Acute 
Pericarditis
In many instances, acute pericarditis occurs in associa-
tion with illnesses of known or presumed viral origin 
and probably is caused by the same agent. Commonly, 
there is an antecedent infection of the respiratory tract, 
and viral isolation and serologic studies are negative. In 
some cases, coxsackievirus A or B or the virus of influ-
enza, echovirus, mumps, herpes simplex, chickenpox, 
adenovirus, cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr, or HIV has 
been isolated from pericardial fluid and/or appropri-
ate elevations in viral antibody titers have been noted. 
Pericardial effusion is a common cardiac manifestation 
of HIV; it is usually secondary to infection (often myco-
bacterial) or neoplasm, most frequently lymphoma. 
Most frequently, a viral causation cannot be established; 
the term idiopathic acute pericarditis is then appropri-
ate. Viral or idiopathic acute pericarditis occurs at all 
ages but is more common in young adults and is often 
associated with pleural effusions and pneumonitis. The 
almost simultaneous development of fever and precor-
dial pain, often 10 to 12 days after a presumed viral ill-
ness, constitutes an important feature in the differentia-
tion of acute pericarditis from AMI, in which chest pain 
precedes fever. The constitutional symptoms are usu-
ally mild to moderate, and a pericardial friction rub is 
often audible. The disease ordinarily runs its course in a 
few days to 4 weeks. The ST-segment alterations in the 
ECG usually disappear after 1 or more weeks, but the 
abnormal T waves may persist for several years and be a 
source of confusion in persons without a clear history of 
pericarditis.
Pleuritis and pneumonitis frequently accompany 
pericarditis. Accumulation of some pericardial fluid is 
common, and both tamponade and constrictive pericar-
ditis are possible complications. Recurrent (relapsing) 
pericarditis occurs in about one-fourth of patients with 
acute idiopathic pericarditis. In a smaller number, there 
are multiple recurrences.
treatment	
Idiopathic Acute Pericarditis
In acute idiopathic pericarditis there is no specific ther-
apy, but bed rest and anti-inflammatory treatment with 
aspirin (2–4 g/d) may be given. If this is ineffective, one 
of the nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), 
such as ibuprofen (400–600 mg tid), indomethacin (25–
50 mg tid), or colchicine (0.6 mg bid), is often effective. 
Glucocorticoids (e.g., prednisone, 40–80 mg daily) usu-
ally suppress the clinical manifestations of the acute ill-
ness and may be useful in patients in whom purulent 
bacterial pericarditis has been excluded and in patients 
with pericarditis secondary to connective tissue dis-
orders and renal failure (see later). Anticoagulants 
 
CHAPTER 22
Pericardial Disease
279
should be avoided since their use could cause bleeding 
into the pericardial cavity and tamponade.
After the patient has been asymptomatic and afebrile 
for about a week, the dose of the NSAID may be tapered 
gradually. Colchicine may prevent recurrences, but 
when recurrences are multiple, frequent, and disabling; 
continued beyond 2 years; and are not controlled by 
glucocorticoids, pericardiectomy may be necessary to 
terminate the illness.
Postcardiac injury syndrome
Acute pericarditis may appear in a variety of circum-
stances that have one common feature: previous injury 
to the myocardium with blood in the pericardial cavity. 
The syndrome may develop after a cardiac operation 
(postpericardiotomy syndrome), after blunt or penetrat-
ing cardiac trauma (Chap. 23), or after perforation of 
the heart with a catheter. Rarely, it follows AMI.
The clinical picture mimics acute viral or idiopathic 
pericarditis. The principal symptom is the pain of acute 
pericarditis, which usually develops 1 to 4 weeks after 
the cardiac injury (1 to 3 days after AMI) but some-
times appears only after an interval of months. Recur-
rences are common and may occur up to 2 years or 
more after the injury. Pericarditis, fever with temper-
ature up to 39°C (102.2°F), pleuritis, and pneumoni-
tis are the outstanding features, and the bout of illness 
usually subsides in 1 or 2 weeks. The pericarditis may 
be of the fibrinous variety, or it may be a pericardial 
effusion, which is often serosanguineous but rarely 
causes tamponade. Leukocytosis, an increased sedimen-
tation rate, and ECG changes typical of acute pericardi-
tis may also occur.
This syndrome is probably the result of a hypersen-
sitivity reaction to antigen that originates from injured 
myocardial tissue and/or pericardium. Circulating myo-
cardial antisarcolemmal and antifibrillar autoantibodies 
occur frequently, but their precise role in the devel-
opment of this syndrome has not been defined. Viral 
infection may also play an etiologic role, since antiviral 
antibodies are often elevated in patients who develop 
this syndrome after cardiac surgery.
Often no treatment is necessary aside from aspirin 
and analgesics. When the illness is followed by a series 
of disabling recurrences, therapy with an NSAID, col-
chicine, or a glucocorticoid is usually effective.
Differential Diagnosis
Since there is no specific test for acute idiopathic pericar-
ditis, the diagnosis is one of exclusion. Consequently, 
all other disorders that may be associated with acute 
fibrinous pericarditis must be considered. A common 
diagnostic error is mistaking acute viral or idiopathic 
pericarditis for AMI and vice versa. When acute fibrin-
ous pericarditis is associated with AMI (Chap. 35), it is 
characterized by fever, pain, and a friction rub in the 
first 4 days after the development of the infarct. ECG 
abnormalities (such as the appearance of Q waves, brief 
ST-segment elevations with reciprocal changes, and 
earlier T-wave changes in AMI) and the extent of the 
elevations of myocardial enzymes are helpful in differ-
entiating pericarditis from AMI.
Pericarditis secondary to postcardiac injury is dif-
ferentiated from acute idiopathic pericarditis chiefly by 
timing. If it occurs within a few days or weeks of an 
AMI, a chest blow, a cardiac perforation, or a cardiac 
operation, it may be justified to conclude that the two 
are probably related.
It is important to distinguish pericarditis due to collagen 
vascular disease from acute idiopathic pericarditis. Most 
important in the differential diagnosis is the pericarditis 
due to systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) or drug-
induced (procainamide or hydralazine) lupus. When 
pericarditis occurs in the absence of any obvious under-
lying disorder, the diagnosis of SLE may be suggested 
by a rise in the titer of antinuclear antibodies. Acute 
pericarditis is an occasional complication of rheumatoid 
arthritis, scleroderma, and polyarteritis nodosa, and other evi-
dence of these diseases is usually obvious. Asymptomatic 
pericardial effusion is also common in these disorders. 
The pericarditis of acute rheumatic fever is generally associ-
ated with evidence of severe pancarditis and with cardiac 
murmurs (Chap. 26).
Pyogenic (purulent) pericarditis is usually secondary to 
cardiothoracic operations, by extension of infection 
from the lungs or pleural cavities, from rupture of the 
esophagus into the pericardial sac, or from rupture of a 
ring abscess in a patient with infective endocarditis, or 
it can occur if septicemia complicates aseptic pericardi-
tis. It is usually accompanied by fever, chills, septicemia, 
and evidence of infection elsewhere and generally has a 
poor prognosis. The diagnosis is made by examination 
of the pericardial fluid. Acute pericarditis may also com-
plicate the viral, pyogenic, mycobacterial, and fungal 
infections that occur with HIV infection.
Pericarditis of renal failure occurs in up to one-third of 
patients with chronic uremia (uremic pericarditis), is also 
seen in patients undergoing chronic dialysis with normal 
levels of blood urea and creatinine, and is termed 
dialysis-associated pericarditis. These two forms of peri-
carditis may be fibrinous and are generally associated 
with an effusion that may be sanguineous. A pericar-
dial friction rub is common, but pain is usually absent 
or mild. Treatment with an NSAID and intensification 
of dialysis are usually adequate. Occasionally, tampon-
ade occurs and pericardiocentesis is required. When the 
pericarditis of renal failure is recurrent or persistent, a 
pericardial window should be created or pericardiec-
tomy may be necessary.
280
SECTION IV
Disorders of the Heart
Pericarditis due to neoplastic diseases results from 
extension or invasion of metastatic tumors (most com-
monly carcinoma of the lung and breast, malignant 
melanoma, lymphoma, and leukemia) to the pericar-
dium; pain, atrial arrhythmias, and tamponade are com-
plications that occur occasionally. Diagnosis is made by 
pericardial fluid cytology or pericardial biopsy. Mediasti-
nal irradiation for neoplasm may cause acute pericarditis 
and/or chronic constrictive pericarditis. Unusual causes 
of acute pericarditis include syphilis, fungal infection 
(histoplasmosis, blastomycosis, aspergillosis, and candidi-
asis), and parasitic infestation (amebiasis, toxoplasmosis, 
echinococcosis, trichinosis).
Chronic Pericardial Effusions
Chronic pericardial effusions are sometimes encoun-
tered in patients without an antecedent history of acute 
pericarditis. They may cause few symptoms per se, and 
their presence may be detected by finding an enlarged 
cardiac silhouette on chest roentgenogram. Tuberculosis 
is a common cause.
Other causes
Myxedema may be responsible for chronic pericardial 
effusion that is sometimes massive but rarely, if ever, 
causes cardiac tamponade. The cardiac silhouette is 
markedly enlarged, and an echocardiogram distinguishes 
cardiomegaly from pericardial effusion. The diagnosis of 
myxedema can be confirmed by tests for thyroid func-
tion. Myxedematous pericardial effusion responds to 
thyroid hormone replacement.
Neoplasms, systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), 
rheumatoid arthritis, mycotic infections, radiation ther-
apy to the chest, pyogenic infections, and chylopericar-
dium may also cause chronic pericardial effusion and 
should be considered and specifically sought in such 
patients.
Aspiration and analysis of the pericardial fluid are 
often helpful in diagnosis. Pericardial fluid should be 
analyzed as described earlier. Grossly sanguineous peri-
cardial fluid results most commonly from a neoplasm, 
tuberculosis, renal failure, or slow leakage from an 
aortic aneurysm. Pericardiocentesis may resolve large 
effusions, but pericardiectomy may be required with 
recurrence. Intrapericardial instillation of sclerosing 
agents or antineoplastic agents may be used to prevent 
reaccumulation of fluid.
Chronic Constrictive Pericarditis
This disorder results when the healing of an acute 
fibrinous or serofibrinous pericarditis or the resorption 
of a chronic pericardial effusion is followed by oblit-
eration of the pericardial cavity with the formation of 
granulation tissue. The latter gradually contracts and 
forms a firm scar, which may be calcified, encasing the 
heart and interfering with filling of the ventricles. In 
developing nations where the condition is prevalent, a 
high percentage of cases are of tuberculous origin, but 
this is now an uncommon cause in North America. 
Chronic constrictive pericarditis may follow acute or 
relapsing viral or idiopathic pericarditis, trauma with 
organized blood clot, cardiac surgery of any type, medi-
astinal irradiation, purulent infection, histoplasmosis, 
neoplastic disease (especially breast cancer, lung cancer, 
and lymphoma), rheumatoid arthritis, SLE, and chronic 
renal failure with uremia treated by chronic dialysis. 
In many patients the cause of the pericardial disease is 
undetermined, and in them an asymptomatic or forgot-
ten bout of viral pericarditis, acute or idiopathic, may 
have been the inciting event.
The basic physiologic abnormality in patients with 
chronic constrictive pericarditis is the inability of the 
ventricles to fill because of the limitations imposed by the 
rigid, thickened pericardium. In constrictive pericardi-
tis, ventricular filling is unimpeded during early diastole 
but is reduced abruptly when the elastic limit of the peri-
cardium is reached, whereas in cardiac tamponade, ven-
tricular filling is impeded throughout diastole. In both 
conditions, ventricular end-diastolic and stroke volumes 
are reduced and the end-diastolic pressures in both ven-
tricles and the mean pressures in the atria, pulmonary 
veins, and systemic veins are all elevated to similar lev-
els (i.e., within 5 mmHg of one another). Despite these 
hemodynamic changes, myocardial function may be 
normal or only slightly impaired in chronic constrictive 
pericarditis. However, the fibrotic process may extend 
into the myocardium and cause myocardial scarring and 
atrophy, and venous congestion may then be due to 
the combined effects of the pericardial and myocardial 
lesions.
In constrictive pericarditis, the right and left atrial pres-
sure pulses display an M-shaped contour, with promi-
nent x and y descents. The y descent, which is absent or 
diminished in cardiac tamponade, is the most prominent 
deflection in constrictive pericarditis; it reflects rapid early 
filling of the ventricles. The y descent is interrupted by 
a rapid rise in atrial pressure during early diastole, when 
ventricular filling is impeded by the constricting pericar-
dium. These characteristic changes are transmitted to the 
jugular veins, where they may be recognized by inspec-
tion. In constrictive pericarditis, the ventricular pressure 
pulses in both ventricles exhibit characteristic “square 
root” signs during diastole. These hemodynamic changes, 
although characteristic, are not pathognomonic of con-
strictive pericarditis and may also be observed in cardio-
myopathies characterized by restriction of ventricular 
filling (Chap. 21) (Table 22-2).
 
CHAPTER 22
Pericardial Disease
281
Clinical and Laboratory Findings
Weakness, fatigue, weight gain, increased abdominal 
girth, abdominal discomfort, a protuberant abdomen, 
and edema are common. The patient often appears 
chronically ill, and in advanced cases there are anasarca, 
skeletal muscle wasting, and cachexia. Exertional dys-
pnea is common, and orthopnea may occur, although it 
is usually not severe. Acute left ventricular failure (acute 
pulmonary edema) is very uncommon. The cervical 
veins are distended and may remain so even after inten-
sive diuretic treatment, and venous pressure may fail to 
decline during inspiration (Kussmaul’s sign). The latter 
is common in chronic pericarditis but may also occur 
in tricuspid stenosis, right ventricular infarction, and 
restrictive cardiomyopathy.
The pulse pressure is normal or reduced. In about 
one-third of cases, a paradoxical pulse can be detected. 
Congestive hepatomegaly is pronounced and may 
impair hepatic function and cause jaundice; ascites is 
common and is usually more prominent than dependent 
edema. The apical pulse is reduced and may retract in 
systole (Broadbent’s sign). The heart sounds may be dis-
tant; an early third heart sound (i.e., a pericardial knock, 
occurring at the cardiac apex 0.09–0.12 s after aortic 
valve closure) is often conspicuous; it occurs with the 
abrupt cessation of ventricular filling. A systolic murmur 
of tricuspid regurgitation may be present.
The ECG frequently displays low voltage of the QRS 
complexes and diffuse flattening or inversion of the 
T waves. Atrial fibrillation is present in about one-third 
of patients. The chest roentgenogram shows a normal or 
slightly enlarged heart; pericardial calcification is most 
common in tuberculous pericarditis. Pericardial calcifica-
tion may, however, occur in the absence of constriction.
Inasmuch as the usual physical signs of cardiac disease 
(murmurs, cardiac enlargement) may be inconspicuous 
or absent in chronic constrictive pericarditis, hepatic 
enlargement and dysfunction associated with jaundice 
and intractable ascites may lead to a mistaken diagno-
sis of hepatic cirrhosis. This error can be avoided if the 
neck veins are inspected carefully in patients with asci-
tes and hepatomegaly. Given a clinical picture resem-
bling hepatic cirrhosis, but with the added feature of 
distended neck veins, a careful search for thickening of 
the pericardium by imaging (see Fig. 12-6) should be 
carried out and may disclose this curable or remediable 
form of heart disease.
The transthoracic echocardiogram typically shows peri-
cardial thickening, dilation of the inferior vena cava 
and hepatic veins, and a sharp halt in ventricular filling 
in early diastole, with normal ventricular systolic func-
tion and flattening of the left ventricular posterior wall. 
Atrial enlargement may be seen, especially in patients 
with long-standing constrictive physiology. There is 
a distinctive pattern of transvalvular flow velocity on 
Septum
E
RV
RA
LA
LV
DIASTOLE
DIASTOLE
E
A
A
TV
TV
MV
MV
Septum
Doppler
transvalvular
inflow patterns
Thickened
pericardium
Pulmonary
vein
IVC and hepatic veins
Inspiration
Expiration
Apical 4-chamber views
Figure 22-5
Constrictive pericarditis. Doppler schema of respirophasic 
changes in mitral and tricuspid inflow. Reciprocal patterns 
of ventricular filling are assessed on pulsed Doppler exami-
nation of mitral valve (MV) and tricuspid valve (TV) inflow. 
(Courtesy of Bernard E. Bulwer, MD; with permission.)
Doppler flow-velocity echocardiography. During inspi-
ration there is an exaggerated reduction in blood flow 
velocity in the pulmonary veins and across the mitral 
valve and a leftward shift of the ventricular septum; the 
opposite occurs during expiration. Diastolic flow veloc-
ity in the vena cavae into the right atrium and across 
the tricuspid valve increases in an exaggerated man-
ner during inspiration and declines during expiration 
(Fig. 22-5). However, echocardiography cannot defini-
tively exclude the diagnosis of constrictive pericarditis. 
MRI and CT scanning (Fig. 22-6) are more accurate 
than echocardiography in establishing or excluding the 
presence of a thickened pericardium. Pericardial thick-
ening and even pericardial calcification, however, are 
not synonymous with constrictive pericarditis since they 
may occur without seriously impairing ventricular filling.
Differential Diagnosis
Like chronic constrictive pericarditis, cor pulmonale 
(Chap. 17) may be associated with severe systemic 
venous hypertension but little pulmonary congestion; 
the heart is usually not enlarged, and a paradoxical pulse 
may be present. However, in cor pulmonale, advanced 
parenchymal pulmonary disease is usually obvious and 
venous pressure falls during inspiration (i.e., Kussmaul’s 
sign is negative). Tricuspid stenosis (Chap. 20) may also 
simulate chronic constrictive pericarditis; congestive 
hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, ascites, and venous disten-
tion may be equally prominent. However, in tricuspid 
stenosis, a characteristic murmur as well as the murmur 
of accompanying mitral stenosis is usually present.
Because constrictive pericarditis can be cor-
rected surgically, it is important to distinguish chronic 
282
SECTION IV
Disorders of the Heart
constrictive pericarditis from restrictive cardiomyopathy 
(Chap. 21), which has a similar physiologic abnor-
mality (i.e., restriction of ventricular filling). In many 
patients with restrictive cardiomyopathy the ventricular 
wall is thickened as shown on echocardiographic exam-
ination (Table 22-2). The features favoring the diagnosis 
of restrictive cardiomyopathy over chronic constrictive 
pericarditis include a well-defined apex beat, cardiac 
enlargement, and pronounced orthopnea with attacks 
of acute left ventricular failure, left ventricular hyper-
trophy, gallop sounds (in place of a pericardial knock), 
bundle branch block, and, in some cases, abnormal Q 
waves on the ECG. The typical echocardiographic fea-
tures of constrictive pericarditis (see earlier) are useful 
in the differential diagnosis in chronic constrictive peri-
carditis (Fig. 22-5). CT imaging (usually with contrast) 
and MRI are key in distinguishing between restrictive 
cardiomyopathy and chronic constrictive pericarditis. 
In the former, the ventricular walls are hypertrophied, 
whereas in the latter, the pericardium is thickened and 
sometimes calcified. When a patient has progressive, 
disabling, and unresponsive congestive heart failure and 
displays any of the features of constrictive heart disease, 
Doppler echocardiography to record respiratory effects 
on transvalvular flow and an MRI or CT scan should 
be obtained to detect or exclude constrictive pericardi-
tis, since the latter is usually curable.
treatment	
Constrictive Pericarditis
Pericardial resection is the only definitive treatment 
of constrictive pericarditis and should be as complete 
as possible. Dietary sodium restriction and diuretics 
Figure 22-6
Cardiovascular magnetic resonance in a patient with 
constrictive pericarditis. On the right is a basal short-axis 
view of the ventricles showing a thickened pericardium 
encasing the heart (arrows). On the left is a transaxial view, 
again showing the thickened pericardium, particularly over 
the right heart, but also a pleural effusion (Pl Eff). LV, left 
ventricle; RV, right ventricle. (From D Pennell: Cardiovascu-
lar Magnetic Resonance, in P Libby et al [eds]: Braunwald’s 
Heart Disease, 8th ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2005.)
are useful during preoperative preparation. Coronary 
arteriography should be carried out preoperatively in 
patients older than 50 years of age to exclude unsus-
pected coronary artery disease. The benefits derived 
from cardiac decortication are usually progressive over 
a period of months. The risk of this operation depends 
on the extent of penetration of the myocardium by the 
fibrotic and calcific process, the severity of myocardial 
atrophy, the extent of secondary impairment of hepatic 
and/or renal function, and the patient’s general condi-
tion. Operative mortality is in the range of 5% to 10%; 
the patients with the most severe disease are at highest 
risk. Therefore, surgical treatment should, if possible, be  
carried out relatively early in the course.
Subacute effusive-constrictive pericarditis
This form of pericardial disease is characterized by the 
combination of a tense effusion in the pericardial space 
and constriction of the heart by thickened pericardium. 
It shares a number of features both with chronic pericar-
dial effusion producing cardiac compression and with 
pericardial constriction. It may be caused by tuberculosis 
(see later), multiple attacks of acute idiopathic pericarditis, 
radiation, traumatic pericarditis, renal failure, scleroderma, 
and neoplasms. The heart is generally enlarged, and a para-
doxical pulse and a prominent x descent (without a promi-
nent y descent) are present in the atrial and jugular venous 
pressure pulses. After pericardiocentesis, the physiologic 
findings may change from those of cardiac tamponade to 
those of pericardial constriction. Furthermore, the intra-
pericardial pressure and the central venous pressure may 
decline, but not to normal. The diagnosis can be estab-
lished by pericardiocentesis followed by pericardial biopsy. 
 
CHAPTER 22
Pericardial Disease
283
Wide excision of both the visceral and parietal pericardium 
is usually effective therapy.
Tuberculous pericardial disease
This chronic infection is a common cause of 
chronic pericardial effusion, although less so in 
the United States than in Africa, Asia, the Mid-
dle East, and other parts of the developing world where 
active tuberculosis is endemic. The clinical picture is that 
of a chronic, systemic illness in a patient with pericar-
dial effusion. It is important to consider this diagnosis in 
a patient with known tuberculosis, with HIV, and with 
fever, chest pain, weight loss, and enlargement of the 
cardiac silhouette of undetermined origin. If the etiology 
of chronic pericardial effusion remains obscure despite 
detailed analysis of the pericardial fluid (see earlier), a 
pericardial biopsy, preferably by a limited thoracotomy, 
should be performed. If definitive evidence is still lack-
ing but the specimen shows granulomas with caseation, 
antituberculous chemotherapy is indicated.
If the biopsy specimen shows a thickened pericar-
dium, pericardiectomy should be carried out to prevent 
the development of constriction. Tubercular cardiac 
constriction should be treated surgically while the patient 
is receiving antituberculous chemotherapy.
Other Disorders of the 
Pericardium
Pericardial cysts appear as rounded or lobulated defor-
mities of the cardiac silhouette, most commonly at the 
right cardiophrenic angle. They do not cause symptoms, 
and their major clinical significance lies in the possibil-
ity of confusion with a tumor, ventricular aneurysm, 
or massive cardiomegaly. Tumors involving the peri-
cardium are most commonly secondary to malignant 
neoplasms originating in or invading the mediastinum, 
including carcinoma of the bronchus and breast, lym-
phoma, and melanoma. The most common primary 
malignant tumor is the mesothelioma. The usual clinical 
picture of malignant pericardial tumor is an insidiously 
developing, often bloody pericardial effusion. Surgical 
exploration is required to establish a definitive diagnosis 
and to carry out definitive or, more commonly, pallia-
tive treatment.
 Eric H. Awtry 
I  Wilson S. Colucci 
284
 TUMORS OF THE HEART 
 PRIMARY TUMORS 
 Primary tumors of the heart are rare. Approximately 
three-quarters are histologically benign, and the major-
ity of these tumors are myxomas. Malignant tumors, 
almost all of which are sarcomas, account for 25% 
of primary cardiac tumors  ( Table 23-1 ) . All cardiac 
tumors, regardless of pathologic type, have the poten-
tial to cause life-threatening complications. Many 
tumors are now surgically curable; thus, early diagnosis 
is imperative. 
 Clinical presentation 
 Cardiac tumors may present with a wide array of car-
diac and noncardiac manifestations. These manifesta-
tions depend in large part on the location and size of 
the tumor and are often nonspeciﬁ c features of more 
common forms of heart disease, such as chest pain, syn-
cope, heart failure, murmurs, arrhythmias, conduction 
disturbances, and pericardial effusion with or without 
tamponade. Additionally, embolic phenomena and con-
stitutional symptoms may occur. 
 Myxoma 
 Myxomas are the most common type of primary car-
diac tumor in all age groups, accounting for one-third 
to one-half of all cases at postmortem and about three-
quarters of the tumors treated surgically. They occur 
at all ages, most commonly in the third through sixth 
decades, with a female predilection. Approximately 90% 
of myxomas are sporadic; the remainder are familial 
with autosomal dominant transmission. The familial 
variety often occurs as part of a syndrome complex 
 TUMORS AND TRAUMA OF THE HEART 
 CHAPTER 23 
TABLE 23-1
 RELATIVE INCIDENCE OF PRIMARY TUMORS OF THE 
HEART 
TYPE
NUMBER
PERCENT
Benign 
199
58.0
 Myxoma
114
33.2
 Rhabdomyoma
20
5.8
 Fibroma
20
5.8
 Hemangioma
17
5.0
 Atrioventricular nodal
10
2.9
 Granular cell
4
1.2
 Lipoma
2
0.6
 Paraganglioma
2
0.6
 Myocytic hamartoma
2
0.6
 Histiocytoid cardiomyopathy
2
0.6
 Inﬂ ammatory psuedotumor
2
0.6
 Other benign tumors
4
1.2
Malignant 
144
42.0
 Sarcoma
137
39.9
 Lymphoma
7
2.1
 Source: Modiﬁ ed from A Burke, R Virmani:  Atlas of Tumor Pathol-
ogy: Tumors of the Heart and Great Vessels . Washington, DC, Armed 
Forces Institute of Pathology 1996, p. 231; with permission.
(Carney complex) that includes (1) myxomas (cardiac, 
skin, and/or breast), (2) lentigines and/or pigmented 
nevi, and (3) endocrine overactivity (primary nodu-
lar adrenal cortical disease with or without Cushing’s 
syndrome, testicular tumors, and/or pituitary adeno-
mas with gigantism or acromegaly). Certain constella-
tions of ﬁ ndings have been referred to as the  NAME 
syndrome (nevi, atrial myxoma, myxoid neuroﬁ broma, 
 
CHAPTER 23
Tumors and Trauma of the Heart
285
and ephelides) or the LAMB syndrome (lentigines, 
atrial myxoma, and blue nevi), although these syn-
dromes probably represent subsets of the Carney com-
plex. The genetic basis of this complex has not been 
elucidated completely; however, patients frequently 
have inactivating mutations in the tumor-suppressor 
gene PRKAR1A, which encodes the protein kinase 
A type I-α regulatory subunit.
Pathologically, myxomas are gelatinous structures 
that consist of myxoma cells embedded in a stroma rich 
in glycosaminoglycans. Most are solitary, are located in 
the atria (particularly the left atrium, where they usu-
ally arise from the interatrial septum in the vicinity of 
the fossa ovalis), and are often pedunculated on a fibro-
vascular stalk. In contrast to sporadic tumors, familial or 
syndromic tumors tend to occur in younger individuals, 
are often multiple, may be ventricular in location, and 
are more likely to recur after initial resection.
Myxomas commonly present with obstructive signs 
and symptoms. The most common clinical presentation 
mimics that of mitral valve disease: either stenosis owing 
to tumor prolapse into the mitral orifice or regurgita-
tion resulting from tumor-induced valvular trauma. 
Ventricular myxomas may cause outflow obstruction 
similar to that caused by subaortic or subpulmonic ste-
nosis. The symptoms and signs of myxoma may be 
sudden in onset or positional in nature, owing to the 
effects of gravity on tumor position. A characteristic 
low-pitched sound, a “tumor plop,” may be appreci-
ated on auscultation during early or mid-diastole and is 
thought to result from the impact of the tumor against 
the mitral valve or ventricular wall. Myxomas also may 
present with peripheral or pulmonary emboli or with 
constitutional signs and symptoms, including fever, 
weight loss, cachexia, malaise, arthralgias, rash, digital 
clubbing, Raynaud’s phenomenon, hypergammaglobu-
linemia, anemia, polycythemia, leukocytosis, elevated 
erythrocyte sedimentation rate, thrombocytopenia, and 
thrombocytosis. These factors account for the frequent 
misdiagnosis of patients with myxomas as having endo-
carditis, collagen vascular disease, or a paraneoplastic 
syndrome.
Two-dimensional transthoracic or omniplane trans-
esophageal echocardiography is useful in the diagnosis 
of cardiac myxoma and allows assessment of tumor size 
and determination of the site of tumor attachment, both 
of which are important considerations in the planning 
of surgical excision (Fig. 23-1). CT and MRI may 
provide important information regarding size, shape, 
composition, and surface characteristics of the tumor 
(Fig. 23-2).
Although cardiac catheterization and angiography 
were previously performed routinely before tumor 
resection, they no longer are considered mandatory 
when adequate noninvasive information is available and 
other cardiac disorders (e.g., coronary artery disease) 
are not considered likely. Additionally, catheterization 
of the chamber from which the tumor arises carries the 
risk of tumor embolization. Because myxomas may be 
familial, echocardiographic screening of first-degree 
relatives is appropriate, particularly if the patient is 
young and has multiple tumors or evidence of myxoma 
syndrome.
treatment	
Myxoma
Surgical excision utilizing cardiopulmonary bypass 
is indicated regardless of tumor size and is generally  
curative. Myxomas recur in 12–22% of familial cases 
but in only 1–2% of sporadic cases. Tumor recurrence 
most likely is due to multifocal lesions in the former and  
inadequate resection in the latter.
Figure 23-1
Transthoracic echocardiogram demonstrat-
ing a large atrial myxoma. The myxoma (Myx) 
fills the entire left atrium in systole (panel A) and 
prolapses across the mitral valve and into the 
left ventricle (LV) during diastole (panel B). RA, 
right atrium; RV, right ventricle. (Courtesy of 
Dr. Michael Tsang; with permission.)
286
SECTION IV
Disorders of the Heart
Other benign tumors
Cardiac lipomas, although relatively common, are usu-
ally incidental findings at postmortem examination; 
however, they may grow as large as 15 cm and may 
present with symptoms owing to mechanical interfer-
ence with cardiac function, arrhythmias, or conduction 
disturbances or as an abnormality of the cardiac silhou-
ette on chest x-ray. Papillary fibroelastomas are the most 
common tumors of the cardiac valves. Although usually 
clinically silent, they can cause valve dysfunction and 
may embolize distally, resulting in transient ischemic 
attacks, stroke, or myocardial infarction. Therefore, 
these tumors should be resected even when asymptom-
atic. Rhabdomyomas and fibromas are the most common 
cardiac tumors in infants and children and usually occur 
in the ventricles, where they may produce mechanical 
obstruction to blood flow, thereby mimicking valvu-
lar stenosis, congestive heart failure (CHF), restrictive 
or hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, or pericardial con-
striction. Rhabdomyomas are probably hamartomatous 
growths, are multiple in 90% of cases, and are strongly 
associated with tuberous sclerosis. These tumors have 
a tendency to regress completely or partially; only 
tumors that cause obstruction require surgical resection. 
Fibromas are usually single, are often calcified, tend 
to grow and cause obstructive symptoms, and should 
be resected. Hemangiomas and mesotheliomas are gener-
ally small tumors, most often intramyocardial in loca-
tion, and may cause atrioventricular (AV) conduction 
Figure 23-2
Cardiac MRI demonstrating a rounded mass (M) within 
the left atrium (LA). Pathologic evaluation at the time of sur-
gery revealed it to be an atrial myxoma. LV, left ventricle; RA, 
right atrium; RV, right ventricle.
disturbances and even sudden death as a result of their 
propensity to develop in the region of the AV node. 
Other benign tumors arising from the heart include tera-
toma, chemodectoma, neurilemoma, granular cell myoblastoma, 
and bronchogenic cysts.
Sarcoma
Almost all primary cardiac malignancies are sarco-
mas, which may be of several histologic types. In gen-
eral, these tumors are characterized by rapid progres-
sion that culminates in the patient’s death within weeks 
to months from the time of presentation as a result of 
hemodynamic compromise, local invasion, or distant 
metastases. Sarcomas commonly involve the right side 
of the heart, are characterized by rapid growth, fre-
quently invade the pericardial space, and may obstruct 
the cardiac chambers or venae cavae. Sarcomas also may 
occur on the left side of the heart and may be mistaken 
for myxomas.
treatment	
Sarcoma
At the time of presentation these tumors have often 
spread too extensively to allow for surgical excision. 
Although there are scattered reports of palliation 
with surgery, radiotherapy, and/or chemotherapy, the 
response of cardiac sarcomas to these therapies is gen-
erally poor. The one exception appears to be cardiac 
lymphosarcomas, which may respond to a combination 
of chemo- and radiotherapy.
Tumors Metastatic to the Heart
Tumors metastatic to the heart are much more com-
mon than primary tumors, and their incidence is likely 
to increase as the life expectancy of patients with vari-
ous forms of malignant neoplasms is extended by more 
effective therapy. Although cardiac metastases may 
occur with any tumor type, the relative incidence is 
especially high in malignant melanoma and, to a some-
what lesser extent, leukemia and lymphoma. In absolute 
terms, the most common primary originating sites of 
cardiac metastases are carcinoma of the breast and lung, 
reflecting the high incidence of those cancers. Cardiac 
metastases almost always occur in the setting of wide-
spread primary disease, and most often there is either 
primary or metastatic disease elsewhere in the thoracic 
cavity. Nevertheless, cardiac metastasis occasionally may 
be the initial presentation of an extrathoracic tumor.
Cardiac metastases may occur via hematogenous or 
lymphangitic spread or by direct tumor invasion. They 
generally manifest as small, firm nodules; diffuse infil-
tration also may occur, especially with sarcomas or 
 
CHAPTER 23
Tumors and Trauma of the Heart
287
hematologic neoplasms. The pericardium is most often 
involved, followed by myocardial involvement of any 
chamber and, rarely, by involvement of the endocar-
dium or cardiac valves.
Cardiac metastases are clinically apparent only ∼10% 
of the time, are usually not the cause of the patient’s 
presentation, and rarely are the cause of death. The vast 
majority occur in the setting of a previously recognized 
malignant neoplasm. When symptomatic, cardiac metas-
tases may result in a variety of clinical features, including 
dyspnea, acute pericarditis, cardiac tamponade, ectopic 
tachyarrhythmias, heart block, and CHF. As with pri-
mary cardiac tumors, the clinical presentation reflects 
more the location and size of the tumor than its histo-
logic type. Many of these signs and symptoms may also 
result from myocarditis, pericarditis, or cardiomyopathy 
induced by radiotherapy or chemotherapy.
Electrocardiographic (ECG) findings are nonspecific. 
On chest x-ray, the cardiac silhouette is most often nor-
mal but may be enlarged or exhibit a bizarre contour. 
Echocardiography is useful for identifying pericardial 
effusions and visualizing larger metastases, although CT 
and radionuclide imaging with gallium or thallium may 
define the tumor burden more clearly. Cardiac MRI 
offers superb image quality and plays a central role in 
the diagnostic evaluation of cardiac metastases and car-
diac tumors in general. Pericardiocentesis may allow for 
a specific cytologic diagnosis in patients with malignant 
pericardial effusions. Angiography is rarely necessary but 
may delineate discrete lesions.
treatment	
Tumors Metastatic to the Heart
Most patients with cardiac metastases have advanced 
malignant disease; thus, therapy is generally palliative 
and consists of treatment of the primary tumor. Symp-
tomatic malignant pericardial effusions should be 
drained by pericardiocentesis. Concomitant instillation 
of a sclerosing agent (e.g., tetracycline) may delay or 
prevent reaccumulation of the effusion, and creation of 
a pericardial window allows drainage of the effusion to 
the pleural space.
Traumatic Cardiac Injury
Traumatic cardiac injury may be caused by either pen-
etrating or nonpenetrating trauma. Penetrating injuries 
most often result from gunshot or knife wounds, and 
the site of entry is usually obvious. Nonpenetrating injuries 
most often occur during motor vehicle accidents, either 
from a rapid deceleration injury or from impact of the 
chest against the steering wheel, and may be associated 
with significant cardiac injury even in the absence of 
external signs of thoracic trauma.
Myocardial contusions are the most common form of 
nonpenetrating cardiac injury and may initially be over-
looked in trauma patients as the clinical focus is directed 
toward other, more obvious injuries. Myocardial necro-
sis may occur as a direct result of the blunt injury or as 
a result of traumatic coronary laceration or thrombosis. 
The contused myocardium is pathologically similar to 
infarcted myocardium and may be associated with atrial 
or ventricular arrhythmias; conduction disturbances, 
including bundle branch block; or ECG abnormalities 
resembling those of infarction or pericarditis. Thus, it is 
important to consider contusion as a cause of otherwise 
unexplained ECG changes in a trauma patient. Serum 
creatine kinase, myocardial bound (CK-MB) isoenzyme 
levels are increased in ∼20% of patients who experi-
ence blunt chest trauma but may be falsely elevated in 
the presence of massive skeletal muscle injury. Cardiac 
troponin levels are more specific for identifying car-
diac injury in this setting. Echocardiography is useful 
in detecting structural and functional sequelae of con-
tusion, including wall motion abnormalities, pericardial 
effusion, valvular dysfunction, and ventricular rupture.
Rupture of the cardiac valves or their supporting 
structures, most commonly of the tricuspid or mitral 
valve, leads to acute valvular incompetence. This com-
plication is usually heralded by the development of a 
loud murmur, may be associated with rapidly progres-
sive heart failure, and can be diagnosed by either trans-
thoracic or transesophageal echocardiography.
The most serious consequence of nonpenetrating 
cardiac injury is myocardial rupture, which may result 
in hemopericardium and tamponade (free wall rupture) 
or intracardiac shunting (ventricular septal rupture). 
Although it generally is fatal, up to 40% of patients 
with cardiac rupture have been reported to survive long 
enough to reach a specialized trauma center. Hemo-
pericardium also may result from traumatic rupture of 
a pericardial vessel or a coronary artery. Additionally, a 
pericardial effusion may develop weeks or even months 
after blunt chest trauma as a manifestation of the post-
cardiac injury syndrome, which resembles the post-peri-
cardiotomy syndrome (Chap. 22).
Blunt, nonpenetrating, often innocent-appearing 
injuries to the chest may trigger ventricular fibrilla-
tion even in absence of overt signs of injury. This syn-
drome, referred to as commotio cordis, occurs most often 
in adolescents during sporting events (e.g., baseball, 
hockey, football, and lacrosse) and probably results from 
an impact to the chest wall overlying the heart dur-
ing the susceptible phase of repolarization just before 
the peak of the T wave. Survival depends on prompt 
defibrillation.
Rupture of the aorta, usually just above the aortic 
valve or at the site of the ligamentum arteriosum, is a 
common consequence of nonpenetrating chest trauma 
and is the most common vascular deceleration injury. 
288
SECTION IV
Disorders of the Heart
The clinical presentation is similar to that of aortic 
dissection (Chap. 38); the arterial pressure and pulse 
amplitude may be increased in the upper extremities 
and decreased in the lower extremities, and chest x-ray 
may reveal mediastinal widening. Occasionally, aortic 
rupture is contained by the aortic adventitia, resulting 
in a false, or pseudo-, aneurysm that may be discovered 
months or years after the initial injury.
Sudden emotional or physical trauma may precipi-
tate a transient catecholamine-mediated cardiomyopathy 
referred to as Tako-Tsubo syndrome or the apical ballooning 
syndrome (Chap. 21).
Penetrating injuries of the heart produced by knife or 
bullet wounds usually result in rapid clinical deteriora-
tion and frequently in death as a result of hemopericar-
dium/pericardial tamponade or massive hemorrhage. 
Nonetheless, up to half of such patients may survive 
long enough to reach a specialized trauma center if 
immediate resuscitation is performed. Prognosis in these 
patients relates to the mechanism of injury, their clini-
cal condition at presentation, and the specific cardiac 
chamber(s) involved. Iatrogenic cardiac or coronary 
arterial perforation may complicate placement of cen-
tral venous or intracardiac catheters, pacemaker leads, or 
intracoronary stents and is associated with a better prog-
nosis than are other forms of penetrating cardiac trauma.
Traumatic rupture of a great vessel from penetrat-
ing injury is usually associated with hemothorax and, 
less often, hemopericardium. Local hematoma forma-
tion may compress major vessels and produce ischemic 
symptoms, and AV fistulas may develop, occasionally 
resulting in high-output CHF.
Occasionally, patients who survive penetrating car-
diac injuries may subsequently present with a new car-
diac murmur or CHF as a result of mitral regurgitation 
or an intracardiac shunt (i.e., ventricular or atrial sep-
tal defect, aortopulmonary fistula, or coronary AV fis-
tula) that was undetected at the time of the initial injury 
or developed subsequently. Therefore, trauma patients 
should be examined carefully several weeks after the 
injury. If a mechanical complication is suspected, it 
can be confirmed by echocardiography or cardiac 
catheterization.
treatment	
Traumatic Cardiac Injury
The treatment of an uncomplicated myocardial contu-
sion is similar to the medical therapy for a myocardial 
infarction, except that anticoagulation is contraindi-
cated, and should include monitoring for the develop-
ment of arrhythmias and mechanical complications 
such as cardiac rupture (Chap. 35). Acute myocardial 
failure resulting from traumatic valve rupture usu-
ally requires urgent operative correction. Immediate  
thoracotomy should be carried out for most cases of 
penetrating injury or if there is evidence of cardiac tam-
ponade and/or shock regardless of the type of trauma. 
Pericardiocentesis may be lifesaving in patients with 
tamponade but is usually only a temporizing measure 
while awaiting definitive surgical therapy. Pericardial 
hemorrhage often leads to constriction (Chap. 22), 
which must be treated by surgical decortication.
 Eric H. Awtry 
I  Wilson S. Colucci 
289
 The common systemic disorders that have associated 
cardiac manifestations are summarized in  Table 24-1 . 
 DIABETES MELLITUS 
 Diabetes mellitus, both insulin- and non-insulin-dependent, 
is an independent risk factor for coronary artery disease 
(CAD;  Chap. 30 ) and accounts for 14–50% of new cases 
of cardiovascular disease. Furthermore, CAD is the most 
common cause of death in adults with diabetes mellitus. 
In the diabetic population the incidence of CAD relates 
to the duration of diabetes and the level of glycemic 
control, and its pathogenesis involves endothelial dys-
function, increased lipoprotein peroxidation, increased 
infl ammation, a prothrombotic state, and associated met-
abolic abnormalities. 
 Diabetic patients are more likely to have a myocar-
dial infarction, have a greater burden of CAD, have 
larger infarct size, and have more postinfarct compli-
cations, including heart failure, shock, and death, than 
are nondiabetics. Importantly, diabetic patients are 
more likely to have atypical ischemic symptoms; nau-
sea, dyspnea, pulmonary edema, arrhythmias, heart 
block, or syncope may be their anginal equivalent. 
Additionally, “silent ischemia,” resulting from auto-
nomic nervous system dysfunction, is more common 
in diabetic patients, accounting for up to 90% of their 
ischemic episodes. Thus, one must have a low thresh-
old for suspecting CAD in diabetic patients. The treat-
ment of diabetic patients with CAD must include 
aggressive risk factor management. Pharmacologic 
therapy and revascularization are similar in diabetic 
patients and nondiabetics except that diabetic patients 
have higher morbidity and mortality rates associated 
with revascularization, have an increased risk of reste-
nosis after percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI), 
and probably have improved survival when treated 
with surgical bypass compared with PCI for multives-
sel CAD. 
 Patients with diabetes mellitus also may have abnor-
mal left ventricular systolic and diastolic function, 
refl ecting concomitant epicardial CAD and/or hyper-
tension, coronary microvascular disease, endothelial 
dysfunction, ventricular hypertrophy, and autonomic 
dysfunction. A restrictive cardiomyopathy may be pres-
ent with abnormal myocardial relaxation and elevated 
ventricular fi lling pressures. Histologically, interstitial 
fi brosis is seen, and intramural arteries may demonstrate 
intimal thickening, hyaline deposition, and infl amma-
tory changes. Diabetic patients have an increased risk 
of developing clinical heart failure, which probably 
contributes to their excessive cardiovascular morbidity 
and mortality rates. There is some evidence that insu-
lin therapy may ameliorate diabetes-related myocardial 
dysfunction. 
 malnutrition anD Vitamin DefiCienCy 
 Malnutrition 
 In patients whose intake of protein, calories, or both 
is severely defi cient, the heart may become thin, pale, 
and hypokinetic with myofi brillar atrophy and inter-
stitial edema. The systolic pressure and cardiac output 
fall, and the pulse pressure narrows. Generalized edema 
is common and relates to a variety of factors, including 
reduced serum oncotic pressure and myocardial dys-
function. Such profound states of protein and calorie 
malnutrition, termed  kwashiorkor and  marasmus, respec-
tively, are most common in underdeveloped countries. 
However, signifi cant nutritional heart disease also may 
occur in developed nations, particularly in patients 
with chronic diseases such as AIDS, patients with 
 CARDIAC MANIFESTATIONS OF 
SYSTEMIC DISEASE 
 CHAPTER 24 
SECTION IV
Disorders of the Heart
290
anorexia nervosa, and patients with severe cardiac fail-
ure in whom gastrointestinal hypoperfusion and venous 
congestion may lead to anorexia and malabsorption. 
Open-heart surgery poses increased risk in malnourished 
patients, and those patients may benefit from preopera-
tive hyperalimentation.
Thiamine deficiency (beriberi)
Generalized malnutrition often is accompanied by thia-
mine deficiency; however, this hypovitaminosis also 
may occur in the presence of an adequate protein and 
caloric intake, particularly in the Far East, where pol-
ished rice deficient in thiamine may be a major dietary 
component. In Western nations where the use of thiamine-
enriched flour is widespread, clinical thiamine defi-
ciency is limited primarily to alcoholics, food faddists, 
and patients receiving chemotherapy. Nonetheless, 
when thiamine stores are measured using the thiamine- 
pyrophosphate effect (TPPE), thiamine deficiency has 
been found in 20–90% of patients with chronic heart 
failure. This deficiency appears to result from both 
reduced dietary intake and a diuretic-induced increase 
in the urinary excretion of thiamine. The acute admin-
istration of thiamine to these patients increases the left 
ventricular ejection fraction and the excretion of salt 
and water.
Clinically, patients with thiamine deficiency usually 
have evidence of generalized malnutrition, peripheral 
neuropathy, glossitis, and anemia. The classic associated 
cardiovascular syndrome is characterized by high-output 
heart failure, tachycardia, and often elevated biventricu-
lar filling pressures. The major cause of the high-output 
state is vasomotor depression leading to reduced systemic 
vascular resistance, the precise mechanism of which is 
not understood. The cardiac examination reveals a wide 
pulse pressure, tachycardia, a third heart sound, and, fre-
quently, an apical systolic murmur. The electrocardio-
gram (ECG) may reveal decreased voltage, a prolonged 
QT interval, and T-wave abnormalities. The chest x-ray 
generally reveals cardiomegaly and signs of congestive 
heart failure (CHF). The response to thiamine is often 
dramatic, with an increase in systemic vascular resistance, 
a decrease in cardiac output, clearing of pulmonary con-
gestion, and a reduction in heart size often occurring in 
12–48 h. Although the response to inotropes and diuret-
ics may be poor before thiamine therapy, these agents 
may be important after thiamine is given, since the left 
ventricle may not be able to handle the increased work 
load presented by the return of vascular tone.
Vitamins B6 , B12 , and folate deficiency
Vitamins B6, B12, and folate are cofactors in the metab-
olism of homocysteine. Their deficiency probably 
contributes to the majority of cases of hyperhomocys-
teinemia, a disorder associated with increased athero-
sclerotic risk. Supplementation of these vitamins has 
reduced the incidence of hyperhomocysteinemia in 
the United States; however, the clinical cardiovascular 
Table 24-1
Common Systemic Disorders and Their Associated Cardiac Manifestations
Systemic Disorder
Common Cardiac Manifestations
Diabetes mellitus
CAD, atypical angina, CMP, systolic or diastolic CHF
Protein-calorie malnutrition
Dilated CMP, CHF
Thiamine deficiency
High-output failure, dilated CMP
Hyperhomocysteinemia
Premature atherosclerosis
Obesity
CMP, systolic or diastolic CHF
Hyperthyroidism
Palpitations, SVT, atrial fibrillation, hypertension
Hypothyroidism
Hypotension, bradycardia, dilated CMP, CHF, pericardial effusion
Malignant carcinoid
Tricuspid and pulmonary valve disease, right heart failure
Pheochromocytoma
Hypertension, palpitations, CHF
Acromegaly
Systolic or diastolic heart failure
Rheumatoid arthritis
Pericarditis, pericardial effusions, coronary arteritis, myocarditis, valvulitis
Seronegative arthropathies
Aortitis, aortic and mitral insufficiency, conduction abnormalities
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Pericarditis, Libman-Sacks endocarditis, myocarditis, arterial and venous thrombosis
HIV
Myocarditis, dilated CMP, pericardial effusion
Amyloidosis
CHF, restrictive CMP, valvular regurgitation, pericardial effusion
Sarcoidosis
CHF, dilated or restrictive CMP, ventricular arrhythmias, heart block
Hemochromatosis
CHF, arrhythmias, heart block
Marfan syndrome
Aortic aneurysm and dissection, aortic insufficiency, mitral valve prolapse
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
Aortic and coronary aneurysms, mitral and tricuspid valve prolapse
Abbreviations: CAD, coronary artery disease; CHF, congestive heart failure; CMP, cardiomyopathy; SVT, supraventricular tachycardia.
 
CHAPTER 24
Cardiac Manifestations of Systemic Disease 
291
benefit of normalizing elevated homocysteine levels has 
not been proved.
Obesity
Severe obesity, especially abdominal obesity, is associ-
ated with an increase in cardiovascular morbidity and 
mortality rates. Although obesity itself is not considered 
a disease, it is associated with an increased prevalence 
of hypertension, glucose intolerance, and atheroscle-
rotic CAD. In addition, obese patients have a distinct 
cardiovascular abnormality characterized by increased 
total and central blood volumes, increased cardiac out-
put, and elevated left ventricular filling pressure. The 
elevated cardiac output appears to be required to sup-
port the metabolic demands of the excess adipose tis-
sue. Left ventricular filling pressure is often at the 
upper limits of normal at rest and rises excessively with 
exercise. In part as a result of chronic volume overload, 
eccentric cardiac hypertrophy with cardiac dilation 
and ventricular dysfunction may develop. In addition, 
altered levels of adipokines secreted by adipose tis-
sue may contribute to adverse myocardial remodeling 
via direct effects on cardiac myocytes and other cells. 
Pathologically, there is left and, in some cases, right 
ventricular hypertrophy and generalized cardiac dila-
tion. Pulmonary congestion, peripheral edema, and 
exercise intolerance may all ensue; however, the rec-
ognition of these findings may be difficult in massively 
obese patients.
Weight reduction is the most effective therapy and 
results in reduction in blood volume and the return of 
cardiac output toward normal. However, rapid weight 
reduction may be dangerous, as cardiac arrhythmias 
and sudden death owing to electrolyte imbalance have 
been described. Treatment with angiotensin-converting 
enzyme inhibitors, sodium restriction, and diuretics may 
be useful to control heart failure symptoms. This form of 
heart disease should be distinguished from Pickwickian 
syndrome, which may share several of the cardiovascu-
lar features of heart disease secondary to severe obesity 
but, in addition, frequently has components of central 
apnea, hypoxemia, pulmonary hypertension, and cor 
pulmonale.
Thyroid Disease
Thyroid hormone exerts a major influence on the car-
diovascular system by a number of direct and indi-
rect mechanisms, and, not surprisingly, cardiovascular 
effects are prominent in both hypo- and hyperthyroid-
ism. Thyroid hormone causes increases in total-body 
metabolism and oxygen consumption that indirectly 
increase the cardiac workload. In addition, thyroid 
hormone exerts direct inotropic, chronotropic, and 
dromotropic effects that are similar to those seen with 
adrenergic stimulation (e.g., tachycardia, increased car-
diac output); they are mediated at least partly by both 
transcriptional and nontranscriptional effects of thyroid 
hormone on myosin, calcium-activated ATPase, Na+-K+- 
ATPase, and myocardial β-adrenergic receptors.
Hyperthyroidism
Common cardiovascular manifestations of hyperthy-
roidism include palpitations, systolic hypertension, and 
fatigue. Sinus tachycardia is present in ∼40% of hyper-
thyroid patients, and atrial fibrillation in ∼15%. Physical 
examination may reveal a hyperdynamic precordium, 
a widened pulse pressure, increases in the intensity of 
the first heart sound and the pulmonic component 
of the second heart sound, and a third heart sound. An 
increased incidence of mitral valve prolapse has been 
described in hyperthyroid patients, in which case a mid-
systolic murmur may be heard at the left sternal border 
with or without a mid-systolic click. A systolic pleuro-
pericardial friction rub (Means-Lerman scratch) may be 
heard at the left second intercostal space during expi-
ration and is thought to result from the hyperdynamic 
cardiac motion.
Elderly patients with hyperthyroidism may present 
with only cardiovascular manifestations of thyrotoxicosis 
such as sinus tachycardia, atrial fibrillation, and hyper-
tension, all of which may be resistant to therapy until 
the hyperthyroidism is controlled. Angina pectoris and 
CHF are unusual with hyperthyroidism unless there is 
coexistent heart disease; in such cases, symptoms often 
resolve with treatment of the hyperthyroidism.
Hypothyroidism
Cardiac manifestations of hypothyroidism include a 
reduction in cardiac output, stroke volume, heart rate, 
blood pressure, and pulse pressure. Pericardial effusions 
are present in about one-third of patients, rarely progress 
to tamponade, and probably result from increased cap-
illary permeability. Other clinical signs include cardio-
megaly, bradycardia, weak arterial pulses, distant heart 
sounds, and pleural effusions. Although the signs and 
symptoms of myxedema may mimic those of CHF, in 
the absence of other cardiac disease, myocardial failure 
is uncommon. The ECG generally reveals sinus brady-
cardia and low voltage and may show prolongation of 
the QT interval, decreased P-wave voltage, prolonged 
AV conduction time, intraventricular conduction dis-
turbances, and nonspecific ST-T-wave abnormali-
ties. Chest x-ray may show cardiomegaly, often with a 
“water bottle” configuration; pleural effusions; and, in 
some cases, evidence of CHF. Pathologically, the heart 
is pale and dilated and often demonstrates myofibrillar 
swelling, loss of striations, and interstitial fibrosis.
SECTION IV
Disorders of the Heart
292
Patients with hypothyroidism frequently have ele-
vations of cholesterol and triglycerides, resulting in 
premature atherosclerotic CAD. Before treatment 
with thyroid hormone, patients with hypothyroidism 
frequently do not have angina pectoris, presumably 
because of the low metabolic demands caused by their 
condition. However, angina and myocardial infarc-
tion may be precipitated during initiation of thyroid 
hormone replacement, especially in elderly patients 
with underlying heart disease. Therefore, replacement 
should be done with care, starting with low doses that 
are increased gradually.
Malignant Carcinoid
Carcinoid tumors most often originate in the small 
bowel and elaborate a variety of vasoactive amines (e.g., 
serotonin), kinins, indoles, and prostaglandins that are 
believed to be responsible for the diarrhea, flushing, and 
labile blood pressure that characterize the carcinoid syn-
drome. Some 50% of patients with carcinoid syndrome 
have cardiac involvement, usually manifesting as abnor-
malities of the right-sided cardiac structures. These 
patients invariably have hepatic metastases that allow 
vasoactive substances to circumvent hepatic metabo-
lism. Left-sided cardiac involvement is rare and indicates 
either pulmonary carcinoid or an intracardiac shunt. 
Pathologically, carcinoid lesions are fibrous plaques that 
consist of smooth-muscle cells embedded in a stroma of 
glycosaminoglycans and collagen. They occur on the 
cardiac valves, where they cause valvular dysfunction, as 
well as on the endothelium of the cardiac chambers and 
great vessels.
Carcinoid heart disease most often presents as tri-
cuspid regurgitation, pulmonic stenosis, or both. In 
some cases a high cardiac output state may occur, pre-
sumably as a result of a decrease in systemic vascular 
resistance resulting from vasoactive substances released 
by the tumor. Treatment with somatostatin analogues 
(e.g., octreotide) or interferon α improves symptoms 
and survival in patients with carcinoid heart disease 
but does not appear to improve valvular abnormalities. 
In some severely symptomatic patients, valve replace-
ment is indicated. Coronary artery spasm, presumably 
due to a circulating vasoactive substance, may occur in 
patients with carcinoid syndrome.
Pheochromocytoma
In addition to causing labile or sustained hypertension, 
the high circulating levels of catecholamines resulting 
from a pheochromocytoma may cause direct myocardial 
injury. Focal myocardial necrosis and inflammatory cell 
infiltration are present in ∼50% of patients who die with 
pheochromocytoma and may contribute to clinically 
significant left ventricular failure and pulmonary edema. 
In addition, associated hypertension results in left ven-
tricular hypertrophy. Left ventricular dysfunction and 
CHF may resolve after removal of the tumor.
Acromegaly
Exposure of the heart to excessive growth hormone 
may cause CHF as a result of high cardiac output, dia-
stolic dysfunction owing to ventricular hypertrophy 
(with increased left ventricular chamber size or wall 
thickness), or global systolic dysfunction. Hypertension 
occurs in up to one-third of patients with acromeg-
aly and is characterized by suppression of the renin- 
angiotensin-aldosterone axis and increases in total-body 
sodium and plasma volume. Some form of cardiac dis-
ease occurs in about one-third of patients with acro-
megaly and is associated with a doubling of the risk of 
cardiac death.
Rheumatoid Arthritis and the 
Collagen Vascular Diseases
Rheumatoid arthritis
Rheumatoid arthritis may be associated with inflamma-
tory changes in any or all cardiac structures, although 
pericarditis is the most common clinical entity. Pericar-
dial effusions are found on echocardiography in 10–50% 
of patients with rheumatoid arthritis, particularly those 
with subcutaneous nodules. Nonetheless, only a small 
fraction of these patients have symptomatic pericarditis, 
and when present, it usually follows a benign course, 
only occasionally progressing to cardiac tamponade or 
constrictive pericarditis. The pericardial fluid is gener-
ally exudative, with decreased concentrations of comple-
ment and glucose and elevated cholesterol. Coronary 
arteritis with intimal inflammation and edema is present 
in ∼20% of cases but only rarely results in angina pectoris 
or myocardial infarction. Inflammation and granuloma 
formation may affect the cardiac valves, most often 
the mitral and aortic valves, and may cause clinically 
significant regurgitation owing to valve deformity. 
Myocarditis is uncommon and rarely results in cardiac 
dysfunction.
Treatment is directed at the underlying rheumatoid 
arthritis and may include glucocorticoids. Urgent peri-
cardiocentesis should be performed in patients with 
tamponade, but pericardiectomy usually is required in 
cases of pericardial constriction.
Seronegative arthropathies
The seronegative arthropathies, including ankylosing 
spondylitis, reactive arthritis, psoriatic arthritis, and the 
arthritides associated with ulcerative colitis and regional 
 
CHAPTER 24
Cardiac Manifestations of Systemic Disease 
293
enteritis, are all strongly associated with the HLA-B27 
histocompatibility antigen and may be accompanied by 
a pancarditis and proximal aortitis. The aortic inflamma-
tion usually is limited to the aortic root but may extend 
to involve the aortic valve, mitral valve, and ventricular 
myocardium, resulting in aortic and mitral regurgitation, 
conduction abnormalities, and ventricular dysfunction. 
One-tenth of these patients have significant aortic insuf-
ficiency, and one-third have conduction disturbances; 
both are more common in patients with peripheral joint 
involvement and long-standing disease. Treatment with 
aortic valve replacement and permanent pacemaker 
implantation may be required. Occasionally, aortic regur-
gitation precedes the onset of arthritis, and therefore, the 
diagnosis of a seronegative arthritis should be considered in 
young males with isolated aortic regurgitation.
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
A significant percentage of patients with SLE have car-
diac involvement. Pericarditis is common, occurring 
in about two-thirds of patients, and generally follows a 
benign course, although rarely tamponade or constric-
tion may result. The characteristic endocardial lesions of 
SLE are verrucous valvular abnormalities known as Libman-
Sacks endocarditis. They most often are located on the 
left-sided cardiac valves, particularly on the ventricular 
surface of the posterior mitral leaflet, and are made up 
almost entirely of fibrin. These lesions may embolize 
or become infected but rarely cause hemodynamically 
important valvular regurgitation. Myocarditis gen-
erally parallels the activity of the disease and, although 
common histologically, seldom results in clinical heart 
failure unless associated with hypertension. Although 
arteritis of epicardial coronary arteries may occur, it 
rarely results in myocardial ischemia. There is, however, 
an increased incidence of coronary atherosclerosis that 
probably is related more to associated risk factors and 
glucocorticoid use than to SLE itself. Patients with 
the antiphospholipid antibody syndrome may have 
a higher incidence of cardiovascular abnormalities, 
including valvular regurgitation, venous and arterial 
thrombosis, premature stroke, myocardial infarction, 
pulmonary hypertension, and cardiomyopathy.
 Adolf W. Karchmer 
294
 The prototypic lesion of infective endocarditis, the 
 vegetation  ( Fig. 25-1 ) , is a mass of platelets, ﬁ brin, 
microcolonies of microorganisms, and scant inﬂ am-
matory cells. Infection most commonly involves heart 
valves (either native or prosthetic) but may also occur 
on the low-pressure side of a ventricular septal defect, 
on the mural endocardium where it is damaged by 
aberrant jets of blood or foreign bodies, or on intracar-
diac devices themselves. The analogous process involv-
ing arteriovenous shunts, arterioarterial shunts (patent 
ductus arteriosus), or a coarctation of the aorta is called 
infective endarteritis . 
 Endocarditis may be classiﬁ ed according to the tem-
poral evolution of disease, the site of infection, the 
cause of infection, or a predisposing risk factor such as 
injection drug use. While each classiﬁ cation criterion 
provides therapeutic and prognostic insight, none is 
sufﬁ cient alone.  Acute endocarditis is a hectically febrile 
illness that rapidly damages cardiac structures, hema-
togenously seeds extracardiac sites, and, if untreated, 
progresses to death within weeks.  Subacute endocarditis
follows an indolent course; causes structural cardiac 
damage only slowly, if at all; rarely metastasizes; and 
is gradually progressive unless complicated by a major 
embolic event or ruptured mycotic aneurysm. 
 In developed countries, the incidence of endocar-
ditis ranges from 2.6 to 7 cases per 100,000 popu-
lation per year and has remained relatively stable 
during recent decades. While congenital heart diseases 
remain a constant predisposition, predisposing conditions 
in developed countries have shifted from chronic rheumatic 
heart disease (which remains a common predisposition in 
developing countries) to illicit IV drug use, degenerative 
valve disease, and intracardiac devices. The incidence of 
endocarditis is notably increased among the elderly. In 
developed countries, 30–35% of cases of native valve 
endocarditis (NVE) are associated with health care, and 
16–30% of all cases of endocarditis involve prosthetic 
valves. The risk of prosthesis infection is greatest during 
the ﬁ rst 6–12 months after valve replacement; gradually 
declines to a low, stable rate thereafter; and is similar for 
mechanical and bioprosthetic devices. 
 ETIOLOGY 
 Although many species of bacteria and fungi cause spo-
radic episodes of endocarditis, a few bacterial species 
cause the majority of cases  ( Table 25-1 ) . Because of 
their different portals of entry, the pathogens involved 
vary somewhat with the clinical types of endocardi-
tis. The oral cavity, skin, and upper respiratory tract 
are the respective primary portals for the viridans 
streptococci, staphylococci, and HACEK organisms 
( Haemophilus ,  Actinobacillus ,  Cardiobacterium ,  Eikenella , 
and  Kingella ;  Haemophilus aphrophilus and  Actinobacillus 
actinomycetemcomitans have been reclassiﬁ ed into the 
genus  Aggregatibacter ).  Streptococcus gallolyticus (formerly 
S. bovis ) originates from the gastrointestinal tract, where 
it is associated with polyps and colonic tumors, and 
 INFECTIVE ENDOCARDITIS 
 CHAPTER 25 
 FIGURE 25-1  
 Vegetations ( arrows ) due to viridans streptococcal endo-
carditis involving the mitral valve. 
 
CHAPTER 25
Infective Endocarditis
295
enterococci enter the bloodstream from the genito-
urinary tract. Health care–associated NVE, commonly 
caused by Staphylococcus aureus, coagulase-negative 
staphylococci (CoNS), and enterococci, has a noso-
comial onset (55%) or a community onset (45%) in 
patients who have had extensive contact with the health 
care system over the preceding 90 days. Endocarditis 
complicates 6–25% of episodes of catheter-associated 
S. aureus bacteremia; the higher rates are detected by 
careful transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) screen-
ing (see “Echocardiography,” later).
Prosthetic valve endocarditis (PVE) arising within 
2 months of valve surgery is generally nosocomial, the 
result of intraoperative contamination of the prosthesis 
or a bacteremic postoperative complication. This noso-
comial origin is reflected in the primary microbial causes: 
S. aureus, CoNS, facultative gram-negative bacilli, diph-
theroids, and fungi. The portals of entry and organisms 
causing cases beginning >12 months after surgery are 
similar to those in community-acquired NVE. PVE due 
to CoNS that presents 2–12 months after surgery often 
represents delayed-onset nosocomial infection. Regard-
less of the time of onset after surgery, at least 68–85% of 
CoNS strains that cause PVE are resistant to methicillin.
Transvenous pacemaker– or implanted defibrillator–
associated endocarditis is usually nosocomial. The major-
ity of episodes occur within weeks of implantation or 
generator change and are caused by S. aureus or CoNS, 
both of which are commonly resistant to methicillin.
Endocarditis occurring among injection drug users, 
especially that involving the tricuspid valve, is commonly 
caused by S. aureus, many strains of which are resistant to 
methicillin. Left-sided valve infections in addicts have a 
more varied etiology. In addition to the usual causes of 
endocarditis, these cases are caused by Pseudomonas aeru-
ginosa and Candida species and sporadically by unusual 
organisms such as Bacillus, Lactobacillus, and Corynebacte-
rium species. Polymicrobial endocarditis occurs among 
injection drug users. HIV infection in drug users does 
not significantly influence the causes of endocarditis.
From 5% to 15% of patients with endocarditis have 
negative blood cultures; in one-third to one-half of 
Table 25-1
Organisms Causing Major Clinical Forms of Endocarditis
Percentage of Cases
Native Valve Endocarditis
Prosthetic Valve 
Endocarditis at 
Indicated Time of Onset 
(Months) after Valve 
Surgery
Endocarditis in Injection Drug 
Users
Organism
Community-
Acquired  
(n = 1718)
Health Care–
Associated  
(n = 788)
<2 
(n = 144)
2–12  
(n = 31)
>12 
(n = 194)
Right-
Sided  
(n = 346)
Left-
Sided  
(n = 204)
Total  
(n = 675)a
Streptococcib
40
  9
   1
  9
31
  5
15
12
Pneumococci
  2
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
Enterococci
  9
13
  8
12
11
  2
24
  9
Staphylococcus aureus
28
53c
22
12
18
77
23
57
Coagulase-negative  
staphylococci
  5
12
33
32
11
—
—
—
Fastidious gram-
negative coccobacilli 
(HACEK group)d
  3
—
—
—
  6
—
—
—
Gram-negative bacilli
   1
  2
13
  3
  6
  5
13
  7
Candida spp.
<1
  2
  8
12
   1
—
12
  4
Polymicrobial/ 
miscellaneous
  3
  4
  3
  6
  5
  8
10
  7
Diphtheroids
—
<1
  6
—
  3
—
—
  0.1
Culture-negative
  9
  5
  5
  6
  8
  3
  3
  3
aThe total number of cases is larger than the sum of right- and left-sided cases because the location of infection was not specified in some cases.
bIncludes viridans streptococci; Streptococcus gallolyticus; other nongroup A, groupable streptococci; and Abiotrophia spp. (nutritionally variant, 
pyridoxal-requiring streptococci).
cMethicillin resistance is common among these S. aureus strains.
dIncludes Haemophilus spp., Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans, Cardiobacterium hominis, Eikenella spp., and Kingella spp.
Note: Data are compiled from multiple studies.
SECTION IV
Disorders of the Heart
296
these cases, cultures are negative because of prior anti-
biotic exposure. The remainder of these patients are 
infected by fastidious organisms, such as nutrition-
ally variant organisms (now designated Granulicatella 
and Abiotrophia species), HACEK organisms, Coxiella 
burnetii, and Bartonella species. Some fastidious organ-
isms occur in characteristic geographic settings (e.g., C. 
burnetii and Bartonella species in Europe, Brucella species 
in the Middle East). Tropheryma whipplei causes an indo-
lent, culture-negative, afebrile form of endocarditis.
Pathogenesis
The endothelium, unless damaged, is resistant to infec-
tion by most bacteria and to thrombus formation. Endo-
thelial injury (e.g., at the site of impact of high-velocity 
blood jets or on the low-pressure side of a cardiac struc-
tural lesion) allows either direct infection by virulent 
organisms or the development of an uninfected platelet-
fibrin thrombus—a condition called nonbacterial thrombotic 
endocarditis (NBTE). The thrombus subsequently serves 
as a site of bacterial attachment during transient bacte-
remia. The cardiac conditions most commonly resulting 
in NBTE are mitral regurgitation, aortic stenosis, aortic 
regurgitation, ventricular septal defects, and complex 
congenital heart disease. NBTE also arises as a result of 
a hypercoagulable state; this phenomenon gives rise to 
the clinical entity of marantic endocarditis (uninfected veg-
etations seen in patients with malignancy and chronic 
diseases) and to bland vegetations complicating systemic 
lupus erythematosus and the antiphospholipid antibody 
syndrome.
Organisms that cause endocarditis generally enter the 
bloodstream from mucosal surfaces, the skin, or sites of 
focal infection. Except for more virulent bacteria (e.g., 
S. aureus) that can adhere directly to intact endothelium 
or exposed subendothelial tissue, microorganisms in the 
blood adhere at sites of NBTE. If resistant to the bacte-
ricidal activity of serum and the microbicidal peptides 
released locally by platelets, the organisms proliferate and 
induce platelet deposition and a procoagulant state at the 
site by eliciting tissue factor from the endothelium or, 
in the case of S. aureus, from monocytes as well. Fibrin 
deposition combines with platelet aggregation and micro-
organism proliferation to generate an infected vegetation. 
The organisms that commonly cause endocarditis have 
surface adhesin molecules, collectively called microbial 
surface components recognizing adhesin matrix molecules 
(MSCRAMMs), that mediate adherence to NBTE sites 
or injured endothelium. Fibronectin-binding proteins 
present on many gram-positive bacteria, clumping fac-
tor (a fibrinogen- and fibrin-binding surface protein) on 
S. aureus, and glucans or FimA (a member of the family of 
oral mucosal adhesins) on streptococci facilitate adherence. 
Fibronectin-binding proteins are required for S. aureus 
invasion of intact endothelium; thus these surface pro-
teins may facilitate infection of previously normal valves. 
In the absence of host defenses, organisms enmeshed in 
the growing platelet-fibrin vegetation proliferate to form 
dense microcolonies. Organisms deep in vegetations are 
metabolically inactive (nongrowing) and relatively resis-
tant to killing by antimicrobial agents. Proliferating surface 
organisms are shed into the bloodstream continuously.
The pathophysiologic consequences and clinical 
manifestations of endocarditis—other than constitu-
tional symptoms, which probably result from cytokine 
production—arise from damage to intracardiac struc-
tures; embolization of vegetation fragments, leading to 
infection or infarction of remote tissues; hematogenous 
infection of sites during bacteremia; and tissue injury 
due to the deposition of circulating immune complexes 
or immune responses to deposited bacterial antigens.
Clinical Manifestations
The clinical syndrome of infective endocarditis is highly 
variable and spans a continuum between acute and sub-
acute presentations. NVE (whether acquired in the 
community or in association with health care), PVE, 
and endocarditis due to injection drug use share clinical 
and laboratory manifestations (Table 25-2). The caus-
ative microorganism is primarily responsible for the tem-
poral course of endocarditis. β-Hemolytic streptococci, 
S. aureus, and pneumococci typically result in an acute 
course, although S. aureus occasionally causes subacute 
disease. Endocarditis caused by Staphylococcus lugdunen-
sis (a coagulase-negative species) or by enterococci may 
present acutely. Subacute endocarditis is typically caused 
by viridans streptococci, enterococci, CoNS, and the 
HACEK group. Endocarditis caused by Bartonella spe-
cies, T. whipplei, or C. burnetii is exceptionally indolent.
The clinical features of endocarditis are nonspecific. 
However, these symptoms in a febrile patient with val-
vular abnormalities or a behavior pattern that predisposes 
to endocarditis (e.g., injection drug use) suggest the diag-
nosis, as do bacteremia with organisms that frequently 
cause endocarditis, otherwise-unexplained arterial emboli, 
and progressive cardiac valvular incompetence. In patients 
with subacute presentations, fever is typically low grade 
and rarely exceeds 39.4°C (103°F); in contrast, tem-
peratures of 39.4°–40°C (103°–104°F) are often noted 
in acute endocarditis. Fever may be blunted or absent in 
patients who are elderly or severely debilitated or who 
have marked cardiac or renal failure.
Cardiac manifestations
Although heart murmurs are usually indicative of the 
predisposing cardiac pathology rather than of endocar-
ditis, valvular damage and ruptured chordae may result 
in new regurgitant murmurs. In acute endocarditis 
 
CHAPTER 25
Infective Endocarditis
297
Table 25-2
Clinical and Laboratory Features of 
Infective Endocarditis
Feature
Frequency, %
Fever
80–90
Chills and sweats
40–75
Anorexia, weight loss, malaise
25–50
Myalgias, arthralgias
15–30
Back pain
7–15
Heart murmur
80–85
New/worsened regurgitant murmur
20–50
Arterial emboli
20–50
Splenomegaly
15–50
Clubbing
10–20
Neurologic manifestations
20–40
Peripheral manifestations (Osler’s nodes, 
subungual hemorrhages,  
Janeway lesions, Roth’s spots)
2–15
Petechiae
10–40
Laboratory manifestations
  Anemia
70–90
  Leukocytosis
20–30
  Microscopic hematuria
30–50
  Elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate
60–90
  Elevated C-reactive protein level
>90
  Rheumatoid factor
50
  Circulating immune complexes
65–100
  Decreased serum complement
5–40
involving a normal valve, murmurs may be absent ini-
tially but ultimately are detected in 85% of cases. Con-
gestive heart failure (CHF) develops in 30–40% of 
patients; it is usually a consequence of valvular dysfunc-
tion but occasionally is due to endocarditis-associated 
myocarditis or an intracardiac fistula. Heart failure due 
to aortic valve dysfunction progresses more rapidly than 
does that due to mitral valve dysfunction. Extension 
of infection beyond valve leaflets into adjacent annu-
lar or myocardial tissue results in perivalvular abscesses, 
which in turn may cause intracardiac fistulae with new 
murmurs. Abscesses may burrow from the aortic valve 
annulus through the epicardium, causing pericardi-
tis, or into the upper ventricular septum, where they 
may interrupt the conduction system, leading to vary-
ing degrees of heart block. Perivalvular abscesses arising 
from the mitral valve rarely interrupt conduction path-
ways near the atrioventricular node or in the proximal 
bundle of His. Emboli to a coronary artery occur in 2% 
of patients and may result in myocardial infarction.
Noncardiac manifestations
The classic nonsuppurative peripheral manifestations 
of subacute endocarditis are related to the duration of 
infection and, with early diagnosis and treatment, have 
become infrequent. In contrast, septic embolization mim-
icking some of these lesions (subungual hemorrhage, 
Osler’s nodes) is common in patients with acute S. aureus 
endocarditis (Fig. 25-2). Musculoskeletal pain usually 
remits promptly with treatment but must be distinguished 
from focal metastatic infections (e.g., spondylodiscitis), 
which may complicate 10–15% of cases. Hematogenously 
seeded focal infection is most often clinically evident in 
the skin, spleen, kidneys, skeletal system, and menin-
ges. Arterial emboli are clinically apparent in up to 50% 
of patients. Endocarditis caused by S. aureus, vegetations 
>10 mm in diameter (as measured by echocardiography), 
and infection involving the mitral valve are indepen-
dently associated with an increased risk of embolization. 
Emboli occurring late, during, or after effective therapy 
do not in themselves constitute evidence of failed anti-
microbial treatment. Cerebrovascular emboli presenting 
as strokes or occasionally as encephalopathy complicate 
15–35% of cases of endocarditis. One-half of these events 
precede the diagnosis of endocarditis. The frequency of 
stroke is 8 per 1000 patient-days during the week prior to 
diagnosis; the figure falls to 4.8 and 1.7 per 1000 patient-
days during the first and second weeks of effective anti-
microbial therapy, respectively. This decline exceeds 
that which can be attributed to change in vegetation 
size. Only 3% of strokes occur after 1 week of effective 
therapy. Other neurologic complications include asep-
tic or purulent meningitis, intracranial hemorrhage due 
to hemorrhagic infarcts or ruptured mycotic aneurysms, 
and seizures. (Mycotic aneurysms are focal dilations of arter-
ies occurring at points in the artery wall that have been 
Figure 25-2 
Septic emboli with hemorrhage and infarction due to acute 
Staphylococcus aureus endocarditis. (Used with permission 
of L. Baden.)
SECTION IV
Disorders of the Heart
298
Table 25-3
The Duke Criteria for the Clinical Diagnosis 
of Infective Endocarditisa
Major Criteria
1. Positive blood culture
Typical microorganism for infective endocarditis from 
two separate blood cultures
Viridans streptococci, Streptococcus gallolyticus, 
HACEK group, Staphylococcus aureus, or
Community-acquired enterococci in the absence of 
a primary focus, or
Persistently positive blood culture, defined as 
recovery of a microorganism consistent with infective 
endocarditis from:
Blood cultures drawn >12 h apart; or
All of 3 or a majority of ≥4 separate blood cultures, 
with first and last drawn at least 1 h apart
Single positive blood culture for Coxiella burnetii or 
phase I IgG antibody titer of >1:800
2. Evidence of endocardial involvement
Positive echocardiogramb
Oscillating intracardiac mass on valve or supporting 
structures or in the path of regurgitant jets or 
in implanted material, in the absence of an 
alternative anatomic explanation, or
Abscess, or
New partial dehiscence of prosthetic valve, or
New valvular regurgitation (increase or change in  
preexisting murmur not sufficient)
Minor Criteria
1. Predisposition: predisposing heart condition or injection 
drug use
2. Fever ≥38.0°C (≥100.4°F)
3. Vascular phenomena: major arterial emboli, septic pul-
monary infarcts, mycotic aneurysm, intracranial hemor-
rhage, conjunctival hemorrhages, Janeway lesions
4. Immunologic phenomena: glomerulonephritis, Osler’s 
nodes, Roth’s spots, rheumatoid factor
5. Microbiologic evidence: positive blood culture but not 
meeting major criterion as noted previouslyc or serologic 
evidence of active infection with organism consistent 
with infective endocarditis
aDefinite endocarditis is defined by documentation of two major cri-
teria, of one major criterion and three minor criteria, or of five minor 
criteria. See text for further details.
bTransesophageal echocardiography is recommended for assessing 
possible prosthetic valve endocarditis or complicated endocarditis.
cExcluding single positive cultures for coagulase-negative staphy-
lococci and diphtheroids, which are common culture contaminants, 
and organisms that do not cause endocarditis frequently, such as 
gram-negative bacilli.
Note: HACEK, Haemophilus spp., Aggregatibacter actinomycetem-
comitans, Cardiobacterium hominis, Eikenella corrodens, Kingella spp.
Source: Adapted from JS Li et al: Clin Infect Dis 30:633, 2000, with 
permission from the University of Chicago Press.
weakened by infection in the vasa vasorum or where 
septic emboli have lodged.) Microabscesses in brain and 
meninges occur commonly in S. aureus endocarditis; sur-
gically drainable intracerebral abscesses are infrequent.
Immune complex deposition on the glomerular 
basement membrane causes diffuse hypocomplement-
emic glomerulonephritis and renal dysfunction, which 
typically improve with effective antimicrobial therapy. 
Embolic renal infarcts cause flank pain and hematuria 
but rarely cause renal dysfunction.
Manifestations of specific  
predisposing conditions
Almost 50% of endocarditis cases associated with injec-
tion drug use are limited to the tricuspid valve and pres-
ent with fever but with faint or no murmur. In 75% of 
cases, septic emboli cause cough, pleuritic chest pain, 
nodular pulmonary infiltrates, or occasionally pyopneu-
mothorax. Infection of the aortic or mitral valves on the 
left side of the heart presents with the typical clinical 
features of endocarditis.
Health care–associated endocarditis has typical mani-
festations if it is not associated with a retained intracardiac 
device or masked by the symptoms of concurrent comor-
bid illness. Transvenous pacemaker– or implanted defi-
brillator–associated endocarditis may be associated with 
obvious or cryptic generator pocket infection and results 
in fever, minimal murmur, and pulmonary symptoms 
due to septic emboli.
Late-onset PVE presents with typical clinical features. 
In cases arising within 60 days of valve surgery (early 
onset), typical symptoms may be obscured by comor-
bidity associated with recent surgery. In both early-
onset and more delayed presentations, paravalvular 
infection is common and often results in partial valve 
dehiscence, regurgitant murmurs, CHF, or disruption of 
the conduction system.
Diagnosis
The Duke criteria
The diagnosis of infective endocarditis is established 
with certainty only when vegetations are examined 
histologically and microbiologically. Nevertheless, a 
highly sensitive and specific diagnostic schema—known 
as the Duke criteria—has been developed on the basis 
of clinical, laboratory, and echocardiographic findings 
(Table 25-3). Documentation of two major criteria, 
of one major criterion and three minor criteria, or of 
five minor criteria allows a clinical diagnosis of definite 
endocarditis. The diagnosis of endocarditis is rejected 
if an alternative diagnosis is established, if symp-
toms resolve and do not recur with ≤ 4 days of antibi-
otic therapy, or if surgery or autopsy after ≤ 4 days of 
antimicrobial therapy yields no histologic evidence of 
endocarditis. Illnesses not classified as definite endocar-
ditis or rejected as such are considered cases of possible 
infective endocarditis when either one major criterion 
 
CHAPTER 25
Infective Endocarditis
299
and one minor criterion or three minor criteria are ful-
filled. Requiring the identification of clinical features of 
endocarditis for classification as possible infective endo-
carditis increases the specificity of the schema without 
significantly reducing its sensitivity.
The roles of bacteremia and echocardiographic find-
ings in the diagnosis of endocarditis are emphasized in 
the Duke criteria. The requirement for multiple posi-
tive blood cultures over time is consistent with the 
continuous low-density bacteremia characteristic of 
endocarditis. Among patients with untreated endocar-
ditis who ultimately have a positive blood culture, 95% 
of all blood cultures are positive. The diagnostic criteria 
attach significance to the species of organism isolated 
from blood cultures. To fulfill a major criterion, the 
isolation of an organism that causes both endocardi-
tis and bacteremia in the absence of endocarditis (e.g., 
S. aureus, enterococci) must take place repeatedly (i.e., 
persistent bacteremia) and in the absence of a primary 
focus of infection. Organisms that rarely cause endo­
carditis but commonly contaminate blood cultures 
(e.g., diphtheroids, CoNS) must be isolated repeatedly 
if their isolation is to serve as a major criterion.
Blood cultures
Isolation of the causative microorganism from blood 
cultures is critical for diagnosis, determination of anti-
microbial susceptibility, and planning of treatment. In 
the absence of prior antibiotic therapy, three 2-bottle 
blood culture sets, separated from one another by at 
least 1 h, should be obtained from different venipunc-
ture sites over 24 h. If the cultures remain negative 
after 48–72 h, two or three additional blood culture sets 
should be obtained, and the laboratory should be con-
sulted for advice regarding optimal culture techniques. 
Pending culture results, empirical antimicrobial therapy 
should be withheld initially from hemodynamically sta-
ble patients with suspected subacute endocarditis, espe-
cially those who have received antibiotics within the 
preceding 2 weeks; thus, if necessary, additional blood 
culture sets can be obtained without the confound-
ing effect of empirical treatment. Patients with acute 
endocarditis or with deteriorating hemodynamics who 
may require urgent surgery should be treated empiri-
cally immediately after three sets of blood cultures are 
obtained over several hours.
Non-blood-culture tests
Serologic tests can be used to implicate causally some 
organisms that are difficult to recover by blood culture: 
Brucella, Bartonella, Legionella, Chlamydophila psittaci, and 
C. burnetii. Pathogens can also be identified in vegeta-
tions by culture, microscopic examination with special 
stains (i.e., the periodic acid–Schiff stain for T. whipplei), 
or direct fluorescence antibody techniques and by the 
use of polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to recover 
unique microbial DNA or 16S rRNA that, when 
sequenced, allows identification of organisms.
Echocardiography
Echocardiography allows anatomic confirmation of 
infective endocarditis, sizing of vegetations, detection 
of intracardiac complications, and assessment of car-
diac function (Fig. 25-3). Transthoracic echocardiog-
raphy (TTE) is noninvasive and exceptionally specific; 
however, it cannot image vegetations <2 mm in diam-
eter, and in 20% of patients it is technically inadequate 
because of emphysema or body habitus. TTE detects 
vegetations in only 65% of patients with definite clinical 
endocarditis. Moreover, TTE is not adequate for evalu-
ating prosthetic valves or detecting intracardiac compli-
cations. TEE is safe and detects vegetations in >90% of 
patients with definite endocarditis; nevertheless, initial 
studies may be false-negative in 6–18% of endocarditis 
patients. When endocarditis is likely, a negative TEE 
result does not exclude the diagnosis but rather warrants 
repetition of the study in 7–10 days. TEE is the opti-
mal method for the diagnosis of PVE or the detection 
of myocardial abscess, valve perforation, or intracardiac 
fistulae.
Experts favor echocardiographic evaluation of all 
patients with a clinical diagnosis of endocarditis; how-
ever, the test should not be used to screen patients with a 
low probability of endocarditis (e.g., patients with unex-
plained fever). An American Heart Association approach 
to the use of echocardiography for evaluation of patients 
with suspected endocarditis is illustrated in Fig. 25-4.
Other studies
Many laboratory studies that are not diagnostic—i.e., 
complete blood count, creatinine determination, liver 
function tests, chest radiography, and electrocardiog-
raphy—are nevertheless important in the management 
of patients with endocarditis. The erythrocyte sedi-
mentation rate, C-reactive protein level, and circulat-
ing immune complex titer are commonly increased in 
endocarditis (Table 25-2). Cardiac catheterization is use-
ful primarily to assess coronary artery patency in older 
individuals who are to undergo surgery for endocarditis.
treatment	
Infective Endocarditis
Antimicrobial 
Therapy  It is difficult to 
eradicate bacteria from the vegetation because local 
host defenses are deficient and because the largely non-
growing, metabolically inactive bacteria are less easily 
SECTION IV
Disorders of the Heart
300
Figure 25-3 
Imaging of a mitral valve infected with Staphylococcus 
aureus by low-esophageal four-chamber-view transesopha-
geal echocardiography (TEE). A. Two-dimensional echocar-
diogram showing a large vegetation with an adjacent echo-
lucent abscess cavity. B. Color-flow Doppler image showing 
severe mitral regurgitation through both the abscess-fistula 
and the central valve orifice. A, abscess; A-F, abscess-fistula; 
L, valve leaflets; LA, left atrium; LV, left ventricle; MR, mitral 
central valve regurgitation; RV, right ventricle; veg, vegeta-
tion. (With permission of Andrew Burger, MD)
Figure 25-4 
The diagnostic use of transesophageal and transtracheal 
echocardiography (TEE and TTE, respectively). †High 
initial patient risk for endocarditis as listed in Table 25-8 or 
evidence of intracardiac complications (new regurgitant mur-
mur, new electrocardiographic conduction changes, or con-
gestive heart failure). *High-risk echocardiographic features 
include large vegetations, valve insufficiency, paravalvular 
infection, or ventricular dysfunction. Rx indicates initiation 
of antibiotic therapy. (Reproduced with permission from 
Diagnosis and Management of Infective Endocarditis and 
Its Complications. Circulation 98:2936, 1998. © 1998 American 
Heart Association.)
Initial TTE
Initial TEE
High initial patient risk†;
moderate to high clinical
suspicion or difficult imaging
candidate 
Low initial patient risk
and low clinical suspicion
High suspicion
persists
Repeat
TEE
Alternative
diagnosis
established
Follow-up TEE or TTE to
reassess vegetations,
complications, or Rx response
as clinically indicated
Low 
suspicion
persists
Increased 
suspicion during
clinical course
Rx
Rx
Rx
Rx
High-risk echo
features *
No high-risk
echo features
TEE for
detection of
complications
No TEE unless
clinical status
deteriorates
TEE
Look for
other source
Look for 
other source
+
+
+
+
–
–
–
–
–
+
IE suspected
Look for 
other source
of symptoms
 
CHAPTER 25
Infective Endocarditis
301
killed by antibiotics. To cure endocarditis, all bacteria in 
the vegetation must be killed; therefore, therapy must 
be bactericidal and prolonged. Antibiotics are gener-
ally given parenterally to achieve serum concentrations 
that, through passive diffusion, lead to effective con-
centrations in the depths of the vegetation. To select 
effective therapy requires knowledge of the suscepti-
bility of the causative microorganisms. The decision to 
initiate treatment empirically must balance the need to 
establish a microbiologic diagnosis against the potential 
progression of disease or the need for urgent surgery 
(see “Blood Cultures,” earlier). Simultaneous infection 
at other sites (such as meningitis), allergies, end-organ 
dysfunction, interactions with concomitant medica-
tions, and risks of adverse events must be considered in 
the selection of therapy.
Although given for several weeks longer, the regi-
mens recommended for the treatment of endocarditis 
involving prosthetic valves (except for staphylococ-
cal infections) are similar to those used to treat NVE  
(Table 25-4). Recommended doses and durations of 
therapy should be adhered to unless alterations are 
required by end-organ dysfunction or adverse events.
Organism-Specific Therapies
Streptococci  Optimal therapy for streptococcal 
endocarditis is based on the minimal inhibitory con-
centration (MIC) of penicillin for the causative isolate  
(Table 25-4). The 2-week penicillin/gentamicin or ceftri-
axone/gentamicin regimens should not be used to treat 
complicated NVE or PVE. The regimen recommended 
for relatively penicillin-resistant streptococci is advo-
cated for treatment of group B, C, or G streptococcal 
endocarditis. Nutritionally variant organisms (Granuli-
catella or Abiotrophia species) and Gemella morbillorum 
are treated with the regimen for moderately penicillin-
resistant streptococci, as is PVE caused by these organ-
isms or by streptococci with a penicillin MIC of >0.1 μg/
mL (Table 25-4).
Enterococci  Enterococci are resistant to oxacillin, 
nafcillin, and the cephalosporins and are only inhib-
ited—not killed—by penicillin, ampicillin, teicoplanin 
(not available in the United States), and vancomycin. To 
kill enterococci requires the synergistic interaction of 
a cell wall–active antibiotic (penicillin, ampicillin, van-
comycin, or teicoplanin) that is effective at achievable 
serum concentrations and an aminoglycoside (genta-
micin or streptomycin) to which the isolate does not 
exhibit high-level resistance. An isolate’s resistance to 
cell wall–active agents or its ability to replicate in the 
presence of gentamicin at ≥500 μg/mL or streptomycin 
at 1000–2000 μg/mL—a phenomenon called high-level 
aminoglycoside resistance—indicates that the ineffective 
antimicrobial agent cannot participate in the interaction 
to produce killing. High-level resistance to gentami-
cin predicts that tobramycin, netilmicin, amikacin, and 
kanamycin also will be ineffective. In fact, even when 
enterococci are not highly resistant to gentamicin, it is 
difficult to predict the ability of these other aminoglyco-
sides to participate in synergistic killing; consequently, 
they should not in general be used to treat enterococcal 
endocarditis. High concentrations of ampicillin plus cef-
triaxone or cefotaxime, by expanded binding of penicil-
lin-binding proteins, kill E. faecalis in vitro and in animal 
models of endocarditis.
Enterococci causing endocarditis must be tested for 
high-level resistance to streptomycin and gentamicin, 
β-lactamase production, and susceptibility to penicillin 
and ampicillin (MIC, <8 μg/mL) and to vancomycin (MIC, 
≤4 μg/mL). If the isolate produces β-lactamase, ampi-
cillin/sulbactam or vancomycin can be used as the cell 
wall–active component; if the penicillin/ampicillin MIC 
is ≥8 μg/mL, vancomycin can be considered; and if the 
vancomycin MIC is ≥8 μg/mL, penicillin or ampicillin can 
be considered. In the absence of high-level resistance, 
gentamicin or streptomycin should be used as the 
aminoglycoside (Table 25-4). If there is high-level resis-
tance to both these drugs, no aminoglycoside should 
be given; instead, an 8- to 12-week course of a single 
cell wall–active agent—or, for E. faecalis, high doses of 
ampicillin combined with ceftriaxone or cefotaxime—is 
suggested. If this alternative therapy fails or the isolate 
is resistant to all of the commonly used agents, surgical 
treatment is advised. The role of newer agents poten-
tially active against multidrug-resistant enterococci 
(quinupristin/dalfopristin [E. faecium only], linezolid, 
and daptomycin) in the treatment of endocarditis has 
not been established. Although the dose of gentamicin 
used to achieve bactericidal synergy in treating entero-
coccal endocarditis is smaller than that used in standard 
therapy, nephrotoxicity is not uncommon during treat-
ment for 4–6 weeks. Regimens in which the aminoglyco-
side component is discontinued at 2–3 weeks because 
of toxicity have been curative. Thus, discontinuation of 
the aminoglycoside is recommended when nephrotox-
icity develops in patients who have responded satisfac-
torily to therapy. Alternatively, the ampicillin-ceftriaxone 
regimen can be used to treat E. faecalis endocarditis if 
nephrotoxicity develops or is exceptionally threatening.
Staphylococci  The regimens used to treat staphy-
lococcal endocarditis (Table 25-4) are based not on 
coagulase production but rather on the presence or 
absence of a prosthetic valve or foreign device, the 
native valve(s) involved, and the susceptibility of the iso-
late to penicillin, methicillin, and vancomycin. All staph-
ylococci are considered penicillin resistant until shown 
SECTION IV
Disorders of the Heart
302
Table 25-4
Antibiotic Treatment for Infective Endocarditis Caused by Common Organismsa
Organism
Drug (Dose, Duration)
Comments
Streptococci
Penicillin-susceptibleb 
streptococci, S. gallolyticus
• Penicillin G (2–3 mU IV q4h for 4 weeks)
• Ceftriaxone (2 g/d IV as a single dose for  
4 weeks)
• Vancomycinc (15 mg/kg IV q12h for 
4 weeks)
• Penicillin G (2–3 mU IV q4h) or ceftriaxone  
(2 g IV qd) for 2 weeks plus Gentamicind 
(3 mg/kg qd IV or IM, as a single dosee or 
divided into equal doses q8h for 2 weeks)
—
Can use ceftriaxone in patients with non-
immediate penicillin allergy
Use vancomycin in patients with severe 
or immediate β-lactam allergy
Avoid 2-week regimen when risk of amino-
glycoside toxicity is increased and in pros-
thetic valve or complicated endocarditis
Relatively penicillin-resistantf 
streptococci
• Penicillin G (4 mU IV q4h) or ceftriaxone  
(2 g IV qd) for 4 weeks plus Gentamicind 
(3 mg/kg qd IV or IM, as a single dosee or 
divided into equal doses q8h for 2 weeks) 
• Vancomycinc as noted above for 4 weeks
Penicillin alone at this dose for 6 weeks 
or with gentamicin during initial 2 weeks 
preferred for prosthetic valve endocardi-
tis caused by streptococci with penicillin 
MICs of ≤0.1 μg/mL
—
Moderately penicillin-resistantg 
streptococci, nutritionally  
variant organisms, or  
Gemella morbillorum
• Penicillin G (4–5 mU IV q4h) or ceftriaxone  
(2 g IV qd) for 6 weeks plus
Gentamicind (3 mg/kg qd IV or IM as a single 
dosee or divided into equal doses q8h for 6 
weeks)
• Vancomycinc as noted above for 4 weeks
Preferred for prosthetic valve endocarditis 
caused by streptococci with penicillin 
MICs of >0.1 μg/mL
 
—
Enterococcih
• Penicillin G (4–5 mU IV q4h) plus
Gentamicind (1 mg/kg IV q8h), both for 
4–6 weeks
• Ampicillin (2 g IV q4h) plus 
Gentamicind (1 mg/kg IV q8h), both 
for 4–6 weeks
• Vancomycinc (15 mg/kg IV q12h) plus
Gentamicind (1 mg/kg IV q8h), both for 
4–6 weeks
Can use streptomycin (7.5 mg/kg q12h) 
in lieu of gentamicin if there is not high-
level resistance to streptomycin
— 
Use vancomycin plus gentamicin for 
penicillin-allergic patients, or desensitize 
to penicillin
Staphylococci
Methicillin-susceptible, infect-
ing native valves (no foreign 
devices)
• Nafcillin or oxacillin (2 g IV q4h for  
4–6 weeks)
• Cefazolin (2 g IV q8h for 4–6 weeks)
• Vancomycinc (15 mg/kg IV q12h for 
4–6 weeks)
Can use penicillin (4 mU q4h) if isolate is 
penicillin susceptible (does not produce 
β-lactamase)
Can use cefazolin regimen for patients 
with nonimmediate penicillin allergy
Use vancomycin for patients with immedi-
ate (urticarial) or severe penicillin allergy
Methicillin-resistant, infect-
ing native valves (no foreign 
devices)
• Vancomycinc (15 mg/kg IV q8–12h for 
4–6 weeks)
No role for routine use of rifampin
Methicillin-susceptible, infect-
ing prosthetic valves
• Nafcillin or oxacillin (2 g IV q4h for  
6–8 weeks) plus
Gentamicind (1 mg/kg IM or IV q8h for 
2 weeks) plus Rifampini (300 mg PO q8h for 
6–8 weeks)
Use gentamicin during initial 2 weeks; 
determine susceptibility to gentamicin 
before initiating rifampin (see text); if 
patient is highly allergic to penicillin, use 
regimen for methicillin-resistant staphy-
lococci; if β-lactam allergy is of the 
minor, nonimmediate type, can substi-
tute cefazolin for oxacillin/nafcillin
Methicillin-resistant, infecting 
prosthetic valves
• Vancomycinc (15 mg/kg IV q12h for 
6–8 weeks) plus
Gentamicind (1 mg/kg IM or IV q8h for 2 weeks) 
plus Rifampini (300 mg PO q8h for 6–8 weeks)
Use gentamicin during initial 2 weeks; 
determine gentamicin susceptibility 
before initiating rifampin (see text)
(continued )
 
CHAPTER 25
Infective Endocarditis
303
not to produce penicillinase. Similarly, methicillin resis-
tance has become so prevalent among staphylococci 
that therapy should be initiated with a regimen for 
methicillin-resistant 
organisms 
and 
subsequently 
revised if the strain proves to be susceptible to methi-
cillin. The addition of 3–5 days of gentamicin (if the iso-
late is susceptible) to a β-lactam antibiotic to enhance 
therapy for native mitral or aortic valve endocarditis 
has been optional. While the addition of gentamicin 
minimally hastens eradication of bacteremia, it does not 
improve survival rates, and even abbreviated gentami-
cin therapy may be associated with nephrotoxicity and 
thus is not recommended. Gentamicin generally is not 
added to the vancomycin regimen in this setting.
For treatment of endocarditis caused by methi-
cillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA), vancomycin dosing 
to achieve trough concentrations of 15–20 μg/mL is 
recommended, with the recognition that this regi-
men may be associated with nephrotoxicity. Although 
resistance to vancomycin among staphylococci is rare, 
reduced vancomycin susceptibility among MRSA strains 
is increasingly encountered. Isolates with a vancomy-
cin MIC of 4–16 μg/mL have intermediate susceptibil-
ity and are referred to as vancomycin-intermediate  
S. aureus (VISA). Isolates with an MIC of 2 μg/mL may 
harbor subpopulations with higher MICs. These isolates, 
called hetero-resistant VISA (hVISA), are not detect-
able by routine susceptibility testing. Because of the 
pharmacokinetics/pharmacodynamics of vancomycin, 
killing of MRSA with a vancomycin MIC of 2 μg/mL is 
unpredictable even with aggressive vancomycin dos-
ing. Although not approved by the U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA), daptomycin (6 mg/kg [or, as some 
experts prefer, 8–10 mg/kg] IV once daily) has been rec-
ommended as an alternative to vancomycin, particularly 
for endocarditis caused by VISA, hVISA, and isolates with 
a vancomycin MIC of 2 μg/mL. These isolates should 
be tested to document daptomycin susceptibility. 
Treatment of endocarditis in which bacteremia persists 
despite this therapy is beyond the scope of this chap-
ter and requires consultation with an infectious disease 
specialist. The efficacy of linezolid for left-sided MRSA 
endocarditis has not been established.
Methicillin-susceptible S. aureus endocarditis that 
is uncomplicated and limited to the tricuspid or pul-
monic valve—a condition occurring almost exclusively 
in injection drug users—can often be treated with a 
2-week course that combines oxacillin or nafcillin (but 
not vancomycin) with gentamicin. Patients with pro-
longed fever (≥5 days) during therapy or multiple sep-
tic pulmonary emboli should receive standard therapy. 
Right-sided endocarditis caused by MRSA is treated for 
4 weeks with a standard vancomycin regimen or with 
daptomycin (6 mg/kg as a single daily dose).
Staphylococcal PVE is treated for 6–8 weeks with a 
multidrug regimen. Rifampin is an essential component 
because it kills staphylococci that are adherent to for-
eign material in a biofilm. Two other agents (selected 
on the basis of susceptibility testing) are combined with 
rifampin to prevent in vivo emergence of resistance. 
Table 25-4
Antibiotic Treatment for Infective Endocarditis Caused by Common Organismsa (continued)
Organism
Drug (Dose, Duration)
Comments
HACEK Organisms
• Ceftriaxone (2 g/d IV as a single dose for 4 
weeks)
• Ampicillin/sulbactam (3 g IV q6h for 4 weeks)
Can use another third-generation cepha-
losporin at comparable dosage
—
aDoses are for adults with normal renal function. Doses of gentamicin, streptomycin, and vancomycin must be adjusted for reduced renal func-
tion. Ideal body weight is used to calculate doses of gentamicin and streptomycin per kilogram (men = 50 kg + 2.3 kg per inch over 5 feet; 
women = 45.5 kg + 2.3 kg per inch over 5 feet).
bMIC, ≤0.1 μg/mL.
cVancomycin dose is based on actual body weight. Adjust for trough level of 10–15 μg/mL for streptococcal and enterococcal infections and 
15–20 μg/mL for staphylococcal infections.
dAminoglycosides should not be administered as single daily doses for enterococcal endocarditis and should be introduced as part of the 
initial treatment. Target peak and trough serum concentrations of divided-dose gentamicin 1 h after a 20- to 30-min infusion or IM injection 
are ∼3.5 μg/mL and ≤1 μg/mL, respectively; target peak and trough serum concentrations of streptomycin (timing as with gentamicin) are 
20–35 μg/mL and <10 μg/mL, respectively.
eNetilmicin (4 mg/kg qd, as a single dose) can be used in lieu of gentamicin.
fMIC, >0.1 μg/mL and <0.5 μg/mL.
gMIC, ≥0.5 μg/mL and <8 μg/mL.
hAntimicrobial susceptibility must be evaluated; see text.
iRifampin increases warfarin and dicumarol requirements for anticoagulation.
SECTION IV
Disorders of the Heart
304
Because many staphylococci (particularly MRSA and  
S. epidermidis) are resistant to gentamicin, susceptibility 
to gentamicin or an alternative agent should be estab-
lished before rifampin treatment is begun. If the isolate 
is resistant to gentamicin, then another aminoglycoside, 
a fluoroquinolone (chosen on the basis of susceptibility), 
or another active agent should be substituted for 
gentamicin.
Other Organisms  In the absence of meningitis, 
endocarditis caused by S. pneumoniae with a penicil-
lin MIC of ≤1 μg/mL can be treated with IV penicillin 
(4 million units every 4 h), ceftriaxone (2 g/d as a single 
dose), or cefotaxime (at a comparable dosage). Infection 
caused by pneumococcal strains with a penicillin MIC of 
≥2 μg/mL should be treated with vancomycin. Until the 
strain’s susceptibility to penicillin is established, therapy 
should consist of vancomycin plus ceftriaxone, especially 
if concurrent meningitis is suspected. P. aeruginosa endo-
carditis is treated with an antipseudomonal penicillin 
(ticarcillin or piperacillin) and high doses of tobramycin 
(8 mg/kg per day in three divided doses). Endocarditis 
caused by Enterobacteriaceae is treated with a potent 
β-lactam antibiotic plus an aminoglycoside. Coryne-
bacterial endocarditis is treated with penicillin plus an 
aminoglycoside (if the organism is susceptible to the 
aminoglycoside) or with vancomycin, which is highly 
bactericidal for most strains. Therapy for Candida endo-
carditis consists of amphotericin B plus flucytosine and 
early surgery; long-term (if not indefinite) suppression 
with an oral azole is advised. Caspofungin treatment 
of Candida endocarditis has been effective in sporadic 
cases; nevertheless, the role of echinocandins in this 
setting has not been established.
Empirical Therapy  In the design and execution of 
therapy without culture data (i.e., before culture results 
are known or when cultures are negative), clinical clues 
(e.g., site of infection, patient’s predispositions), as well 
as epidemiologic clues to etiology must be consid-
ered. Thus, empirical therapy for acute endocarditis in 
an injection drug user should cover MRSA and gram- 
negative bacilli. Treatment with vancomycin plus gen-
tamicin, initiated immediately after blood is obtained 
for cultures, covers these as well as many other poten-
tial causes. Similarly, treatment of health care–associ-
ated endocarditis must cover MRSA. In the treatment of 
culture-negative episodes, marantic endocarditis must 
be excluded and fastidious organisms sought by sero-
logic testing. In the absence of prior antibiotic therapy, it 
is unlikely that S. aureus, CoNS, or enterococcal infection 
will present with negative blood cultures; thus, in this sit-
uation, recommended empirical therapy targets not these 
organisms but rather nutritionally variant organisms, the 
HACEK group, and Bartonella species. Pending the avail-
ability of diagnostic data, blood culture–negative subacute 
NVE is treated either with ampicillin-sulbactam (12 g every 
24 h) or with ceftriaxone plus gentamicin; doxycycline (100 
mg twice daily) is added for Bartonella coverage. Vancomy-
cin, gentamicin, cefepime, and rifampin should be used if 
prosthetic valves in place for ≤1 year are involved. Empiri-
cal therapy for infected prosthetic valves in place for >1 
year is similar to that for culture-negative PVE. If negative 
cultures have been confounded by prior antibiotic admin-
istration, broader empirical therapy may be indicated, with 
particular attention to pathogens likely to be inhibited by 
the specific prior therapy.
Outpatient Antimicrobial Therapy  Fully com-
pliant patients who have sterile blood cultures, no fever, 
and no clinical or echocardiographic findings that sug-
gest an impending complication may complete therapy 
as outpatients. Careful follow-up and a stable home set-
ting are necessary, as are predictable IV access and use 
of antimicrobial agents that are stable in solution.
Monitoring Antimicrobial Therapy  The serum 
bactericidal titer—the highest dilution of the patient’s 
serum during therapy that kills 99.9% of the standard 
inoculum of the infecting organism—is no longer rec-
ommended for assessment of standard regimens. How-
ever, in the treatment of endocarditis caused by unusual 
organisms, this measurement may provide a patient-
specific assessment of in vivo antibiotic effect. Serum 
concentrations of aminoglycosides and vancomycin 
should be monitored.
Antibiotic toxicities, including allergic reactions, occur in 
25–40% of patients and commonly arise during the third 
week of therapy. Blood tests to detect renal, hepatic, and 
hematologic toxicity should be performed periodically.
Blood cultures should be repeated daily until sterile, 
rechecked if there is recrudescent fever, and performed 
again 4–6 weeks after therapy to document cure. Blood 
cultures become sterile within 2 days after the start of 
appropriate therapy when infection is caused by viri-
dans streptococci, enterococci, or HACEK organisms. In 
S. aureus endocarditis, β-lactam therapy results in sterile 
cultures in 3–5 days, whereas with MRSA endocarditis 
positive cultures may persist for 7–9 days with vanco-
mycin treatment. MRSA bacteremia persisting despite 
an adequate dosage of vancomycin may indicate infec-
tion due to a strain with reduced vancomycin suscepti-
bility and therefore may point to a need for alternative 
therapy. When fever persists for 7 days despite appro-
priate antibiotic therapy, patients should be evaluated 
for paravalvular abscess, extracardiac abscesses (spleen, 
kidney), or complications (embolic events). Recrudescent 
fever raises the question of these complications but also 
of drug reactions or complications of hospitalization. 
Vegetations become smaller with effective therapy; how-
ever, 3 months after cure, 50% are unchanged and 25% 
are slightly larger.
 
CHAPTER 25
Infective Endocarditis
305
Table 25-5
Indications for Cardiac Surgical 
Intervention in Patients With Endocarditis
Surgery required for optimal outcome
Moderate to severe congestive heart failure due to valve 
dysfunction
Partially dehisced unstable prosthetic valve
Persistent bacteremia despite optimal antimicrobial 
therapy
Lack of effective microbicidal therapy (e.g., fungal or 
Brucella endocarditis)
S. aureus prosthetic valve endocarditis with an intracar-
diac complication
Relapse of prosthetic valve endocarditis after optimal 
antimicrobial therapy
Surgery to be strongly considered for improved 
outcomea
Perivalvular extension of infection
Poorly responsive S. aureus endocarditis involving the 
aortic or mitral valve
Large (>10-mm diameter) hypermobile vegetations with 
increased risk of embolism
Persistent unexplained fever (≥10 days) in culture-negative 
native valve endocarditis
Poorly responsive or relapsed endocarditis due to highly 
antibiotic-resistant enterococci or gram-negative bacilli
aSurgery must be carefully considered; findings are often combined 
with other indications to prompt surgery.
Table 25-6
Timing of Cardiac Surgical Intervention in Patients With Endocarditis
Indication for Surgical Intervention
Timing
Strong Supporting Evidence
Conflicting Evidence, but Majority 
of Opinions Favor Surgery
Emergent (same day)
Acute aortic regurgitation plus preclosure of 
mitral valve
Sinus of Valsalva abscess ruptured into right 
heart
Rupture into pericardial sac
Urgent (within 1–2 days)
Valve obstruction by vegetation
Unstable (dehisced) prosthesis
Acute aortic or mitral regurgitation with heart 
failure (New York Heart Association class III  
or IV)
Septal perforation
Perivalvular extension of infection with/without 
new electrocardiographic conduction system 
changes
Lack of effective antibiotic therapy
Major embolus plus persisting large 
vegetation (>10 mm in diameter)
Elective (earlier usually preferred)
Progressive paravalvular prosthetic regurgitation
Valve dysfunction plus persisting infection after 
≥7–10 days of antimicrobial therapy
Fungal (mold) endocarditis
Staphylococcal PVE
Early PVE (≤2 months after valve surgery)
Fungal endocarditis (Candida spp.)
Antibiotic-resistant organisms
Note: PVE, prosthetic valve endocarditis.
Source: Adapted from L Olaison, G Pettersson: Infect Dis Clin North Am 16:453, 2002.
Surgical Treatment  Intracardiac and cen-
tral nervous system complications of endocarditis are 
important causes of morbidity and death. In some cases, 
effective treatment for these complications requires 
surgery. The indications for cardiac surgical treatment 
of endocarditis (Table 25-5) have been derived from 
observational studies and expert opinion. The strength 
of individual indications vary; thus, the risks and benefits 
as well as the timing of surgery must be individualized 
(Table 25-6). From 25% to 40% of patients with left-
sided endocarditis undergo cardiac surgery during active 
infection, with slightly higher surgery rates with PVE than 
with NVE. Clinical events resulting from intracardiac com-
plications, which are most reliably detected by TEE, jus-
tify most surgery. In the absence of randomized trials to 
evaluate a survival benefit for surgical intervention, the 
effect of surgery has been assessed in studies comparing 
populations of medically and surgically treated patients 
matched for the necessity of surgery (indication), with 
adjustments for predictors of death (comorbidity) and 
time of the surgical intervention. Although study results 
vary, surgery for currently advised indications appears 
to convey a significant survival benefit (27–55%) that 
becomes apparent only with follow-up for ≥6 months 
after the intervention. During the initial weeks after sur-
gery, mortality risk is actually increased (disease-plus 
SECTION IV
Disorders of the Heart
306
surgery-related mortality). With less demanding surgi-
cal indications, this combined mortality risk may erode 
potential long-term benefits. Benefit is greatest for NVE 
complicated by heart failure or myocardial abscess and is 
less clear for PVE; this difference may reflect sample size 
in the relevant studies.
Congestive Heart Failure  Moderate to severe 
refractory CHF caused by new or worsening valve dys-
function is the major indication for cardiac surgical 
treatment of endocarditis. At 6 months of follow-up, 
patients with left-sided endocarditis and moderate to 
severe heart failure due to valve dysfunction who are 
treated only medically have a 50% mortality rate; the 
figure is 15% among matched patients who undergo 
surgery. The survival benefit with surgery is seen in 
both NVE and PVE. Surgery can relieve functional ste-
nosis due to large vegetations or restore competence to 
damaged regurgitant valves by repair or replacement.
Perivalvular Infection  This complication, which 
is most common with aortic valve infection, occurs in 
10–15% of native valve and 45–60% of prosthetic valve 
infections. It is suggested by persistent unexplained 
fever during appropriate therapy, new electrocardio-
graphic conduction disturbances, and pericarditis. TEE 
with color Doppler is the test of choice to detect peri-
valvular abscesses (sensitivity, ≥85%). For optimal out-
come, surgery is required, especially when fever persists, 
fistulae develop, prostheses are dehisced and unstable, 
and invasive infection relapses after appropriate treat-
ment. Cardiac rhythm must be monitored since high-
grade heart block may require insertion of a pacemaker.
Uncontrolled Infection  Continued positive blood 
cultures or otherwise-unexplained persistent fevers (in 
patients with either blood culture–positive or –negative  
endocarditis) despite optimal antibiotic therapy may 
reflect uncontrolled infection and may warrant sur-
gery. Surgical treatment is also advised for endocardi-
tis caused by organisms for which experience indicates 
that effective antimicrobial therapy is lacking (e.g., 
yeasts, fungi, P. aeruginosa, other highly resistant 
gram-negative bacilli, Brucella species, and probably 
C. burnetii).
S. 
aureus 
Endocarditis  The mortality rate 
for S. aureus PVE exceeds 50% with medical treat-
ment but is reduced to 25% with surgical treatment. In 
patients with intracardiac complications associated with 
S. aureus PVE, surgical treatment reduces the mortality 
rate twentyfold. Surgical treatment should be consid-
ered for patients with S. aureus native aortic or mitral 
valve infection who have TTE-demonstrable vegetations 
and remain septic during the initial week of therapy. Iso-
lated tricuspid valve endocarditis, even with persistent 
fever, rarely requires surgery.
Prevention of Systemic Emboli  Death and 
persisting morbidity due to emboli are largely limited 
to patients suffering occlusion of cerebral or coronary 
arteries. Echocardiographic determination of vegeta-
tion size and anatomy, although predictive of patients 
at high risk of systemic emboli, does not identify those 
patients in whom the benefits of surgery to prevent 
emboli clearly exceed the risks of the surgical pro-
cedure. Net benefits from surgery to prevent emboli 
are most likely when other surgical benefits can be 
achieved simultaneously—e.g., repair of a moderately 
dysfunctional valve or debridement of a paravalvular 
abscess. Only 3.5% of patients undergo surgery solely to 
prevent systemic emboli. Valve repair avoiding insertion 
of a prosthesis makes the benefit-to-risk ratio of surgery 
to address vegetations more favorable.
Timing of Cardiac Surgery  In general, when 
indications for surgical treatment of infective endocardi-
tis are identified, surgery should not be delayed simply 
to permit additional antibiotic therapy, since this course 
of action increases the risk of death (Table 25-6). After 
14 days of recommended antibiotic therapy, excised 
valves are culture-negative in 99% and 50% of patients 
with streptococcal and S. aureus endocarditis, respec-
tively. Recrudescent endocarditis on a new implanted 
prosthetic valve follows surgery for active NVE and PVE 
in 2% and 6–15% of patients, respectively. These fre-
quencies do not justify the risk of adverse outcome with 
delayed surgery, particularly in patients with severe 
heart failure, valve dysfunction, and staphylococcal 
infections. Delay is justified only when infection is con-
trolled and CHF is resolved with medical therapy.
Among patients who have experienced a neurologic 
complication of endocarditis, further neurologic dete-
rioration can occur as a consequence of cardiac surgery. 
The risk of neurologic deterioration is related to the type 
of neurologic complication and the interval between 
the complication and surgery. Whenever feasible, car-
diac surgery should be delayed for 2–3 weeks after a 
nonhemorrhagic embolic infarction and for 4 weeks 
after a cerebral hemorrhage. A ruptured mycotic aneu-
rysm should be treated before cardiac surgery.
Antibiotic Therapy after Cardiac Surgery  ­
Bacteria visible in Gram-stained preparations of excised 
valves do not necessarily indicate a failure of antibi-
otic therapy. Organisms have been detected on Gram’s 
stain—or their DNA has been detected by PCR—in 
excised valves from 45% of patients who have success-
fully completed the recommended therapy for endo-
carditis. In only 7% of these patients are the organisms, 
most of which are unusual and antibiotic resistant, cul-
tured from the valve. Despite the detection of organ-
isms or their DNA, relapse of endocarditis after surgery 
 
CHAPTER 25
Infective Endocarditis
307
Table 25-7
Antibiotic Regimens for Prophylaxis of 
Endocarditis in Adults With High-Risk 
Cardiac Lesionsa,b
A. Standard oral regimen
  1. Amoxicillin: 2 g PO 1 h before procedure
B. Inability to take oral medication
  1. Ampicillin: 2 g IV or IM within 1 h before procedure
C. Penicillin allergy
  1. Clarithromycin or azithromycin: 500 mg PO 1 h 
before procedure
  2. Cephalexinc: 2 g PO 1 h before procedure
  3. Clindamycin: 600 mg PO 1 h before procedure
D. Penicillin allergy, inability to take oral medication
  1. Cefazolinc or ceftriaxonec: 1 g IV or IM 30 min before 
procedure
  2. Clindamycin: 600 mg IV or IM 1 h before procedure
aDosing for children: for amoxicillin, ampicillin, cephalexin, or 
cefadroxil, use 50 mg/kg PO; cefazolin, 25 mg/kg IV; clindamycin, 
20 mg/kg PO, 25 mg/kg IV; clarithromycin, 15 mg/kg PO; and 
vancomycin, 20 mg/kg IV.
bFor high-risk lesions, see Table 25-8. Prophylaxis is not advised for 
other lesions.
cDo not use cephalosporins in patients with immediate hypersensi-
tivity (urticaria, angioedema, anaphylaxis) to penicillin.
Source: W Wilson et al: Circulation 116:1736, 2007.
is uncommon. Thus, when valve cultures are negative in 
uncomplicated NVE caused by susceptible organisms, 
the duration of preoperative plus postoperative treat-
ment should equal the total duration of recommended 
therapy, with ∼2 weeks of treatment administered after 
surgery. For endocarditis complicated by paravalvu-
lar abscess, partially treated PVE, or cases with culture-
positive valves, a full course of therapy should be given 
postoperatively.
Extracardiac Complications  Splenic abscess 
develops in 3–5% of patients with endocarditis. Effec-
tive therapy requires either image-guided percutaneous 
drainage or splenectomy. Mycotic aneurysms occur in 
2–15% of endocarditis patients; one-half of these cases 
involve the cerebral arteries and present as headaches, 
focal neurologic symptoms, or hemorrhage. Cerebral 
aneurysms should be monitored by angiography. Some 
will resolve with effective antimicrobial therapy, but 
those that persist, enlarge, or leak should be treated 
surgically if possible. Extracerebral aneurysms present 
as local pain, a mass, local ischemia, or bleeding; these 
aneurysms are treated by resection.
Outcome
Older age, severe comorbid conditions and diabe-
tes, delayed diagnosis, involvement of prosthetic valves 
or the aortic valve, an invasive (S. aureus) or antibiotic-
resistant (P. aeruginosa, yeast) pathogen, intracardiac 
and major neurologic complications, and an association 
with health care adversely affect outcome. Death and 
poor outcome often are related not to failure of antibi-
otic therapy but rather to the interactions of comorbidi-
ties and endocarditis-related end-organ complications. 
Overall survival rates for patients with NVE caused by 
viridans streptococci, HACEK organisms, or enterococci 
(susceptible to synergistic therapy) are 85–90%. For S. 
aureus NVE in patients who do not inject drugs, survival 
rates are 55–70%, whereas 85–90% of injection drug users 
survive this infection. PVE beginning within 2 months 
of valve replacement results in mortality rates of 40–50%, 
whereas rates are only 10–20% in later-onset cases.
Prevention
In the past, in an effort to prevent endocarditis (long a 
goal in clinical practice), expert committees have sup-
ported systemic antibiotic administration prior to many 
bacteremia-inducing procedures. In the absence of 
human trials, a reappraisal of the indirect evidence for 
antibiotic prophylaxis for endocarditis by the American 
Heart Association has culminated in guidelines that 
reverse prior recommendations and restrict prophy-
lactic antibiotic use. At best, the benefit of antibiotic 
prophylaxis is minimal. Most endocarditis cases do not 
follow a procedure. In case-control studies, dental treat-
ments—widely considered as predisposing to endocardi-
tis—occur no more frequently before endocarditis than in 
matched controls. Furthermore, the frequency and mag-
nitude of bacteremia associated with dental procedures 
and routine daily activities (e.g., tooth brushing and floss-
ing) are similar. Because dental procedures are infrequent, 
exposure of cardiac structures to bacteremic oral-cavity 
organisms is notably greater from routine daily activities 
than from dental care. The relation of gastrointestinal and 
genitourinary procedures to subsequent endocarditis is 
more tenuous than that of dental procedures. In addition, 
cost-effectiveness and cost-benefit estimates suggest that 
antibiotic prophylaxis represents a poor use of resources.
Studies in animal models suggest that antibiotic pro-
phylaxis may be effective. Thus it is possible that rare 
cases of endocarditis are prevented. Weighing the poten-
tial benefits, potential adverse events, and costs associ-
ated with antibiotic prophylaxis, the American Heart 
Association and the European Society of Cardiology 
now recommend prophylactic antibiotics (Table 25-7) 
only for those patients at highest risk for severe morbid-
ity or death from endocarditis (Table 25-8). Maintain-
ing good dental hygiene is essential. Prophylaxis is rec-
ommended only when there is manipulation of gingival 
tissue or the periapical region of the teeth or perforation 
of the oral mucosa (including surgery on the respiratory 
tract). Prophylaxis is not advised for patients undergoing 
SECTION IV
Disorders of the Heart
308
gastrointestinal or genitourinary tract procedures. High-
risk patients should be treated before or when they 
undergo procedures on an infected genitourinary tract or 
on infected skin and soft tissue. The British Society for 
Antimicrobial Chemotherapy continues to recommend 
prophylaxis for at-risk patients undergoing selected gas-
trointestinal and genitourinary procedures. In contrast, 
the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence 
in the United Kingdom found no convincing evidence 
that antibiotic prophylaxis was cost-effective and advised 
discontinuation of the practice (see www.nice.org.uk/
guidance/CG64).
Table 25-8
High-Risk Cardiac Lesions for Which 
Endocarditis Prophylaxis Is Advised Before 
Dental Procedures
Prosthetic heart valves
Prior endocarditis
Unrepaired cyanotic congenital heart disease, including 
palliative shunts or conduits
Completely repaired congenital heart defects during the  
6 months after repair
Incompletely repaired congenital heart disease with residual 
defects adjacent to prosthetic material
Valvulopathy developing after cardiac transplantation
Source: W Wilson et al: Circulation 116:1736, 2007.
 Jonathan R. Carapetis 
309
 Acute rheumatic fever (ARF) is a multisystem disease 
resulting from an autoimmune reaction to infection 
with group A streptococcus. Although many parts of 
the body may be affected, almost all of the manifesta-
tions resolve completely. The exception is cardiac val-
vular damage (rheumatic heart disease [RHD]), which 
may persist after the other features have disappeared. 
 gloBal ConsiDerations 
 ARF and RHD are diseases of poverty. They 
were common in all countries until the early 
twentieth century, when their incidence began 
to decline in industrialized nations. This decline was 
largely attributable to improved living conditions—
particularly less crowded housing and better hygiene—
which resulted in reduced transmission of group A 
streptococci. The introduction of antibiotics and 
improved systems of medical care had a supplemental 
effect. Recurrent outbreaks of ARF began in the 1980s 
in the Rocky Mountain states of the United States, 
where elevated rates persist. 
 The virtual disappearance of ARF and reduction in 
the incidence of RHD in industrialized countries during 
the twentieth century unfortunately was not replicated 
in developing countries, where these diseases continue 
unabated. RHD is the most common cause of heart dis-
ease in children in developing countries and is a major 
cause of mortality and morbidity in adults as well. It has 
been estimated that between 15 and 19 million people 
worldwide are affected by RHD, with approximately 
one-quarter of a million deaths occurring each year. 
Some 95% of ARF cases and RHD deaths now occur 
in developing countries. 
 Although ARF and RHD are relatively common 
in all developing countries, they occur at particularly 
elevated rates in certain regions. These “hot spots” are 
sub-Saharan Africa, Pacifi c nations, Australasia, and the 
Indian subcontinent  ( Fig. 26-1 ) . Unfortunately, most 
 ACUTE RHEUMATIC FEVER 
 CHaPter 26 
developing countries do not currently have coordi-
nated, register-based RHD control programs, which 
are proven to be cost-effective in reducing the burden 
of RHD. Enhancing awareness of RHD and mobiliz-
ing resources for its control in developing countries is 
an issue requiring international attention. 
 ePiDeMiologY 
 ARF is mainly a disease of children aged 5–14 years. 
Initial episodes become less common in older adoles-
cents and young adults and are rare in persons aged >30 
years. By contrast, recurrent episodes of ARF remain 
relatively common in adolescents and young adults. This 
pattern contrasts with the prevalence of RHD, which 
peaks between 25 and 40 years. There is no clear gender 
association for ARF, but RHD more commonly affects 
females, sometimes up to twice as frequently as males. 
 PatHogenesis 
 organIsm factors 
 Based on currently available evidence, ARF is exclu-
sively caused by infection of the upper respiratory tract 
with group A streptococci. Although classically, certain 
M-serotypes (particularly types 1, 3, 5, 6, 14, 18, 19, 24, 
27, and 29) were associated with ARF, in high-incidence 
regions, it is now thought that any strain of group A 
streptococcus has the potential to cause ARF. Potential 
role of skin infection and of groups C and G streptococci 
are currently being investigated. 
 Host factors 
 Approximately 3–6% of any population may be sus-
ceptible to ARF, and this proportion does not vary 
dramatically between populations. Findings of familial 
SECTION IV
Disorders of the Heart
310
Clinical Features
There is a latent period of ∼3 weeks (1–5 weeks) 
between the precipitating group A streptococcal infec-
tion and the appearance of the clinical features of ARF. 
The exceptions are chorea and indolent carditis, which 
may follow prolonged latent periods lasting up to 
6 months. Although many patients report a prior sore 
throat, the preceding group A streptococcal infection is 
commonly subclinical; in these cases it can only be con-
firmed using streptococcal antibody testing. The most 
common clinical presentation of ARF is polyarthritis 
and fever. Polyarthritis is present in 60–75% of cases and 
carditis in 50–60%. The prevalence of chorea in ARF 
varies substantially between populations, ranging from 
<2% to 30%. Erythema marginatum and subcutaneous 
nodules are now rare, being found in <5% of cases.
Heart Involvement
Up to 60% of patients with ARF progress to RHD. 
The endocardium, pericardium, or myocardium may 
be affected. Valvular damage is the hallmark of rheu-
matic carditis. The mitral valve is almost always affected, 
sometimes together with the aortic valve; isolated aortic 
valve involvement is rare. Early valvular damage leads 
to regurgitation. Over ensuing years, usually as a result 
of recurrent episodes, leaflet thickening, scarring, calci-
fication, and valvular stenosis may develop (Fig. 26-3). 
Videos 26-1 and 26-2 can be accessed at the following 
link: http://www.mhprofessional.com/mediacenter/. 
clustering of cases and concordance in monozygotic 
twins—particularly for chorea—confirm that suscep-
tibility to ARF is an inherited characteristic. Particular 
human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class II alleles appear 
to be strongly associated with susceptibility. Associations 
have also been described with high levels of circulating 
mannose-binding lectin and polymorphisms of trans-
forming growth factor β1 gene and immunoglobulin 
genes. High-level expression of a particular alloantigen 
present on B cells, D8-17, has been found in patients 
with a history of ARF in many populations, with inter-
mediate-level expression in first-degree family mem-
bers, suggesting that this may be a marker of inherited 
susceptibility.
The Immune Response
When a susceptible host encounters a group A strepto-
coccus, an autoimmune reaction results, which leads to 
damage to human tissues as a result of cross-reactivity 
between epitopes on the organism and the host 
(Fig. 26-2). Cross-reactive epitopes are present in the 
streptococcal M protein and the N-acetylglucosamine 
of group A streptococcal carbohydrate and are immu-
nologically similar to molecules in human myosin, 
tropomyosin, keratin, actin, laminin, vimentin, and 
N-acetylglucosamine. It is currently thought that the 
initial damage is due to cross-reactive antibodies attach-
ing at the cardiac valve endothelium, allowing the entry 
of primed CD4+ T cells, leading to subsequent T cell-
mediated inflammation.
1–0
1–8
0–3
0–8
1–3
2–2
3–5
5–7
Prevalence of rheumatic heart disease (cases per 1000)
Figure 26-1 
Prevalence of rheumatic heart disease in children aged 
5–14 years. Circles within Australia and New Zealand rep-
resent indigenous populations, and also Pacific Islanders in 
New Zealand. (From JR Carapetis et al: Lancet Infect Dis. 
Copyright 2005; with permission from Elsevier.)
 
CHAPTER 26
Acute Rheumatic Fever
311
Therefore the characteristic manifestation of carditis in 
previously unaffected individuals is mitral regurgitation, 
sometimes accompanied by aortic regurgitation. Myocar-
dial inflammation may affect electrical conduction path-
ways, leading to P-R interval prolongation (first-degree 
AV block or rarely higher-level block) and softening of 
the first heart sound.
Joint Involvement
To qualify as a major manifestation, joint involvement 
in ARF must be arthritic, i.e., objective evidence of 
inflammation, with hot, swollen, red and/or tender 
joints, and involvement of more than one joint (i.e., 
polyarthritis). The typical arthritis is migratory, moving 
from one joint to another over a period of hours. ARF 
almost always affects the large joints—most commonly 
the knees, ankles, hips, and elbows—and is asymmetric. 
The pain is severe and usually disabling until anti-
inflammatory medication is commenced.
Less severe joint involvement is also relatively 
common but qualifies only as a minor manifestation. 
Arthralgia without objective joint inflammation usu-
ally affects large joints in the same migratory pattern 
as polyarthritis. In some populations, aseptic mono-
arthritis may be a presenting feature of ARF. This 
may occur because of early commencement of anti-
inflammatory medication before the typical migratory 
pattern is established.
RV
LV
AV
MV
LA
Figure 26-3 
Transthoracic echocardiographic image from a 5-year-
old boy with chronic rheumatic heart disease. This dia-
stolic image demonstrates leaflet thickening, restriction of 
the anterior mitral valve leaflet tip, and doming of the body 
of the leaflet toward the interventricular septum. This appear-
ance (marked by the arrowhead) is commonly described 
as a “hockey stick” or an “elbow” deformity. AV, aortic 
valve; LA, left atrium; LV, left ventricle; MV, mitral valve; RV, 
right ventricle. (Courtesy of Dr. Bo Remenyi, Department 
of Paediatric and Congential Cardiac Services, Starship 
Children’s Hospital, Auckland, New Zealand.)
RHD
Susceptible
host
First
episode
of ARF
Priming of immune response
Episodes of recurrrent ARF
Repeated group A
streptococcus infections
Repeated or ongoing infections
possibly driving the valvular
inflammatory response
Precipitating event: infection
with a strain of group A
streptococcus carrying
specific virulence factors
Molecular mimicry between
group A streptococcus
antigens and host tissues
Exaggerated T-cell
mediated immune
response
Genetically
determined
host factors
Environmental
factors, especially
overcrowding
Figure 26-2 
Pathogenetic pathway for acute rheumatic fever and 
rheumatic heart disease. (From JR Carapetis et al: Lancet 
366:155, 2005. Copyright 2005; with permission from 
Elsevier.)
SECTION IV
Disorders of the Heart
312
Evidence of a Preceding Group  
A Streptococcal Infection
With the exception of chorea and low-grade cardi-
tis, both of which may become manifest many months 
later, evidence of a preceding group A streptococcal 
infection is essential in making the diagnosis of ARF. 
As most cases do not have a positive throat swab cul-
ture or rapid antigen test, serologic evidence is usually 
needed. The most common serologic tests are the anti-
streptolysin O (ASO) and anti-DNase B (ADB) titers. 
Where possible, age-specific reference ranges should 
be determined in a local population of healthy people 
without a recent group A streptococcal infection.
Other Post-Streptococcal 
Syndromes that May be Confused 
with Rheumatic Fever
Post-streptococcal reactive arthritis (PSRA) is differenti-
ated from ARF on the basis of: (1) small-joint involve-
ment that is often symmetric; (2) a short latent period 
following streptococcal infection (usually <1 week); 
(3) occasional causation by nongroup A β-hemolytic 
streptococcal infection; (4) slower responsiveness to 
salicylates; and (5) the absence of other features of ARF, 
particularly carditis.
Pediatric autoimmune neuropsychiatric disorders 
associated with streptococcal infection (PANDAS) is a 
term that links a range of tic disorders and obsessive-
compulsive symptoms with group A streptococcal 
infections. People with PANDAS are said not to be at 
risk of carditis, unlike patients with Sydenham’s chorea. 
The diagnoses of PANDAS and PSRA should rarely be 
made in populations with a high incidence of ARF.
Confirming the Diagnosis
Because there is no definitive test, the diagnosis of ARF 
relies on the presence of a combination of typical clini-
cal features together with evidence of the precipitating 
group A streptococcal infection, and the exclusion of 
other diagnoses. This uncertainty led Dr. T. Duckett 
Jones in 1944 to develop a set of criteria (subsequently 
known as the Jones criteria) to aid in the diagnosis. An 
expert panel convened by the World Health Organi-
zation (WHO) clarified the use of the Jones criteria in 
ARF recurrences (Table 26-1). Because each revision 
of the Jones criteria since 1944 has reduced sensitivity 
and increased specificity, in response to the decline in 
incidence of ARF in high-income countries, there is 
now concern that they may be too insensitive for coun-
tries where ARF incidence remains high. As a result, 
some countries (e.g., Australia and New Zealand) have 
The joint manifestations of ARF are highly responsive 
to salicylates and other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory 
drugs (NSAIDs). Indeed, joint involvement that persists 
more than 1 or 2 days after starting salicylates is unlikely 
to be due to ARF. Conversely, if salicylates are com-
menced early in the illness, before fever and migratory 
polyarthritis have become manifest, it may be difficult to 
make a diagnosis of ARF. For this reason, salicylates and 
other NSAIDs should be withheld—and pain managed 
with acetaminophen or codeine—until the diagnosis is 
confirmed.
Chorea
Sydenham’s chorea commonly occurs in the absence of 
other manifestations, follows a prolonged latent period 
after group A streptococcal infection, and is found 
mainly in females. The choreiform movements affect 
particularly the head (causing characteristic darting 
movements of the tongue) and the upper limbs. They 
may be generalized or restricted to one side of the body 
(hemi-chorea). The chorea varies in severity. In mild 
cases it may be evident only on careful examination, 
while in the most severe cases the affected individuals 
are unable to perform activities of daily living and are at 
risk of injuring themselves. Chorea eventually resolves 
completely, usually within 6 weeks.
Skin Manifestations
The classic rash of ARF is erythema marginatum, which 
begins as pink macules that clear centrally, leaving a 
serpiginous, spreading edge. The rash is evanescent, 
appearing and disappearing before the examiner’s eyes. 
It occurs usually on the trunk, sometimes on the limbs, 
but almost never on the face.
Subcutaneous nodules occur as painless, small (0.5–
2 cm), mobile lumps beneath the skin overlying bony 
prominences, particularly of the hands, feet, elbows, 
occiput, and occasionally the vertebrae. They are a 
delayed manifestation, appearing 2–3 weeks after the 
onset of disease, last for just a few days up to 3 weeks, 
and are commonly associated with carditis.
Other Features
Fever occurs in most cases of ARF, although rarely 
in cases of pure chorea. Although high-grade fever 
(≥39°C) is the rule, lower-grade temperature elevations 
are not uncommon. Elevated acute-phase reactants are 
also present in most cases. C-reactive protein (CRP) 
and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) are often dra-
matically elevated. Occasionally, the peripheral leuko-
cyte count is mildly elevated.
 
CHAPTER 26
Acute Rheumatic Fever
313
should be performed on all possible cases to aid in 
making the diagnosis and to determine the severity at 
baseline of any carditis. Other tests that should be per-
formed are listed in Table 26-2.
There is no treatment for ARF that has been proven 
to alter the likelihood of developing, or the severity of, 
RHD. With the exception of treatment of heart failure, 
which may be lifesaving in cases of severe carditis, the 
treatment of ARF is symptomatic.
Antibiotics  All patients with ARF should receive 
antibiotics sufficient to treat the precipitating group A 
streptococcal infection. Penicillin is the drug of choice 
developed their own, more sensitive, diagnostic criteria 
for ARF in their populations (links available at the 
RHDnet website www.worldheart.org/rhd).
Treatment	
Acute Rheumatic Fever
Patients with possible ARF should be followed closely 
to ensure that the diagnosis is confirmed, treatment of 
heart failure and other symptoms is undertaken, and 
preventive measures including commencement of sec-
ondary prophylaxis, inclusion on an ARF registry, and 
health education are commenced. Echocardiography 
Table 26-1
2002–2003 World Health Organization Criteria for the Diagnosis of Rheumatic Fever  
and Rheumatic Heart Disease (Based on the 1992 Revised Jones Criteria)
Diagnostic Categories
Criteria
Primary episode of rheumatic fevera
Two major or one major and two minor manifestations plus 
evidence of preceding group A streptococcal infection
Recurrent attack of rheumatic fever in a patient without 
established rheumatic heart disease
Two major or one major and two minor manifestations plus 
evidence of preceding group A streptococcal infection
Recurrent attack of rheumatic fever in a patient with 
established rheumatic heart diseaseb
Two minor manifestations plus evidence of preceding group A 
streptococcal infectionc
Rheumatic chorea
Insidious onset rheumatic carditisb
Other major manifestations or evidence of group A streptococ-
cal infection not required
Chronic valve lesions of rheumatic heart disease (patients 
presenting for the first time with pure mitral stenosis or 
mixed mitral valve disease and/or aortic valve disease)d
Do not require any other criteria to be diagnosed as having 
rheumatic heart disease
Major manifestations
Carditis
Polyarthritis
Chorea
Erythema marginatum
Subcutaneous nodules
Minor manifestations
Clinical: fever, polyarthralgia
Laboratory: elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate or leukocyte 
count e
Electrocardiogram: prolonged P-R interval
Supporting evidence of a preceding streptococcal infec-
tion within the last 45 days
Elevated or rising anti-streptolysin O or other streptococcal 
antibody, or
A positive throat culture, or
Rapid antigen test for group A streptococcus, or
Recent scarlet fever e
aPatients may present with polyarthritis (or with only polyarthralgia or monoarthritis) and with several (three or more) other minor manifestations, 
together with evidence of recent group A streptococcal infection. Some of these cases may later turn out to be rheumatic fever. It is prudent 
to consider them as cases of “probable rheumatic fever” (once other diagnoses are excluded) and advise regular secondary prophylaxis. Such 
patients require close follow-up and regular examination of the heart. This cautious approach is particularly suitable for patients in vulnerable 
age groups in high incidence settings.
bInfective endocarditis should be excluded.
cSome patients with recurrent attacks may not fulfill these criteria.
dCongenital heart disease should be excluded.
e1992 Revised Jones criteria do not include elevated leukocyte count as a laboratory minor manifestation (but do include elevated C-reactive 
protein), and do not include recent scarlet fever as supporting evidence of a recent streptococcal infection.
Source: Reprinted with permission from WHO Expert Consultation on Rheumatic Fever and Rheumatic Heart Disease (2001: Geneva, Switzer-
land): Rheumatic Fever and Rheumatic Heart Disease: Report of a WHO Expert Consultation (WHO Tech Rep Ser, 923). Geneva, World Health 
Organization, 2004.
SECTION IV
Disorders of the Heart
314
and can be given orally (as phenoxymethyl penicillin, 
500 mg [250 mg for children ≤27 kg] PO twice daily, or 
amoxicillin 50 mg/kg [max 1 g] daily, for 10 days] or as a 
single dose of 1.2 million units (600,000 units for children 
≤27 kg) IM benzathine penicillin G.
Salicylates and NSAIDS  These may be 
used for the treatment of arthritis, arthralgia, and fever, 
once the diagnosis is confirmed. They are of no proven 
value in the treatment of carditis or chorea. Aspirin is 
the drug of choice. An initial dose of 80–100 mg/kg per 
day in children (4–8 g/d in adults) in 4–5 divided doses 
is often needed for the first few days up to 2 weeks. A 
lower dose should be used if symptoms of salicylate tox-
icity emerge, such as nausea, vomiting, or tinnitus. When 
the acute symptoms are substantially resolved, the dose 
can be reduced to 60–70 mg/kg per day for a further 2–4 
weeks. Fever, joint manifestations, and elevated acute-
phase reactants sometimes recur up to 3 weeks after 
the medication is discontinued. This does not indicate 
a recurrence and can be managed by recommencing 
salicylates for a brief period. Although less well studied, 
naproxen at a dose of 10–20 mg/kg per day has been 
reported to lead to good symptomatic response.
Table 26-2
Recommended Tests in Cases of Possible 
Acute Rheumatic Fever
Recommended for all cases
White blood cell count
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate
C-reactive protein
Blood cultures if febrile
Electrocardiogram (repeat in 2 weeks and 2 months if 
prolonged P-R interval or other rhythm abnormality)
Chest x-ray if clinical or echocardiographic evidence  
of carditis
Echocardiogram (consider repeating after 1 month  
if negative)
Throat swab (preferably before giving antibiotics)—
culture for group A streptococcus
Anti-streptococcal serology: both anti-streptolysin O 
and anti-DNase B titres, if available (repeat 10–14 days 
later if 1st test not confirmatory)
Tests for alternative diagnoses, depending on clinical 
features
Repeated blood cultures if possible endocarditis
Joint aspirate (microscopy and culture) for possible  
septic arthritis
Copper, ceruloplasmin, anti-nuclear antibody, drug 
screen for choreiform movements
Serology and auto-immune markers for arboviral, auto-
immune or reactive arthritis
Source: Reprinted with permission from National Heart Foundation 
of Australia: Diagnosis and Management of Acute Rheumatic Fever 
and Rheumatic Heart Disease in Australia: Complete Evidence-
Based Review and Guideline. Melbourne, National Heart Foundation 
of Australia, 2009.
Congestive 
Heart 
Failure  Glucocor-
ticoids  The use of glucocorticoids in ARF remains 
controversial. Two meta-analyses have failed to demon-
strate a benefit of glucocorticoids compared to placebo 
or salicylates in improving the short- or longer-term 
outcome of carditis. However, the studies included in 
these meta-analyses all took place >40 years ago and 
did not use medications in common usage today. Many 
clinicians treat cases of severe carditis (causing heart 
failure) with glucocorticoids in the belief that they may 
reduce the acute inflammation and result in more rapid 
resolution of failure. However, the potential benefits of 
this treatment should be balanced against the possible 
adverse effects, including gastrointestinal bleeding and 
fluid retention. If used, prednisone or prednisolone are 
recommended at doses of 1–2 mg/kg per day (maxi-
mum, 80 mg). Glucocorticoids are often only required for 
a few days or up to a maximum of 3 weeks.
Management of Heart Failure  See 
Chap. 17.
Bed Rest  Traditional recommendations for long-
term bed rest, once the cornerstone of management, 
are no longer widely practiced. Instead, bed rest should 
be prescribed as needed while arthritis and arthralgia 
are present, and for patients with heart failure. Once 
symptoms are well controlled, gradual mobilization can 
commence as tolerated.
Chorea  Medications to control the abnormal 
movements do not alter the duration or outcome of 
chorea. Milder cases can usually be managed by provid-
ing a calm environment. In patients with severe chorea, 
carbamazepine or sodium valproate are preferred to 
haloperidol. A response may not be seen for 1–2 weeks, 
and a successful response may only be to reduce rather 
than resolve the abnormal movements. Medication 
should be continued for 1–2 weeks after symptoms 
subside.
Intravenous 
Immunoglobulin 
(IVIg) 
Small studies have suggested that IVIg may lead to 
more rapid resolution of chorea but has shown no bene-
fit on the short- or long-term outcome of carditis in ARF 
without chorea. In the absence of better data, IVIg is not 
recommended except in cases of severe chorea refrac-
tory to other treatments.
Prognosis
Untreated, ARF lasts on average 12 weeks. With treat-
ment, patients are usually discharged from hospital 
within 1–2 weeks. Inflammatory markers should be 
monitored every 1–2 weeks until they have normal-
ized (usually within 4–6 weeks), and an echocardiogram 
 
CHAPTER 26
Acute Rheumatic Fever
315
antibiotic for secondary prophylaxis is benzathine peni-
cillin G (1.2 million units, or 600,000 units if ≤27 kg) 
delivered every 4 weeks. It can be given every 3 weeks, 
or even every 2 weeks, to persons considered to be at 
particularly high risk, although in settings where good 
compliance with 4-weekly dosing can be achieved, 
more frequent dosing is rarely needed. Oral penicillin V 
(250 mg) can be given twice daily instead but is somewhat 
less effective than benzathine penicillin G. Penicillin- 
allergic patients can receive erythromycin (250 mg) 
twice daily.
The duration of secondary prophylaxis is determined 
by many factors, in particular the duration since the last 
episode of ARF (recurrences become less likely with 
increasing time), age (recurrences are less likely with 
increasing age), and the severity of RHD (if severe, it 
may be prudent to avoid even a very small risk of recur-
rence because of the potentially serious consequences) 
(Table 26-3). Secondary prophylaxis is best delivered 
as part of a coordinated RHD control program, based 
around a registry of patients. Registries improve the 
ability to follow patients and identify those who default 
from prophylaxis and institute strategies to improve 
adherence.
should be performed after 1 month to determine if 
there has been progression of carditis. Cases with more 
severe carditis need close clinical and echocardiographic 
monitoring in the longer term.
Once the acute episode has resolved, the priority in 
management is to ensure long-term clinical follow-up 
and adherence to a regimen of secondary prophylaxis. 
Patients should be entered onto the local ARF registry 
(if present) and contact made with primary care prac-
titioners to ensure a plan for follow-up and adminis-
tration of secondary prophylaxis before the patient is 
discharged. Patients and their families should also be 
educated about their disease, emphasizing the impor-
tance of adherence to secondary prophylaxis. If carditis 
is present, they should also be informed of the need for 
antibiotic prophylaxis against endocarditis for dental and 
surgical procedures.
Prevention
Primary Prevention
Ideally, primary prevention would entail elimination of 
the major risk factors for streptococcal infection, partic-
ularly overcrowded housing. This is difficult to achieve 
in most places where ARF is common.
Therefore, the mainstay of primary prevention for 
ARF remains primary prophylaxis (i.e., the timely and 
complete treatment of group A streptococcal sore throat 
with antibiotics). If commenced within 9 days of sore 
throat onset, a course of penicillin (as outlined earlier 
for treatment of ARF) will prevent almost all cases 
of ARF that would otherwise have developed. This 
important strategy relies on individuals presenting for 
medical care when they have a sore throat, the availabil-
ity of trained health and microbiology staff along with 
the materials and infrastructure to take throat swabs, and 
a reliable supply of penicillin. Unfortunately, many of 
these elements are not available in developing countries.
Secondary Prevention
The mainstay of controlling ARF and RHD is second-
ary prevention. Because patients with ARF are at dra-
matically higher risk than the general population of 
developing a further episode of ARF after a group A 
streptococcal infection, they should receive long-term 
penicillin prophylaxis to prevent recurrences. The best 
Table 26-3
American Heart Association 
Recommendations for Duration of 
Secondary Prophylaxisa
Category of Patient
Duration of Prophylaxis
Rheumatic fever without 
carditis
For 5 years after the last 
attack or 21 years of age 
(whichever is longer)
Rheumatic fever with cardi-
tis but no residual valvular 
disease
For 10 years after the last 
attack, or 21 years of age 
(whichever is longer)
Rheumatic fever with 
persistent valvular disease, 
evident clinically or on 
echocardiography
For 10 years after the last 
attack, or 40 years of 
age (whichever is longer). 
Sometimes lifelong 
prophylaxis.
a These are only recommendations and must be modified by individ-
ual circumstances as warranted. Note that other organizations have 
slightly different recommendations (see www.worldheart.org/rhd for 
links).
Source: Adapted from AHA Scientific Statement Prevention 
of Rheumatic Fever and Diagnosis and Treatment of Acute 
Streptococcal Pharyngitis. Circulation 119:1541, 2009.
 Louis V. Kirchhoff 
I  Anis Rassi, Jr. 
316
 Although the genus  Trypanosoma contains many spe-
cies of protozoans, only  T. cruzi ,  T. brucei gambiense , and 
T. brucei rhodesiense cause disease in humans.  T. cruzi
is the etiologic agent of Chagas’ disease in the Ameri-
cas;  T. b. gambiense and  T. b. rhodesiense cause African 
trypanosomiasis. 
 CHAGAS’ DISEASE 
 DEFINITION 
 Chagas’ disease, or American trypanosomiasis, is a 
zoonosis caused by the protozoan parasite  T. cruzi . 
Acute Chagas’ disease is usually a mild febrile illness 
that results from initial infection with the organism. 
After spontaneous resolution of the acute illness, most 
infected persons remain for life in the indeterminate 
phase of chronic Chagas’ disease, which is character-
ized by subpatent parasitemia, easily detectable antibod-
ies to  T. cruzi , and an absence of associated signs and 
symptoms. In 10–30% of chronically infected patients, 
cardiac and/or gastrointestinal lesions develop that can 
result in serious morbidity and even death. 
 LIFE CYCLE AND TRANSMISSION 
 T. cruzi is transmitted among its mammalian hosts by 
hematophagous triatomine insects, often called reduviid 
bugs. The insects become infected by sucking blood 
from animals or humans who have circulating parasites. 
Ingested organisms multiply in the gut of the triato-
mines, and infective forms are discharged with the feces 
at the time of subsequent blood meals. Transmission 
to a second vertebrate host occurs when breaks in the 
skin, mucous membranes, or conjunctivae become con-
taminated with bug feces that contain infective parasites. 
 T. cruzi can also be transmitted by the transfusion of 
 CHAGAS’ DISEASE 
 CHAPTER 27 
blood donated by infected persons, by organ transplan-
tation, from mother to unborn child, by ingestion of 
contaminated food or drink, and in laboratory accidents. 
 PATHOLOGY 
 Initial infection at the site of parasite entry is character-
ized by local histologic changes that include the presence 
of parasites within leukocytes and cells of subcutaneous 
tissues and the development of interstitial edema, lym-
phocytic infi ltration, and reactive hyperplasia of adja-
cent lymph nodes. After dissemination of the organisms 
through the lymphatics and the bloodstream, primar-
ily muscles (including the myocardium)  ( Fig. 27-1 )
and ganglion cells may become heavily parasitized. The 
characteristic pseudocysts present in sections of infected 
tissues are intracellular aggregates of multiplying parasites. 
 FIGURE 27-1 
 Trypanosoma cruzi in the heart muscle of a child who 
died of acute Chagas’ myocarditis. An infected myocyte 
containing several dozen  T. cruzi amastigotes is in the center 
of the ﬁ eld (hematoxylin and eosin, 900ë). 
 
CHAPTER 27
Chagas’ Disease
317
In individuals with chronic T. cruzi infections who 
develop related clinical manifestations, the heart is the 
organ most commonly affected. Changes include thin-
ning of the ventricular walls, biventricular enlargement, 
apical aneurysms, and mural thrombi. Widespread lym-
phocytic infiltration, diffuse interstitial fibrosis, and atro-
phy of myocardial cells are often apparent, but parasites 
are difficult to find in myocardial tissue by conventional 
histologic methods. Conduction-system abnormali-
ties often affect the right branch and the left ante-
rior branch of the bundle of His. In chronic Chagas’ 
disease of the gastrointestinal tract (megadisease), the 
esophagus and colon may exhibit varying degrees of dil-
atation. On microscopic examination, focal inflamma-
tory lesions with lymphocytic infiltration are seen, and 
the number of neurons in the myenteric plexus may be 
markedly reduced. Accumulating evidence implicates the 
persistence of parasites and the accompanying chro­nic 
inflammation—rather than autoimmune mechanisms—
as the basis for the pathology in patients with chronic 
T. cruzi infection.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
T. cruzi is found only in the Americas. Wild and 
domestic mammals harboring T. cruzi and infected 
triatomines are found in spotty distributions from 
the southern United States to southern Argentina. 
Humans become involved in the cycle of transmission 
when infected vectors take up residence in the primi-
tive wood, adobe, and stone houses common in much 
of Latin America. Thus, human T. cruzi infection is a 
health problem primarily among the poor in rural areas 
of Mexico and Central and South America. Most new 
T. cruzi infections in rural settings occur in children, but 
the incidence is unknown because most cases go undi-
agnosed. Historically, transfusion-associated transmis-
sion of T. cruzi was a serious public health problem in 
many endemic countries. However, with some notable 
exceptions, transmission by this route has been essen-
tially eliminated as effective programs for the screen-
ing of donated blood have been implemented. Several 
dozen patients with HIV and chronic T. cruzi infec-
tions who underwent acute recrudescence of the lat-
ter have been described. These patients generally pre-
sented with T. cruzi brain abscesses, a manifestation of 
the illness that does not occur in immunocompetent 
persons. Currently, it is estimated that 8 million people 
are chronically infected with T. cruzi and that 14,000 
deaths due to the illness occur each year. The resulting 
morbidity and mortality make Chagas’ disease the most 
important parasitic disease burden in Latin America.
In recent years, the rate of T. cruzi transmission has 
decreased markedly in several endemic countries as a 
result of successful programs involving vector control, 
blood-bank screening, and education of at-risk popu-
lations. A major program, which began in 1991 in the 
“southern cone” nations of South America (Uruguay, 
Paraguay, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, and Argentina), has 
provided the framework for much of this progress. Uru-
guay and Chile were certified free of transmission by the 
main domiciliary vector species (Triatoma infestans) in 
the late 1990s, and Brazil was declared transmission-free 
in 2006. Transmission has been reduced markedly in 
Argentina as well. Similar control programs have been 
initiated in the countries of northern South America and 
in the Central American nations.
Acute Chagas’ disease is rare in the United States. Five 
cases of autochthonous transmission and five instances of 
transmission by blood transfusion have been reported. 
Moreover, T. cruzi was transmitted to five recipients of 
organs from three T. cruzi–infected donors. Two of these 
recipients became infected through cardiac transplants. 
Acute Chagas’ disease has not been reported in tour-
ists returning to the United States from Latin America, 
although three such instances have been reported in 
Europe. In contrast, the prevalence of chronic T. cruzi 
infections in the United States has increased considerably 
in recent years. An estimated 23 million immigrants from 
Chagas’-endemic countries currently live in the United 
States, ~17 million of whom are Mexicans. The total 
number of T. cruzi–infected persons living in the United 
States is estimated to be 300,000. Screening of the U.S. 
blood supply for T. cruzi infection began in January 
2007. The overall prevalence of T. cruzi infection among 
donors is about 1 in 29,000, and to date more than 1200 
infected donors have been identified and deferred 
permanently (see “Diagnosis,” later in this chapter).
CLINICAL COURSE
The first signs of acute Chagas’ disease develop at least 1 
week after invasion by the parasites. When the organisms 
enter through a break in the skin, an indurated area of 
erythema and swelling (the chagoma), accompanied by 
local lymphadenopathy, may appear. Romaña’s sign—the 
classic finding in acute Chagas’ disease, which consists of 
unilateral painless edema of the palpebrae and periocular 
tissues—can result when the conjunctiva is the portal of 
entry. These initial local signs may be followed by mal-
aise, fever, anorexia, and edema of the face and lower 
extremities. Generalized lymphadenopathy and hepato-
splenomegaly may develop. Severe myocarditis devel-
ops rarely; most deaths in acute Chagas’ disease are due 
to heart failure. Neurologic signs are not common, but 
meningoencephalitis occurs occasionally, especially in 
children <2 years old. Usually within 4–8 weeks, acute 
signs and symptoms resolve spontaneously in virtually all 
patients, who then enter the asymptomatic or indetermi-
nate phase of chronic T. cruzi infection.
SECTION IV
Disorders of the Heart
318
Symptomatic chronic Chagas’ disease becomes 
apparent years or even decades after the initial 
infection. The heart is commonly involved, and symp-
toms are caused by rhythm disturbances, segmental or 
dilated cardiomyopathy, and thromboembolism. Right 
bundle-branch block is a common electrocardiographic 
abnormality, but other types of intraventricular and atrio-
ventricular blocks, premature ventricular contractions, 
and tachy- and bradyarrhythmias occur frequently. Car-
diomyopathy often results in biventricular heart failure 
with a predominance of right-sided failure at advanced 
stages. Embolization of mural thrombi to the brain or 
other areas may take place. Sudden death is the main 
cause of death in Chagas’ heart disease. Patients with 
megaesophagus suffer from dysphagia, odynophagia, 
chest pain, and regurgitation. Aspiration can occur (espe-
cially during sleep) in patients with severe esophageal 
dysfunction, and repeated episodes of aspiration pneumo-
nitis are common. Weight loss, cachexia, and pulmonary 
infection can result in death. Patients with megacolon 
are plagued by abdominal pain and chronic constipa-
tion, which predisposes to fecaloma formation. Advanced 
megacolon can cause obstruction, volvulus, septicemia, 
and death.
DIAGNOSIS
The diagnosis of acute Chagas’ disease requires the 
detection of parasites. Microscopic examination of fresh 
anticoagulated blood or the buffy coat is the simplest 
way to see the motile organisms. Parasites also can be 
seen in Giemsa-stained thin and thick blood smears. 
Microhematocrit tubes containing acridine orange as 
a stain can be used for the same purpose. When used 
by experienced personnel, all of these methods yield 
positive results in a high proportion of cases of acute 
Chagas’ disease. Serologic testing plays no role in diag-
nosing acute Chagas’ disease.
Chronic Chagas’ disease is diagnosed by the detec-
tion of specific IgG antibodies that bind to T. cruzi anti-
gens. Demonstration of the parasite is not of primary 
importance. In Latin America, ~30 assays are commer-
cially available, including several based on recombinant 
antigens. Although these tests usually show good sen-
sitivity and reasonable specificity, false-positive reac-
tions may occur—typically with samples from patients 
who have other infectious and parasitic diseases or 
autoimmune disorders. In addition, confirmatory test-
ing has presented a persistent challenge. For these rea-
sons, the World Health Organization recommends that 
specimens be tested in at least two assays and that well-
characterized positive and negative comparison samples 
be included in each run. The radioimmune precipita-
tion assay (Chagas RIPA) is a highly sensitive and spe-
cific confirmatory method for detecting antibodies 
to T. cruzi (approved under the Clinical Laboratory 
Improvement Amendment and available in the authors’ 
laboratory). In December 2006, the U.S. Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA) approved a test to screen 
blood and organ donors for T. cruzi infection (Ortho 
T. cruzi ELISA Test System, Ortho-Clinical Diagnos-
tics, Raritan, NJ). Since January 2007, the vast major-
ity of U.S. blood donors have been screened with the 
Ortho test, and positive units have undergone confir-
matory testing in the Chagas RIPA. A second test for 
donor screening was approved by the FDA in April 
2010 (Abbott PRISM® Chagas Assay, Abbott Laborato-
ries, Abbott Park, IL). The use of PCR assays to detect 
T. cruzi DNA in chronically infected persons has been 
studied extensively. The sensitivity of this approach has 
not been shown to be reliably greater than that of serol-
ogy, and no PCR assays are commercially available.
Treatment	
Chagas’ Disease
Therapy for Chagas’ disease is still unsatisfactory. For 
many years now, only two drugs—nifurtimox and 
benznidazole—have been available for this purpose. 
Unfortunately, both drugs lack efficacy and may cause 
bothersome side effects.
In acute Chagas’ disease, nifurtimox markedly 
reduces the duration of symptoms and parasitemia and 
decreases the mortality rate. Nevertheless, limited stud-
ies have shown that only ~70% of acute infections are 
cured parasitologically by a full course of treatment. 
Common adverse effects of nifurtimox include anorexia, 
nausea, vomiting, weight loss, and abdominal pain. Neu-
rologic reactions to the drug may include restlessness, 
disorientation, insomnia, twitching, paresthesia, poly-
neuritis, and seizures. These symptoms usually disappear 
when the dosage is reduced or treatment is discontin-
ued. The recommended daily dosage is 8–10 mg/kg for 
adults, 12.5–15 mg/kg for adolescents, and 15–20 mg/kg 
for children 1–10 years of age. The drug should be given 
orally in four divided doses each day, and therapy should 
be continued for 90–120 days. Nifurtimox is available 
from the Drug Service of the Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention (CDC) in Atlanta (telephone number, 
404-639-3670).
The efficacy of benznidazole is similar or even supe-
rior to that of nifurtimox. A cure rate of 90% among con-
genitally infected infants treated before their first birth-
day has been reported. Adverse effects include rash, 
peripheral neuropathy, and rarely granulocytopenia. 
The recommended oral dosage is 5 mg/kg per day for 
60 days for adults and 5–10 mg/kg per day for 60 days 
for children, with administration of two or three divided 
doses. Benznidazole is generally considered the drug of 
choice in Latin America.
 
CHAPTER 27
Chagas’ Disease
319
The question of whether adults in the indeterminate 
or chronic symptomatic phase of Chagas’ disease should 
be treated with nifurtimox or benznidazole has been 
debated for years. The fact that parasitologic cure rates 
in chronically infected persons are notably inferior to 
those in patients with acute or recent chronic infection 
is central to this controversy. No convincing evidence 
from randomized controlled trials indicates that nifurti­
mox or benznidazole treatment of adults in the indeter­
minate or chronic symptomatic phase reduces either 
the appearance and progression of symptoms or mor­
tality rates. On the basis of results of some observational 
studies, a panel of experts convened by the CDC in 2006 
recommended that adults <50 years old with presum­
ably long-standing indeterminate T. cruzi infections—or 
even with mild to moderate disease—be offered treat­
ment. A large randomized clinical trial (the BENEFIT multi­
center trial) designed to assess the parasitologic and clini­
cal efficacy of benznidazole in adults (18–75 years old) 
with chronic Chagas’ heart disease (without advanced 
lesions) is being performed in Brazil, Argentina, Colom­
bia, and Bolivia, but results are not yet available. In con­
trast, randomized studies have shown that treatment 
of children is useful, and the current consensus of Latin 
American authorities is that all T. cruzi–infected persons 
up to 18 years old and all adults known to have become 
infected recently should be given benznidazole or  
nifurtimox.
The usefulness of antifungal azoles for the treatment 
of Chagas’ disease has been studied in laboratory ani­
mals and to a lesser extent in humans. To date, none of 
these drugs has exhibited a level of anti–T. cruzi activ­
ity that would justify its use in humans. Several newer 
drugs in this class have shown promise in animal studies 
and are likely to undergo human trials in the near future.
Patients who develop cardiac and/or gastrointesti­
nal disease in association with T. cruzi infection should 
be referred to appropriate subspecialists for further 
evaluation and treatment. Cardiac transplantation is an 
option for patients with end-stage chagasic cardiomyopa­
thy; more than 150 such transplantations have been done 
in Brazil and the United States. The survival rate among 
Chagas’ disease cardiac transplant recipients seems to be 
higher than that among persons receiving cardiac trans­
plants for other reasons. This better outcome may be due 
to the fact that lesions are limited to the heart in most 
patients with symptomatic chronic Chagas’ disease.
PREVENTION
Since drug therapy has limitations and vaccines are 
not available, the control of T. cruzi transmission in 
endemic countries depends on the reduction of domi-
ciliary vector populations by spraying of insecticides, 
improvements in housing, and education of at-risk per-
sons. As noted earlier, these measures, coupled with 
serologic screening of blood donors, have markedly 
reduced transmission of the parasite in many endemic 
countries. Tourists would be wise to avoid sleeping in 
dilapidated houses in rural areas of endemic countries. 
Mosquito nets and insect repellent can provide addi-
tional protection.
In view of the possibly serious consequences of 
chronic T. cruzi infection, it would be prudent for all 
immigrants from endemic regions who are living in 
the United States to be tested for evidence of infection. 
Identification of persons harboring the parasite would 
permit periodic electrocardiographic monitoring, which 
can be important because pacemakers benefit some 
patients who develop ominous rhythm disturbances. The 
possibility of congenital transmission is yet another justifi-
cation for screening. T. cruzi is classified as a Risk Group 
2 agent in the United States and a Risk Group 3 agent in 
some European countries. Laboratory staff should work 
with the parasite or infected vectors at containment levels 
consistent with the risk group designation in their areas.
 Judith S. Hochman  I   David H. Ingbar 
320
 Cardiogenic shock and pulmonary edema are life-threat-
ening conditions that should be treated as medical emer-
gencies. The most common etiology for both is severe 
left ventricular (LV) dysfunction that leads to pulmonary 
congestion and/or systemic hypoperfusion  ( Fig. 28-1 ) . 
 The pathophysiology of pulmonary edema is discussed in 
 Chap. 5 . 
 CardIoGEnIC SHoCK 
 Cardiogenic shock (CS) is characterized by systemic 
hypoperfusion due to severe depression of the cardiac 
index (<2.2 [L/min]/m 2 ) and sustained systolic arte-
rial hypotension (<90 mmHg) despite an elevated fi lling 
pressure (pulmonary capillary wedge pressure [PCWP] 
>18 mmHg). It is associated with in-hospital mortal-
ity rates >50%. The major causes of CS are listed in 
 Table 28-1 . Circulatory failure based on cardiac dys-
function may be caused by primary myocardial failure, 
most commonly secondary to acute myocardial infarc-
tion (MI) ( Chap. 35 ), and less frequently by cardiomy-
opathy or myocarditis ( Chap. 21 ), cardiac tamponade 
( Chap. 22 ), or critical valvular heart disease ( Chap. 20 ). 
 Incidence 
 CS is the leading cause of death of patients hospital-
ized with MI. Early reperfusion therapy for acute MI 
decreases the incidence of CS. The rate of CS compli-
cating acute MI was 20% in the 1960s, stayed at ∼8% 
for >20 years, but decreased to 5–7% in the fi rst decade 
of this millennium. Shock typically is associated with ST 
elevation MI (STEMI) and is less common with non-
ST elevation MI ( Chap. 35 ). 
 LV failure accounts for ∼80% of cases of CS com-
plicating acute MI. Acute severe mitral regurgitation 
 CARDIOGENIC SHOCK 
AND PULMONARY EDEMA 
 CHaPTEr 28 
Myocardial infarction
Myocardial dysfunction
Systolic
Diastolic
↓Cardiac output
↓Stroke volume
↓Systemic
  perfusion
↓Coronary
perfusion pressure
↑LVEDP
Pulmonary congestion
Hypotension
Compensatory
vasoconstriction*
Hypoxemia
Ischemia
Progressive
myocardial
dysfunction
Death
 Figure 28-1 
Pathophysiology of cardiogenic shock. Systolic and dia-
stolic myocardial dysfunction results in a reduction in cardiac 
output and often pulmonary congestion. Systemic and coro-
nary hypoperfusion occur, resulting in progressive ischemia. 
Although a number of compensatory mechanisms are acti-
vated in an attempt to support the circulation, these compen-
satory mechanisms may become maladaptive and produce 
a worsening of hemodynamics. *Release of infl ammatory 
cytokines after myocardial infarction may lead to inducible 
nitric oxide expression, excess nitric oxide, and inappropriate 
vasodilation. This causes further reduction in systemic and 
coronary perfusion. A vicious spiral of progressive myocar-
dial dysfunction occurs that ultimately results in death if it is 
not interrupted. LVEDP, left ventricular end-diastolic pressure. 
( From SM Hollenberg et al: Ann Intern Med 131:47, 1999 .) 
 
CHAPTER 28
Cardiogenic Shock and Pulmonary Edema 
321
(BP), which result in hypoperfusion of the myocardium 
and further ischemia and depression of cardiac output 
(Fig. 28-1). Systolic myocardial dysfunction reduces 
stroke volume and, together with diastolic dysfunction, 
leads to elevated LV end-diastolic pressure and PCWP 
as well as to pulmonary congestion. Reduced coronary 
perfusion leads to worsening ischemia and progressive 
myocardial dysfunction and a rapid downward spiral, 
which, if uninterrupted, is often fatal. A systemic 
inflammatory response syndrome may accompany large 
infarctions and shock. Inflammatory cytokines, induc-
ible nitric oxide synthase, and excess nitric oxide and 
peroxynitrite may contribute to the genesis of CS as 
they do to that of other forms of shock. Lactic aci-
dosis from poor tissue perfusion and hypoxemia from 
pulmonary edema may result from pump failure and 
then contribute to the vicious circle by worsening 
myocardial ischemia and hypotension. Severe acido-
sis (pH <7.25) reduces the efficacy of endogenous and 
exogenously administered catecholamines. Refractory 
sustained ventricular or atrial tachyarrhythmias can 
cause or exacerbate CS.
Patient profile
In patients with acute MI, older age, female sex, prior 
MI, diabetes, and anterior MI location are all associated 
with an increased risk of CS. Shock associated with a 
first inferior MI should prompt a search for a mechani-
cal cause. Reinfarction soon after MI increases the risk of 
CS. Two-thirds of patients with CS have flow-limiting 
stenoses in all three major coronary arteries, and 20% 
have stenosis of the left main coronary artery. CS may 
rarely occur in the absence of significant stenosis, as seen 
in LV apical ballooning/Takotsubo’s cardiomyopathy.
Timing
Shock is present on admission in only one-quarter of 
patients who develop CS complicating MI; one-quarter 
develop it rapidly thereafter, within 6 h of MI onset. 
Another quarter develop shock later on the first day. 
Subsequent onset of CS may be due to reinfarction, 
marked infarct expansion, or a mechanical complication.
Diagnosis
Due to the unstable condition of these patients, sup-
portive therapy must be initiated simultaneously with 
diagnostic evaluation (Fig. 28-2). A focused history 
and physical examination should be performed, blood 
specimens sent to the laboratory, and an electrocardio-
gram (ECG) and chest x-ray obtained.
Echocardiography is an invaluable diagnostic tool in 
patients suspected of CS.
(MR), ventricular septal rupture (VSR), predominant 
right ventricular (RV) failure, and free wall rupture or 
tamponade account for the remainder.
Pathophysiology
CS is characterized by a vicious circle in which depres-
sion of myocardial contractility, usually due to ischemia, 
results in reduced cardiac output and arterial pressure 
Table 28-1
Etiologies of Cardiogenic Shock (CS)a and 
Cardiogenic Pulmonary Edema
Etiologies of Cardiogenic Shock or Pulmonary Edema
Acute myocardial infarction/ischemia
  LV failure
  VSR
  Papillary muscle/chordal rupture—severe MR
  Ventricular free wall rupture with subacute tamponade
  Other conditions complicating large MIs
    Hemorrhage
    Infection
    Excess negative inotropic or vasodilator medications
    Prior valvular heart disease
    Hyperglycemia/ketoacidosis
Post-cardiac arrest
Post-cardiotomy
Refractory sustained tachyarrhythmias
Acute fulminant myocarditis
End-stage cardiomyopathy
Left ventricular apical ballooning
Takotsubo’s cardiomyopathy
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy with severe outflow obstruction
Aortic dissection with aortic insufficiency or tamponade
Pulmonary embolus
Severe valvular heart disease
  Critical aortic or mitral stenosis
  Acute severe aortic or MR
Toxic-metabolic
  Beta-blocker or calcium channel antagonist overdose
Other Etiologies of Cardiogenic Shockb
RV failure due to:
  Acute myocardial infarction
  Acute coronary pulmonale
Refractory sustained bradyarrhythmias
Pericardial tamponade
Toxic/metabolic
  Severe acidosis, severe hypoxemia
aThe etiologies of CS are listed. Most of these can cause pulmonary 
edema instead of shock or pulmonary edema with CS.
bThese cause CS but not pulmonary edema.
Abbreviations: LV, left ventricular; VSR, ventricular septal rupture; 
MR, mitral regurgitation; MI, myocardial infarction; RV, right ventricular.
SECTION IV
Disorders of the Heart
322
Acute, severe MR and VSR usually are associated with 
characteristic systolic murmurs (Chap. 35). Rales are 
audible in most patients with LV failure causing CS. 
Oliguria (urine output <30 mL/h) is common.
Laboratory findings
The white blood cell count is typically elevated 
with a left shift. In the absence of prior renal insuffi-
ciency, renal function is initially normal, but blood 
urea nitrogen and creatinine rise progressively. Hepatic 
transaminases may be markedly elevated due to liver 
hypoperfusion. Poor tissue perfusion may result in an 
anion-gap acidosis and elevation of the lactic acid level. 
Before support with supplemental O2, arterial blood 
Clinical findings
Most patients have continuing chest pain and dys-
pnea and appear pale, apprehensive, and diaphoretic. 
Mentation may be altered, with somnolence, confusion, 
and agitation. The pulse is typically weak and rapid, 
often in the range of 90–110 beats/min, or severe bra-
dycardia due to high-grade heart block may be pres-
ent. Systolic blood pressure is reduced (<90 mmHg) 
with a narrow pulse pressure (<30 mmHg), but occa-
sionally BP may be maintained by very high systemic 
vascular resistance. Tachypnea, Cheyne-Stokes respi-
rations, and jugular venous distention may be present. 
The precordium is typically quiet, with a weak apical 
pulse. S1 is usually soft, and an S3 gallop may be audible. 
Figure 28-2 
The emergency management of patients with cardio-
genic shock, acute pulmonary edema, or both is outlined. 
*Furosemide: <0.5 mg/kg for new-onset acute pulmo-
nary edema without hypervolemia; 1 mg/kg for acute on 
chronic volume overload, renal insufficiency. †For man-
agement of bradycardia and tachycardia, see Chaps. 15 
and 16. ‡Indicates modification from published guidelines. 
ACE, angiotensin-converting enzyme; BP, blood pressure; 
MI, myocardial infarction. (Modified from Guidelines 2000 
for Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation and Emergency Car-
diovascular Care. Part 7: The era of reperfusion: Section 1: 
Acute coronary syndromes [acute myocardial infarction]. The 
American Heart Association in collaboration with the Inter-
national Liaison Committee on Resuscitation. Circulation 
102:I172, 2000.)
Clinical signs: Shock, hypoperfusion, congestive heart failure, acute pulmonary edema
Most likely major underlying disturbance?
Acute pulmonary edema
Check blood pressure
Systolic BP
Greater than 100 mm Hg
and not less than 30 mm Hg
below baseline
ACE Inhibitors
Short-acting agent such as
captopril (1 to 6.25 mg)
Low output-
cardiogenic shock
Check blood
pressure
See Section 7.7
in the ACC/AHA guidelines for
patients with ST-elevation
myocardial infarction
Hypovolemia
Bradycardia†
Tachycardia†
Administer
• Fluids
• Blood transfusions
• Cause-specific
 interventions
Consider vasopressors
Arrhythmia
Systolic BP
Greater than 100 mm Hg
Nitroglycerin
10 to 20 mcg/min IV
Systolic BP
70 to 100 mm Hg
NO signs/symptoms of shock
Dobutamine
2 to 20 mcg/kg per minute IV
Systolic BP 
less than 100 mm Hg
signs/symptoms of shock‡
‡Norepinephrine 0.5 to 30 mcg/min IV
or
Dopamine, 5 to 15 mcg/kg per minute IV
Administer
• Furosemide IV 0.5 to 1.0 mg/kg∗
• Morphine IV 2 to 4 mg
• Oxygen/intubation as needed
• Nitroglycerin SL, then 10 to 20 mcg/min IV if SBP
  greater than 100 mm Hg
• ‡Norepinephrine, 0.5 to 30 mcg/min IV or Dopamine,
 5 to 15 mcg/kg per minute IV if SBP <100 mm Hg and
 signs/symptoms of shock present
• Dobutamine 2 to 20 mcg/kg per minute IV if SBP 70
 to 100 mm Hg and no signs/symptoms of shock
First line of action
Second line of action
Third line of action
Further diagnostic/therapeutic considerations (should be considered
in nonhypovolemic shock)
Diagnostic
• Pulmonary artery catheter
• Echocardiography
• Angiography for MI/ischemia
• Additional diagnostic studies
Therapeutic
• Intra-aortic balloon pump
• Reperfusion/revascularization
 
CHAPTER 28
Cardiogenic Shock and Pulmonary Edema 
323
is present. Proximal aortic dissection with aortic regurgita-
tion or tamponade may be visualized, or evidence for pul-
monary embolism may be obtained.
Pulmonary artery catheterization
There is controversy regarding the use of pulmonary 
artery (Swan-Ganz) catheters in patients with established 
or suspected CS (Chap. 13). Their use is generally recom-
mended for measurement of filling pressures and cardiac 
output to confirm the diagnosis and optimize the use 
of IV fluids, inotropic agents, and vasopressors in per-
sistent shock (Table 28-2). Blood samples for O2 satu-
ration measurement should be obtained from the right 
atrium, right ventricle, and pulmonary artery to rule 
out a left-to-right shunt. Mixed venous O2 saturations 
are low and arteriovenous (AV) O2 differences are ele-
vated, reflecting low cardiac index and high fractional 
O2 extraction. However, when a systemic inflammatory 
response syndrome accompanies CS, AV O2 differences 
may not be elevated. The PCWP is elevated. How-
ever, use of sympathomimetic amines may return these 
measurements and the systemic BP to normal. Systemic 
vascular resistance may be low, normal, or elevated in 
CS. Equalization of right- and left-sided filling pressures 
(right atrial and PCWP) suggests cardiac tamponade as 
the cause of CS (Chap. 22).
gases usually demonstrate hypoxemia and metabolic aci-
dosis, which may be compensated by respiratory alkalo-
sis. Cardiac markers, creatine phosphokinase and its MB 
fraction, and troponins I and T are markedly elevated.
Electrocardiogram
In CS due to acute MI with LV failure, Q waves and/
or >2-mm ST elevation in multiple leads or left bun-
dle branch block are usually present. More than one-
half of all infarcts associated with shock are anterior. 
Global ischemia due to severe left main stenosis usually 
is accompanied by severe (e.g., >3 mm) ST depressions 
in multiple leads.
Chest roentgenogram
The chest x-ray typically shows pulmonary vascular con-
gestion and often pulmonary edema, but these findings 
may be absent in up to a third of patients. The heart size 
is usually normal when CS results from a first MI but is 
enlarged when it occurs in a patient with a previous MI.
Echocardiogram
A two-dimensional echocardiogram with color-flow 
Doppler (Chap. 12) should be obtained promptly in 
patients with suspected CS to help define its etiology. 
Doppler mapping demonstrates a left-to-right shunt in 
patients with VSR and the severity of MR when the latter 
Table 28-2
Hemodynamic Patternsa
RA, 
mmHg
RVS, 
mmHg
RVD, 
mmHg
PAS, 
mmHg
PAD, 
mmHg
PCW, 
mmHg
CI, (L/min)/m2
SVR, (dyn · s)/
cm5
Normal values
<6
<25
0–12
<25
0–12
<6–12
≥2.5
(800–1600)
MI without pulmonary edemab
—
—
—
—
—
∼13 (5–18)
∼2.7 (2.2–4.3)
—
Pulmonary edema
↔↑
↔↑
↔↑
↑
↑
↑
↔↓
↑
Cardiogenic shock
  LV failure
↔↑
↔↑
↔↑
↔↑
↑
↑
↓
↔↑
  RV failurec
↑
↓↔↑d
↑
↓↔↑d
↔↓↑d
↓↔↑d
↓
↑
Cardiac tamponade
↑
↔↑
↑
↔↑
↔↑
↔↑
↓
↑
Acute mitral regurgitation
↔↑
↑
↔↑
↑
↑
↑
↔↓
↔↑
Ventricular septal rupture
↑
↔↑
↑
↔↑
↔↑
↔↑
↑PBF
↓SBF
↔↑
Hypovolemic shock
↓
↔↓
↔↓
↓
↓
↓
↓
↑
Septic shock
↓
↔↓
↔↓
↓
↓
↓
↑
↓
aThere is significant patient-to-patient variation. Pressure may be normalized if cardiac output is low.
bForrester et al classified nonreperfused MI patients into four hemodynamic subsets. (From Forrester JS et al: N Engl J Med 295:1356, 1976.) 
PCWP and CI in clinically stable subset 1 patients are shown. Values in parentheses represent range.
c“Isolated” or predominant RV failure.
dPCW and PA pressures may rise in RV failure after volume loading due to RV dilation, right-to-left shift of the interventricular septum, resulting 
in impaired LV filling. When biventricular failure is present, the patterns are similar to those shown for LV failure.
Abbreviations: CI, cardiac index; MI, myocardial infarction; P/SBF, pulmonary/systemic blood flow; PAS/D, pulmonary artery systolic/diastolic; 
PCW, pulmonary capillary wedge; RA, right atrium; RVS/D, right ventricular systolic/diastolic; SVR, systemic vascular resistance.
Source: Table prepared with the assistance of Krishnan Ramanathan, MD.
SECTION IV
Disorders of the Heart
324
chronotropic and inotropic effects as a consequence 
of β-adrenergic receptor stimulation. At higher doses, 
a vasoconstrictor effect results from α-receptor stimu-
lation. It is started at an infusion rate of 2–5 μg/kg per 
min, and the dose is increased every 2–5 min to a maxi-
mum of 20–50 μg/kg per min. Dobutamine is a synthetic 
sympathomimetic amine with positive inotropic action 
and minimal positive chronotropic activity at low doses 
(2.5 μg/kg per min) but moderate chronotropic activ-
ity at higher doses. Although the usual dose is up to  
10 μg/kg per min, its vasodilating activity precludes its 
use when a vasoconstrictor effect is required.
Aortic Counterpulsation  In CS, mechan-
ical assistance with an intraaortic balloon pumping 
(IABP) system capable of augmenting both arterial dia-
stolic pressure and cardiac output is helpful in rapidly 
stabilizing patients. A sausage-shaped balloon is intro-
duced percutaneously into the aorta via the femoral 
artery; the balloon is automatically inflated during early 
diastole, augmenting coronary blood flow. The balloon 
collapses in early systole, reducing the afterload against 
which the LV ejects. IABP improves hemodynamic sta-
tus temporarily in most patients. In contrast to vaso-
pressors and inotropic agents, myocardial O2 consump-
tion is reduced, ameliorating ischemia. IABP is useful 
as a stabilizing measure in patients with CS before and 
during cardiac catheterization and percutaneous coro-
nary intervention (PCI) or before urgent surgery. IABP 
is contraindicated if aortic regurgitation is present or 
aortic dissection is suspected. Ventricular assist devices 
may be considered for eligible young patients with 
refractory shock as a bridge to cardiac transplantation 
(Chap. 18).
Reperfusion-Revascularization  The 
rapid establishment of blood flow in the infarct-related 
artery is essential in the management of CS and forms 
the centerpiece of management. The randomized 
SHOCK Trial demonstrated that 132 lives were saved 
per 1000 patients treated with early revascularization 
with PCI or coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) com-
pared with initial medical therapy including IABP with 
fibrinolytics followed by delayed revascularization. The 
benefit is seen across the risk strata and is sustained up 
to 11 years after an MI. Early revascularization with PCI 
or CABG is a class I recommendation for patients age 
<75 years with ST elevation or left bundle branch block 
MI who develop CS within 36 h of MI and who can be 
revascularized within 18 h of the development of CS. 
When mechanical revascularization is not possible, 
IABP and fibrinolytic therapy are recommended. Older 
patients who are suitable candidates for aggressive care 
also should be offered early revascularization.
Left heart catheterization and coronary 
angiography
Measurement of LV pressure and definition of the 
coronary anatomy provide useful information and are 
indicated in most patients with CS complicating MI. 
Cardiac catheterization should be performed when 
there is a plan and capability for immediate coronary 
intervention (see later) or when a definitive diagnosis 
has not been made by other tests.
Treatment	
Acute Myocardial Infarction
General Measures  (Fig. 28-2) In addition 
to the usual treatment of acute MI (Chap. 35), initial 
therapy is aimed at maintaining adequate systemic and 
coronary perfusion by raising systemic BP with vasopres-
sors and adjusting volume status to a level that ensures 
optimum LV filling pressure. There is interpatient vari-
ability, but the values that generally are associated with 
adequate perfusion are systolic BP ∼90 mmHg or mean 
BP >60 mmHg and PCWP >20 mmHg. Hypoxemia and 
acidosis must be corrected; most patients require ven-
tilatory support with either endotracheal intubation 
or noninvasive ventilation to correct these abnormali-
ties and reduce the work of breathing (see “Pulmonary 
Edema,” later). Negative inotropic agents should be  
discontinued, and the doses of renally cleared medica-
tions adjusted. Hyperglycemia should be controlled 
with insulin. Bradyarrhythmias may require transvenous 
pacing. Recurrent ventricular tachycardia or rapid atrial 
fibrillation may require immediate treatment (Chap. 16).
Vasopressors  Various IV drugs may be used 
to augment BP and cardiac output in patients with CS. 
All have important disadvantages, and none has been 
shown to change the outcome in patients with estab-
lished shock. Norepinephrine is a potent vasoconstrictor 
and inotropic stimulant that is useful for patients with 
CS. As first line of therapy norepinephrine was associated 
with fewer adverse events, including arrhythmias, com-
pared to a dopamine randomized trial of patients with 
several eteologies of circulatory shock. Although it did not 
significantly improve survival compared to dopamine, its 
relative safety suggests that norepinephrine is reasonable 
as initial vasopressor therapy. Norepinephrine should be 
started at a dose of 2 to 4 μg/min and titrated upward as 
necessary. If systemic perfusion or systolic pressure can-
not be maintained at >90 mmHg with a dose of 15 μg/
min, it is unlikely that a further increase will be beneficial.
Dopamine has varying hemodynamic effects based 
on the dose; at low doses (≤2 μg/kg per min), it dilates 
the renal vascular bed, although its outcome benefits at 
this low dose have not been demonstrated conclusively; 
at moderate doses (2–10 μg/kg per min), it has positive 
 
CHAPTER 28
Cardiogenic Shock and Pulmonary Edema 
325
loss of pulse, blood pressure, and consciousness but sinus 
rhythm on ECG (pulseless electrical activity) due to car-
diac tamponade (Chap. 22). Free wall rupture may also 
result in CS due to subacute tamponade when the peri-
cardium temporarily seals the rupture sites. Definitive sur-
gical repair is required.
Acute Fulminant Myocarditis
(See also Chap. 21) Myocarditis can mimic acute MI 
with ST deviation or bundle branch block on the ECG 
and marked elevation of cardiac markers. Acute myo-
carditis causes CS in a small proportion of cases. These 
patients are typically younger than those with CS due 
to acute MI and often do not have typical ischemic 
chest pain. Echocardiography usually shows global LV 
dysfunction. Initial management is the same as for CS 
complicating acute MI (Fig. 28-2) but does not involve 
coronary revascularization.
Pulmonary Edema
The etiologies and pathophysiology of pulmonary edema 
are discussed in Chap. 5.
Diagnosis
Acute pulmonary edema usually presents with the rapid 
onset of dyspnea at rest, tachypnea, tachycardia, and 
severe hypoxemia. Rales and wheezing due to airway 
compression from peribronchial cuffing may be audible. 
Hypertension is usually present due to release of endog-
enous catecholamines.
It is often difficult to distinguish between cardiogenic 
and noncardiogenic causes of acute pulmonary edema. 
Echocardiography may identify systolic and diastolic ven-
tricular dysfunction and valvular lesions. Pulmonary 
edema associated with electrocardiographic ST eleva-
tion and evolving Q waves is usually diagnostic of 
acute MI and should prompt immediate institution of 
MI protocols and coronary artery reperfusion therapy 
(Chap. 35). Brain natriuretic peptide levels, when sub-
stantially elevated, support heart failure as the etiology 
of acute dyspnea with pulmonary edema (Chap. 17).
The use of a Swan-Ganz catheter permits measure-
ment of PCWP and helps differentiate high-pressure 
(cardiogenic) from normal-pressure (noncardiogenic) 
causes of pulmonary edema. Pulmonary artery catheter-
ization is indicated when the etiology of the pulmonary 
edema is uncertain, when it is refractory to therapy, or 
when it is accompanied by hypotension. Data derived 
from use of a catheter often alter the treatment plan, but 
the impact on mortality rates has not been demonstrated.
Prognosis
Within this high-risk condition, there is a wide range of 
expected death rates based on age, severity of hemody-
namic abnormalities, severity of the clinical manifesta-
tions of hypoperfusion, and the performance of early 
revascularization.
Shock Secondary to Right 
Ventricular Infarction
Although transient hypotension is common in patients 
with RV infarction and inferior MI (Chap. 35), per-
sistent CS due to RV failure accounts for only 3% of 
CS complicating MI. The salient features of RV shock 
are absence of pulmonary congestion, high right atrial 
pressure (which may be seen only after volume load-
ing), RV dilation and dysfunction, only mildly or mod-
erately depressed LV function, and predominance of 
single-vessel proximal right coronary artery occlusion. 
Management includes IV fluid administration to opti-
mize right atrial pressure (10–15 mmHg); avoidance of 
excess fluids, which cause a shift of the interventricular 
septum into the LV; sympathomimetic amines; IABP; 
and the early reestablishment of infarct-artery flow.
Mitral Regurgitation
(See also Chap. 35) Acute severe MR due to papillary 
muscle dysfunction and/or rupture may complicate 
MI and result in CS and/or pulmonary edema. This 
complication most often occurs on the first day, with 
a second peak several days later. The diagnosis is con-
firmed by echo-Doppler. Rapid stabilization with IABP 
is recommended, with administration of dobutamine 
as needed to raise cardiac output. Reducing the load 
against which the LV pumps (afterload) reduces the vol-
ume of regurgitant flow of blood into the left atrium. 
Mitral valve surgery is the definitive therapy and should 
be performed early in the course in suitable candidates.
Ventricular Septal Rupture
(See also Chap. 35) Echo-Doppler demonstrates shunting 
of blood from the left to the right ventricle and may visu-
alize the opening in the interventricular septum. Timing 
and management are similar to those for MR with IABP 
support and surgical correction for suitable candidates.
Free Wall Rupture
Myocardial rupture is a dramatic complication of STEMI 
that is most likely to occur during the first week after the 
onset of symptoms; its frequency increases with the age of 
the patient. The clinical presentation typically is a sudden 
SECTION IV
Disorders of the Heart
326
chronic diuretic use, or hypervolemia or after failure of a 
lower dose.
Nitrates  Nitroglycerin and isosorbide dinitrate act 
predominantly as venodilators but have coronary vasodi-
lating properties as well. They are rapid in onset and effec-
tive when administered by a variety of routes. Sublingual 
nitroglycerin (0.4 mg × 3 every 5 min) is first-line therapy 
for acute cardiogenic pulmonary edema. If pulmonary 
edema persists in the absence of hypotension, sublin-
gual may be followed by IV nitroglycerin, commencing 
at 5–10 μg/min. IV nitroprusside (0.1–5 μg/kg per min) 
is a potent venous and arterial vasodilator. It is useful for 
patients with pulmonary edema and hypertension but is 
not recommended in states of reduced coronary artery 
perfusion. It requires close monitoring and titration using 
an arterial catheter for continuous BP measurement.
Morphine  Given in 2- to 4-mg IV boluses, morphine 
is a transient venodilator that reduces preload while 
relieving dyspnea and anxiety. These effects can dimin-
ish stress, catecholamine levels, tachycardia, and ven-
tricular afterload in patients with pulmonary edema and 
systemic hypertension.
Angiotensin-Converting 
Enzyme 
(ACE) 
Inhibitors  ACE inhibitors reduce both afterload 
and preload and are recommended for hypertensive 
patients. A low dose of a short-acting agent may be ini-
tiated and followed by increasing oral doses. In acute MI 
with heart failure, ACE inhibitors reduce short- and long-
term mortality rates.
Other Preload-Reducing Agents  IV recom-
binant brain natriuretic peptide (nesiritide) is a potent 
vasodilator with diuretic properties and is effective 
in the treatment of cardiogenic pulmonary edema. It 
should be reserved for refractory patients and is not rec-
ommended in the setting of ischemia or MI.
Physical Methods  Reduction of venous return 
reduces preload. Patients without hypotension should 
be maintained in the sitting position with the legs dan-
gling along the side of the bed.
Inotropic and Inodilator Drugs  The sympa-
thomimetic amines dopamine and dobutamine (see 
earlier) are potent inotropic agents. The bipyridine 
phosphodiesterase-3 inhibitors (inodilators), such as 
milrinone (50 μg/kg followed by 0.25–0.75 μg/kg per 
min), stimulate myocardial contractility while promot-
ing peripheral and pulmonary vasodilation. Such agents 
are indicated in patients with cardiogenic pulmonary 
edema and severe LV dysfunction.
Digitalis Glycosides  Once a mainstay of treatment 
because of their positive inotropic action (Chap. 17), 
digitalis glycosides are rarely used at present. However,  
Treatment	
Pulmonary Edema
The treatment of pulmonary edema depends on the 
specific etiology. In light of the acute, life-threatening 
nature of the condition, a number of measures must 
be applied immediately to support the circulation, gas 
exchange, and lung mechanics. In addition, conditions 
that frequently complicate pulmonary edema, such as 
infection, acidemia, anemia, and renal failure, must be 
corrected.
Support of Oxygenation and Venti-
lation  Patients with acute cardiogenic pulmonary 
edema generally have an identifiable cause of acute LV 
failure—such as arrhythmia, ischemia/infarction, or myo-
cardial decompensation (Chap. 17)—that can be rapidly 
treated, with improvement in gas exchange. In contrast, 
noncardiogenic edema usually resolves much less 
quickly, and most patients require mechanical ventilation.
Oxygen Therapy  Support of oxygenation is essen-
tial to ensure adequate O2 delivery to peripheral tissues, 
including the heart.
Positive-Pressure Ventilation  Pulmonary edema 
increases the work of breathing and the O2 require-
ments of this work, imposing a significant physiologic 
stress on the heart. When oxygenation or ventilation 
is not adequate in spite of supplemental O2, positive-
pressure ventilation by face or nasal mask or by endo-
tracheal intubation should be initiated. Noninvasive 
ventilation can rest the respiratory muscles, improve 
oxygenation and cardiac function, and reduce the need 
for intubation. In refractory cases, mechanical ventila-
tion can relieve the work of breathing more completely 
than can noninvasive ventilation. Mechanical ventilation 
with positive end-expiratory pressure can have multiple 
beneficial effects on pulmonary edema: (1) decreases 
both preload and afterload, thereby improving cardiac 
function, (2) redistributes lung water from the intraalve-
olar to the extraalveolar space, where the fluid interferes 
less with gas exchange, and (3) increases lung volume to 
avoid atelectasis.
Reduction of Preload  In most forms of 
pulmonary edema, the quantity of extravascular lung 
water is determined by both the PCWP and the intravas-
cular volume status.
Diuretics  The “loop diuretics” furosemide, bumetanide, 
and torsemide are effective in most forms of pulmo-
nary edema, even in the presence of hypoalbuminemia, 
hyponatremia, or hypochloremia. Furosemide is also 
a venodilator that reduces preload rapidly, before any 
diuresis, and is the diuretic of choice. The initial dose of 
furosemide should be ≤0.5 mg/kg, but a higher dose  
(1 mg/kg) is required in patients with renal insufficiency, 
 
CHAPTER 28
Cardiogenic Shock and Pulmonary Edema 
327
may lead to hypotension, coronary artery hypoperfusion, 
and shock (Fig. 28-1). In general, patients with a hyper-
tensive response to pulmonary edema tolerate and bene-
fit from these medications. In normotensive patients, low 
doses of single agents should be instituted sequentially, 
as needed.
Acute Coronary Syndromes  (See also Chap. 35) 
Acute STEMI complicated by pulmonary edema is asso-
ciated with in-hospital mortality rates of 20–40%. After 
immediate stabilization, coronary artery blood flow must 
be reestablished rapidly. When available, primary PCI is 
preferable; alternatively, a fibrinolytic agent should be 
administered. Early coronary angiography and revascu-
larization by PCI or CABG also are indicated for patients 
with non-ST elevation acute coronary syndrome. IABP 
use may be required to stabilize patients for coronary 
angiography if hypotension develops or for refractory 
pulmonary edema in patients with LV failure who are 
candidates for revascularization.
Unusual Types of Edema  Specific etiologies 
of pulmonary edema may require particular therapy. 
Reexpansion pulmonary edema can develop after 
removal of air or fluid that has been in the pleural space 
for some time. These patients may develop hypotension 
or oliguria resulting from rapid fluid shifts into the lung. 
Diuretics and preload reduction are contraindicated, 
and intravascular volume repletion often is needed 
while supporting oxygenation and gas exchange.
High-altitude pulmonary edema often can be pre-
vented by use of dexamethasone, calcium channel-
blocking drugs, or long-acting inhaled β2-adrenergic 
agonists. Treatment includes descent from altitude, bed 
rest, oxygen, and, if feasible, inhaled nitric oxide; nife-
dipine may also be effective.
For pulmonary edema resulting from upper air-
way obstruction, recognition of the obstructing cause 
is key, since treatment then is to relieve or bypass the 
obstruction.
they may be useful for control of ventricular rate in 
patients with rapid atrial fibrillation or flutter and LV dys-
function, since they do not have the negative inotropic 
effects of other drugs that inhibit atrioventricular nodal 
conduction.
Intraaortic Counterpulsation  IABP may help 
relieve cardiogenic pulmonary edema. It is indicated as 
a stabilizing measure when acute severe mitral regur-
gitation or ventricular septal rupture causes refractory 
pulmonary edema, especially in preparation for surgical 
repair. IABP or LV-assist devices (Chap. 18) are useful as 
bridging therapy to cardiac transplantation in patients 
with refractory pulmonary edema secondary to myocar-
ditis or cardiomyopathy.
Treatment of Tachyarrhythmias and Atrial-
Ventricular Resynchronization  (See also Chap. 16) 
Sinus tachycardia or atrial fibrillation can result from ele-
vated left atrial pressure and sympathetic stimulation. 
Tachycardia itself can limit LV filling time and raise left 
atrial pressure further. Although relief of pulmonary con-
gestion will slow the sinus rate or ventricular response in 
atrial fibrillation, a primary tachyarrhythmia may require 
cardioversion. In patients with reduced LV function and 
without atrial contraction or with lack of synchronized 
atrioventricular contraction, placement of an atrioventricu-
lar sequential pacemaker should be considered (Chap. 15).
Stimulation of Alveolar Fluid Clearance 
­Recent mechanistic studies on alveolar epithelial ion trans-
port have defined a variety of ways to upregulate the 
clearance of solute and water from the alveolar space. In 
patients with acute lung injury (noncardiogenic pulmonary 
edema), IV β-adrenergic agonist treatment decreases extra-
vascular lung water, but the outcome benefit is uncertain.
Special Considerations
The Risk of Iatrogenic Cardiogenic Shock 
In the treatment of pulmonary edema vasodilators lower 
BP, and, particularly when used in combination, their use 
 Robert J. Myerburg  I   Agustin Castellanos 
328
 OVERVIEW AND DEFINITIONS 
 Sudden cardiac death (SCD) is deﬁ ned  as natural death 
due to cardiac causes in a person who may or may not 
have previously recognized heart disease but in whom 
the time and mode of death are  unexpected . In the con-
text of time, “sudden” is deﬁ ned for most clinical and 
epidemiologic purposes as  1 h or less between a change 
in clinical status heralding the onset of the terminal clin-
ical event and the cardiac arrest itself. An exception is 
unwitnessed deaths, in which pathologists may expand 
the deﬁ nition of time to 24 h after the victim was last 
seen to be alive and stable. 
 The overwhelming majority of natural deaths are 
caused by cardiac disorders. However, it is common for 
underlying heart diseases—often far advanced—to go 
unrecognized before the fatal event. As a result, up to 
two-thirds of all SCDs occur as the ﬁ rst clinical expres-
sion of previously undiagnosed disease or in patients 
with known heart disease, the extent of which sug-
gests low risk. The magnitude of sudden  cardiac death 
as a public health problem is highlighted by the esti-
mate that ∼50% of all cardiac deaths are sudden and 
unexpected, accounting for a total SCD burden esti-
mated to range from <200,000 to >450,000 deaths each 
year in the United States. SCD is a direct consequence 
of cardiac arrest, which may be reversible if addressed 
promptly. Since resuscitation techniques and emergency 
rescue systems are available to respond to victims of 
out-of-hospital cardiac arrest, which was uniformly fatal 
in the past, understanding the SCD problem has practi-
cal clinical importance. 
 Because of community-based interventions, vic-
tims may remain biologically alive for days or even 
weeks after a cardiac arrest that has resulted in irre-
versible central nervous system damage. Confusion in 
terms can be avoided by adhering strictly to deﬁ nitions 
 CARDIOVASCULAR COLLAPSE, CARDIAC 
ARREST, AND SUDDEN CARDIAC DEATH 
 CHAPTER 29 
of cardiovascular collapse, cardiac arrest, and death 
 ( Table 29-1 ) . Although cardiac arrest is often poten-
tially reversible by appropriate and timely interventions, 
death is biologically, legally, and literally an absolute and 
irreversible event. Death may be delayed in a survivor 
of cardiac arrest, but “survival after sudden death” is an 
irrational term. When biologic death of a cardiac arrest 
victim is delayed because of interventions, the relevant 
pathophysiologic event remains the sudden and unex-
pected cardiac arrest that leads ultimately to death, even 
though delayed by interventions. The language used 
should reﬂ ect the fact that the index event was a car-
diac arrest and that death was due to its delayed con-
sequences. Accordingly, for statistical purposes, deaths 
that occur during hospitalization or within 30 days after 
resuscitated cardiac arrest are counted as sudden deaths. 
 CLINICAL DEFINITION OF FORMS OF 
CARDIOVASCULAR COLLAPSE 
Cardiovascular collapse is a general term connoting loss of 
sufﬁ cient cerebral blood ﬂ ow to maintain consciousness 
due to acute dysfunction of the heart and/or peripheral 
vasculature. It may be caused by vasodepressor syncope 
(vasovagal syncope, postural hypotension with syncope, 
neurocardiogenic syncope, a transient severe bradycardia, 
or cardiac arrest. The latter is distinguished from the 
transient forms of cardiovascular collapse in that it usu-
ally requires an intervention to restore spontaneous 
blood ﬂ ow. In contrast, vasodepressor syncope and 
other primary bradyarrhythmic syncopal events are tran-
sient and non-life-threatening, with spontaneous return 
of consciousness. 
 The most common electrical mechanism for cardiac 
arrest is ventricular ﬁ brillation (VF), which is responsible 
for 50–80% of cardiac arrests. Severe persistent brady-
arrhythmias, asystole, and pulseless electrical activity 
 
CHAPTER 29
Cardiovascular Collapse, Cardiac Arrest, and Sudden Cardiac Death
329
and young adults, the incidence of SCD is approxi-
mately 1 per 100,000 population per year. The inci-
dence begins to increase in adults over age 30 years, 
reaching a second peak in the age range 45–75 years, 
when it approximates 1–2 per 1000 per year among 
the unselected adult population. Increasing age within 
this range is associated with increasing risk for sudden 
cardiac death (Fig. 29-1A). From 1 to 13 years of age, 
only one of five sudden natural deaths is due to cardiac 
causes. Between 14 and 21 years of age, the proportion 
increases to 30%, and it rises to 88% in the middle-aged 
and elderly.
Young and middle-aged men and women have dif-
ferent susceptibilities to SCD, but the sex differences 
decrease with advancing age. The difference in risk for 
SCD parallels the differences in age-related risks for 
other manifestations of coronary heart disease (CHD) 
between men and women. As the gender gap for mani-
festations of CHD closes in the sixth to eighth decades 
of life, the excess risk of SCD in males progressively 
narrows. Despite the lower incidence among younger 
women, coronary risk factors such as cigarette smoking, 
diabetes, hyperlipidemia, and hypertension are highly 
influential, and SCD remains an important clinical and 
epidemiologic problem. The incidence of SCD among 
the African-American population appears to be higher 
than it is among the white population; the reasons 
remain uncertain.
Genetic factors contribute to the risk of acquiring 
CHD and its expression as acute coronary syndromes, 
including SCD. In addition, however, there are data 
(PEA: organized electrical activity, unusually slow, with-
out mechanical response, formerly called electromechan-
ical dissociation [EMD]) cause another 20–30%. Pulse-
less sustained ventricular tachycardia (a rapid arrhythmia 
distinct from PEA) is a less common mechanism. Acute 
low cardiac output states, having a precipitous onset, also 
may present clinically as a cardiac arrest. These hemody-
namic causes include massive acute pulmonary emboli, 
internal blood loss from a ruptured aortic aneurysm, 
intense anaphylaxis, and cardiac rupture with tamponade 
after myocardial infarction (MI). Sudden deaths due to 
these causes are not included in the SCD category.
Etiology, Initiating Events, and 
Clinical Epidemiology
Clinical, epidemiologic, and pathologic studies have 
provided information on the underlying structural abnor-
malities in victims of SCD and identified subgroups at 
high risk for SCD. In addition, studies of clinical physi-
ology have begun to identify transient functional factors 
that may convert a long-standing underlying structural 
abnormality from a stable to an unstable state, leading to 
the onset of cardiac arrest (Table 29-2).
Cardiac disorders constitute the most common causes 
of sudden natural death. After an initial peak incidence 
of sudden death between birth and 6 months of age 
(the sudden infant death syndrome [SIDS]), the inci-
dence of sudden death declines sharply and remains low 
through childhood and adolescence. Among adolescents 
Table 29-1
Distinction Between Cardiovascular Collapse, Cardiac Arrest, and Death
Term
Definition
Qualifiers
Mechanisms
Cardiovascular collapse
Sudden loss of effective 
blood flow due to cardiac 
and/or peripheral vascular 
factors that may reverse 
spontaneously (e.g., 
neurocardiogenic syncope, 
vasovagal syncope) or 
require interventions  
(e.g., cardiac arrest)
Nonspecific term: includes 
cardiac arrest and its con-
sequences and transient 
events that characteristically 
revert spontaneously
Same as “cardiac arrest,” 
plus vasodepressor syncope 
or other causes of transient 
loss of blood flow
Cardiac arrest
Abrupt cessation of cardiac 
mechanical function, which 
may be reversible by a 
prompt intervention but will 
lead to death in its absence
Rare spontaneous rever-
sions; likelihood of success-
ful intervention relates to 
mechanism of arrest, clinical 
setting, and prompt return of 
circulation
Ventricular fibrillation, ven-
tricular tachycardia, asys-
tole, bradycardia, pulseless 
electrical activity, mechani-
cal factors
Sudden cardiac death
Sudden, irreversible cessation 
of all biological functions
None
Source: Modified from RJ Myerburg, A Castellanos: Cardiac arrest and sudden cardiac death, in Braunwald’s Heart Disease, 8th ed, P Libby 
et al (eds). Philadelphia, Saunders, 2008, with permission of publisher.
SECTION IV
Disorders of the Heart
330
probability of a similar expression in the offspring. In 
a number of less common syndromes, such as hyper-
trophic cardiomyopathy, congenital long QT interval 
syndromes, right ventricular dysplasia, and the syn-
drome of right bundle branch block and nonischemic 
ST-segment elevations (Brugada syndrome), there is a 
specific inherited risk of ventricular arrhythmias and 
SCD (Chap. 16).
The structural causes of and functional factors con-
tributing to the SCD syndrome are listed in Table 29-2. 
Worldwide, and especially in Western cultures, coro-
nary atherosclerotic heart disease is the most common 
structural abnormality associated with SCD in middle-
aged and older adults. Up to 80% of all SCDs in the 
United States are due to the consequences of coronary 
atherosclerosis. The nonischemic cardiomyopathies 
(dilated and hypertrophic, collectively; Chap. 14) 
account for another 10–15% of SCDs, and all the 
remaining diverse etiologies cause only 5–10% of all 
SCDs. The inherited arrhythmia syndromes (see earlier 
and Table 29-2) are proportionally more common 
causes in adolescents and young adults. For some of 
these syndromes, such as hypertrophic cardiomyopathy 
(Chap. 21), the risk of SCD increases significantly after 
the onset of puberty.
Transient ischemia in a previously scarred or hyper-
trophied heart, hemodynamic and fluid and electrolyte 
disturbances, fluctuations in autonomic nervous system 
activity, and transient electrophysiologic changes caused 
by drugs or other chemicals (e.g., proarrhythmia) have 
all been implicated as mechanisms responsible for the 
transition from electrophysiologic stability to instabil-
ity. In addition, reperfusion of ischemic myocardium 
may cause transient electrophysiologic instability and 
arrhythmias.
Pathology
Data from postmortem examinations of SCD victims 
parallel the clinical observations on the prevalence of 
CHD as the major structural etiologic factor. More than 
80% of SCD victims have pathologic findings of CHD. 
The pathologic description often includes a combina-
tion of long-standing, extensive atherosclerosis of the 
epicardial coronary arteries and unstable coronary artery 
lesions, which include various permutations of eroded, 
fissured, or ruptured plaques; platelet aggregates; hem-
orrhage; and/or thrombosis. As many as 70–75% of 
males who die suddenly have preexisting healed MIs, 
whereas only 20–30% have recent acute MIs, despite 
the prevalence of unstable plaques and thrombi. The 
latter suggests transient ischemia as the mechanism of 
onset. Regional or global left ventricular (LV) hypertro-
phy often coexists with prior MIs.
suggesting a familial predisposition to SCD as a spe-
cific form of expression of CHD. A parental history 
of SCD as an initial coronary event increases the 
Table 29-2
Cardiac Arrest and Sudden Cardiac Death
Structural Associations and Causes
I. Coronary heart disease
A. Coronary artery abnormalities
1. Chronic atherosclerotic lesions
2. Acute (active) lesions (plaque fissuring, platelet 
aggregation, acute thrombosis)
3. Anomalous coronary artery anatomy
B. Myocardial Infarction
1. Healed
2. Acute
II. Myocardial hypertrophy
 A. Secondary
 B. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
1. Obstructive
2. Nonobstructive
III. Dilated cardiomyopathy—primary muscle disease
IV. Inflammatory and infiltrative disorders
 A. Myocarditis
 B. Noninfectious inflammatory diseases
 C. Infiltrative diseases
V. Valvular heart disease
VI. Electrophysiologic abnormalities, structural
  A. Anomalous pathways in Wolff-Parkinson-White 
syndrome
  B. Conducting system disease
VII. Inherited disorders associated with 
electrophysiological abnormalities (congenital long 
QT syndromes, right ventricular dysplasia, Brugada 
syndrome, catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular 
tachycardia, etc.)
Functional Contributing Factors
I. Alterations of coronary blood flow
A. Transient ischemia
B. Reperfusion after ischemia
II. Low cardiac output states
A. Heart failure
1. Chronic
2. Acute decompensation
B. Shock
III. Systemic metabolic abnormalities
  A. Electrolyte imbalance (e.g., hypokalemia)
  B. Hypoxemia, acidosis
IV. Neurologic disturbances
 A. Autonomic fluctuations: central, neural, humoral
 B. Receptor function
V. Toxic responses
 A. Proarrhythmic drug effects
 B. Cardiac toxins (e.g., cocaine, digitalis intoxication)
 C. Drug interactions
 
CHAPTER 29
Cardiovascular Collapse, Cardiac Arrest, and Sudden Cardiac Death
331
risk for SCD and institute preventive strategies. Second-
ary prevention refers to measures taken to prevent recur-
rent cardiac arrest or death in individuals who have 
survived a previous cardiac arrest. A third category con-
sists of interventions intended to abort sudden cardiac 
arrests, thus avoiding their progression to death. This 
focuses primarily on out-of-hospital response strategies.
The primary prevention strategies currently used 
depend on the magnitude of risk among the various 
population subgroups. Because the annual incidence 
of SCD among the unselected adult population is lim-
ited to 1–2 per 1000 population per year (Fig. 29-1) 
and >30% of all SCDs due to coronary artery disease 
occur as the first clinical manifestation of the disease 
(Fig. 29-2A), the only currently practical strategies are 
profiling for risk of developing CHD and risk factor 
control (Fig. 29-2B). The most powerful long-term risk 
factors include age, cigarette smoking, elevated serum 
cholesterol, diabetes mellitus, elevated blood pressure, 
LV hypertrophy, and nonspecific electrocardiographic 
abnormalities. Markers of inflammation (e.g., levels of 
Prediction and Prevention of 
Cardiac Arrest and Sudden 
Cardiac Death
SCD accounts for approximately one-half the total 
number of cardiovascular deaths. As shown in 
Fig. 29-1B, the very high-risk subgroups provide more 
focused populations (“percent per year”) for predict-
ing cardiac arrest or SCD, but the representation of 
such subgroups within the overall population burden 
of SCD, indicated by the absolute number of events 
(“events per year”), is relatively small. The require-
ments for achieving a major population impact are 
effective prevention of underlying diseases and/or new 
epidemiologic probes that will allow better resolution 
of specific high-risk subgroups within the large general 
populations.
Strategies for predicting and preventing SCD are 
classified as primary and secondary. Primary prevention, as 
defined in various implantable defibrillator trials, refers 
to the attempt to identify individual patients at specific 
10-25%/Year
Advanced heart
disease [1 in 4-10]
0.1%/Year
0.001%/Year
Increasing Risk
20
60
50
40
30
Adolescents/
young adults
[1 per 100,000]
General population
>35 years of age
[1 per 500-1,000]
Age [Years]
A
General
population
High coronary
risk profile
Prior coronary
event
Cardiac arrest
survivor
Post-MI
low EF, VT
EF< 35%; CHF
Patient
Group
SCDs:
[Annual Incidence]
SCDs:
[Annual Number]
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
100,000
300,000
200,000
Percent
Patients (n)
B
Figure 29-1 
Panel A demonstrates age-related risk for SCD. For 
the general population age 35 years and older, SCD risk is 
0.1–0.2% per year (1 per 500–1000 population). Among the 
general population of adolescents and adults younger than age 
30 years, the overall risk of SCD is 1 per 100,000 population, 
or 0.001% per year. The risk of SCD increases dramatically 
beyond age 35 years. The greatest rate of increase is between 
40 and 65 years (vertical axis is discontinuous). Among patients 
older than 30 years of age, with advanced structural heart 
disease and markers of high risk for cardiac arrest, the event 
rate may exceed 25% per year, and age-related risk attenuates. 
(Modified from Myerburg and Castellanos 2008, with permission 
of publisher.) Panel B demonstrates the incidence of SCD 
in population subgroups and the relation of total number of 
events per year to incidence figures. Approximations of sub-
group incidence figures and the related population pool from 
which they are derived are presented. Approximately 50% of all 
cardiac deaths are sudden and unexpected. The incidence 
triangle on the left (“Percent / Year”) indicates the approxi-
mate percentage of sudden and nonsudden deaths in each of 
the population subgroups indicated, ranging from the lowest 
percentage in unselected adult populations (0.1–2% per year) 
to the highest percentage in patients with VT or VF during 
convalescence after an MI (approximately 50% per year). 
The triangle on the right indicates the total number of events 
per year in each of these groups to reflect incidence in context 
with the size of the population subgroups. The highest risk cat-
egories identify the smallest number of total annual events, and 
the lowest incidence category accounts for the largest number 
of events per year. EF, ejection fraction; VT, ventricular tachycar-
dia; VF, ventricular fibrillation; MI, myocardial infarction. (After RJ 
Myerburg et al: Circulation 85:2, 1992.)
SECTION IV
Disorders of the Heart
332
specific high-risk subgroups that become evident among 
populations with established disease (compare events 
per year with percent per year in Fig. 29-1B). After a 
major cardiovascular event, such as acute coronary syn-
dromes, recent onset of heart failure, and survival after 
out-of-hospital cardiac arrest, the highest risk of death 
occurs during the initial 6–18 months after the event 
and then plateaus toward the baseline risk associated 
with the extent of underlying disease. However, many 
of the early deaths are nonsudden, diluting the potential 
benefit of strategies targeted specifically to SCD. Thus, 
although post-MI beta-blocker therapy has an identifi-
able benefit for both early SCD and nonsudden mortal-
ity risk, a total mortality benefit for ICD therapy early 
after MI has not been observed.
C-reactive protein) that may predict plaque destabiliza-
tion have been added to risk classifications. The pres-
ence of multiple risk factors progressively increases inci-
dence, but not sufficiently or specifically enough to 
warrant therapies targeted to potentially fatal arrhythmias 
(Fig. 29-1A). However, recent studies offer the hope that 
genetic markers for specific risk may become available. 
These studies suggest that a family history of SCD asso-
ciated with acute coronary syndromes predicts a higher 
likelihood of cardiac arrest as the initial manifestation of 
coronary artery disease in first-degree family members.
After coronary artery disease has been identified in 
a patient, additional strategies for risk profiling become 
available (Fig. 29-2B), but the majority of SCDs occur 
among the large unselected groups rather than in the 
Figure 29-2 
Population subsets, risk predictors, and distribution of sud-
den cardiac deaths (SCDs) according to clinical circum-
stances. A. The population subset with high-risk arrhythmia 
markers in conjunction with low ejection fraction is a group at 
high risk of SCD but accounts for <10% of the total SCD bur-
den attributable to coronary artery disease. In contrast, nearly 
two-thirds of all SCD victims present with SCD as the first 
and only manifestation of underlying disease or have known 
disease but are considered relatively low risk because of the 
absence of high-risk markers. B. Risk profile for prediction and 
prevention of SCD is difficult. The highest absolute numbers of 
events occur among the general population who may have risk 
factors for coronary heart disease or expressions of disease 
that do not predict high risk. This results in a low sensitivity for 
predicting and preventing SCD. New approaches that include 
epidemiologic modeling of transient risk factors and methods 
of predicting individual patient risk offer hope for greater sen-
sitivity in the future. AP, angina pectoris; ASHD, arteriosclerotic 
heart disease; CAD, coronary artery disease; EPS, electro-
physiologic study; HRV, heart rate variability. (Modified from 
Myerburg RJ: J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol 2001; 12:369–381, 
reproduced with permission of the publisher.)
A
B
7DUJHW
$6+'ULVNIDFWRUV
$QDWRPLFVFUHHQLQJ
&OLQLFDOPDUNHUV
7UDQVLHQWULVNSUHGLFWRUV
,QGLYLGXDOULVNSUHGLFWRUV
([DPSOHV
)UDPLQJKDPULVNLQGH[
&7LPDJLQJ
()DQJLRJUDSK\
$0(36
+LVWRU\RIKHDUWIDLOXUH
(3DQGKHPRG\QDPLFYDULDWLRQV
$XWRQRPLFIOXFWXDWLRQV
3UHGLFWRUVRILVFKHPLD
)DPLOLDOJHQHWLFSURILOHV
*RDO
3UHGLFWHYROXWLRQRIGLVHDVH
,GHQWLI\&$'
'HILQHH[WHQWRIGLVHDVH
,GHQWLI\DUUK\WKPLDPDUNHUV
'HILQHKLJKULVNVXEJURXSV
&OLQLFDOPDUNHUVRILQVWDELOLW\
4XDQWLI\DXWRQRPLFWULJJHUV
3UHGLFWXQVWDEOHSODTXHV
3UHGLFWVSHFLILF6&'ULVN
 EHIRUHGLVHDVHH[SUHVVLRQ
6HQVLWLYLW\
9HU\ORZ
0RGHUDWHIRUDQDWRP\
+LJKIRUH[WHQWRIGLVHDVH
 YDULDEOHIRUVSHFLILFLW\RIULVN
/RZWRLQWHUPHGLDWHIRUVFUHHQLQJ
+LJKIRUVSHFLILFJURXSV
3ULPDU\SUHGLFWLYHYDOXHXQNQRZQ
8QFHUWDLQVRPHPHDVXUHVXVHIXO"
8QNQRZQSRWHQWLDOO\KLJK
+LJKSRWHQWLDOIRUIXWXUHSURILOLQJ
100
40
50
30
20
10
0
Proportion of Sudden Deaths (%)
5-10%
Arrhythmic
risk markers
7-15%
Hemodynamic
risk markers
 ≤20%
Acute M.I.;
unstable AP
≥30%
First clinical
event
~33%
Known disease;
low power or
non-specific markers
 
CHAPTER 29
Cardiovascular Collapse, Cardiac Arrest, and Sudden Cardiac Death
333
it is for the general adolescent and young adult popula-
tion, perhaps up to 1 in 75,000. Hypertrophic cardio-
myopathy (Chap. 21) is the most common cause in the 
United States, compared with Italy, where more com-
prehensive screening programs remove potential victims 
from the population of athletes.
Secondary prevention strategies should be applied to 
surviving victims of a cardiac arrest that was not associ-
ated with an acute MI or a transient risk of SCD (e.g., 
drug exposures, correctable electrolyte imbalances). 
Multivessel coronary artery disease and dilated cardio-
myopathy, especially with markedly reduced left ven-
tricular EF predict a 1- to 2-year risk of recurrence of 
an SCD or cardiac arrest of up to 30% in the absence 
of specific interventions (see later). The presence of 
life-threatening arrhythmias with long QT syndromes 
or right ventricular dysplasia are also associated with 
increased risks.
Clinical Characteristics of 
Cardiac Arrest
Prodrome, Onset, Arrest, Death
SCD may be presaged by days to months of increasing 
angina, dyspnea, palpitations, easy fatigability, and other 
nonspecific complaints. However, these prodromal symp-
toms are generally predictive of any major cardiac event; 
they are not specific for predicting SCD.
The onset of the clinical transition, leading to cardiac 
arrest, is defined as an acute change in cardiovascular 
status preceding cardiac arrest by up to 1 h. When the 
onset is instantaneous or abrupt, the probability that the 
arrest is cardiac in origin is >95%. Continuous electro-
cardiographic (ECG) recordings fortuitously obtained 
at the onset of a cardiac arrest commonly demonstrate 
changes in cardiac electrical activity during the min-
utes or hours before the event. There is a tendency for 
the heart rate to increase and for advanced grades of 
PVCs to evolve. Most cardiac arrests that are caused by 
VF begin with a run of nonsustained or sustained VT, 
which then degenerates into VF.
The probability of achieving successful resuscita-
tion from cardiac arrest is related to the interval from 
onset of loss of circulation to institution of resuscita-
tive efforts, the setting in which the event occurs, the 
mechanism (VF, VT, PEA, asystole), and the clinical 
status of the patient before the cardiac arrest. Return of 
circulation and survival rates as a result of defibrillation 
decrease almost linearly from the first minute to 10 min. 
After 5 min, survival rates are no better than 25–30% 
in out-of-hospital settings. Those settings in which it is 
possible to institute prompt cardiopulmonary resuscita-
tion (CPR) followed by prompt defibrillation provide 
a better chance of a successful outcome. However, the 
Among patients in the acute, convalescent, and 
chronic phases of myocardial infarction (Chap. 35), 
subgroups at high absolute risk of SCD can be identi-
fied. During the acute phase, the potential risk of car-
diac arrest from onset through the first 48 h may be as 
high as 15%, emphasizing the importance for patients 
to respond promptly to the onset of symptoms. Those 
who survive acute-phase VF, however, are not at con-
tinuing risk for recurrent cardiac arrest indexed to that 
event. During the convalescent phase after MI (3 days 
to ∼6 weeks), an episode of sustained ventricular tachy-
cardia (VT) or VF, which is usually associated with a 
large infarct, predicts a natural history mortality risk of 
>25% at 12 months. At least one-half of the deaths are 
sudden. Aggressive intervention techniques may reduce 
this incidence.
After passage into the chronic phase of MI, the 
longer-term risk for total mortality and SCD mortal-
ity is predicted by a number of factors (Fig. 29-2B). 
The most important for both SCD and nonsudden 
death is the extent of myocardial damage sustained as a 
result of the acute MI. This is measured by the mag-
nitude of reduction of the ejection fraction (EF) and/
or the occurrence of heart failure. Various studies have 
demonstrated that ventricular arrhythmias identified by 
ambulatory monitoring contribute significantly to this 
risk, especially in patients with an EF <40%. In addi-
tion, inducibility of VT or VF during electrophysi-
ologic testing of patients who have ambient ventricular 
arrhythmias (premature ventricular contractions [PVCs] 
and nonsustained VT) and an EF <35 or 40% is a strong 
predictor of SCD risk. Patients in this subgroup are 
now considered candidates for implantable cardioverter 
defibrillators (ICDs) (see later). Risk falls off sharply 
with EFs >40% after MI and the absence of ambient 
arrhythmias and conversely is high with EFs <30% even 
without the ambient arrhythmia markers.
The cardiomyopathies (dilated and hypertrophic, 
Chap. 21) are the second most common category 
of diseases associated with risk of SCD, after CHD 
(Table 29-2). Some risk factors have been identified, 
largely related to extent of disease, documented ven-
tricular arrhythmias, and symptoms of arrhythmias (e.g., 
syncope). The less common causes of SCD include val-
vular heart disease (primarily aortic) and inflammatory 
and infiltrative disorders of the myocardium. The latter 
include viral myocarditis, sarcoidosis, and amyloidosis.
Among adolescents and young adults, rare inher-
ited disorders such as hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, 
the long QT interval syndromes, right ventricular dys-
plasia, and Brugada syndrome have received atten-
tion as important causes of SCD because of advances 
in genetics and the ability to identify some of those at 
risk before a fatal event. The subgroup of young com-
petitive athletes has received special attention. The inci-
dence of SCD among athletes appears to be higher than 
SECTION IV
Disorders of the Heart
334
cardiac arrest. The success rate for immediate resuscita-
tion in primary cardiac arrest during acute MI in a mon-
itored setting should exceed 90%. In contrast, as many as 
70% of patients with secondary cardiac arrest succumb 
immediately or during the same hospitalization.
Treatment	
Cardiac Arrest
An individual who collapses suddenly is managed in 
five stages: (1) initial evaluation and basic life support if 
arrest is confirmed, (2) public access defibrillation (when 
available), (3) advanced life support, (4) postresuscita-
tion care, and (5) long-term management. The initial 
response, including confirmation of loss of circulation, 
followed by basic life support and public access defibril-
lation, can be carried out by physicians, nurses, paramed-
ical personnel, and trained laypersons. There is a require-
ment for increasingly specialized skills as the patient 
moves through the stages of advanced life support, 
postresuscitation care, and long-term management.
Initial 
Evaluation 
and 
Basic 
Life 
Support  Confirmation that a sudden collapse is 
indeed due to a cardiac arrest includes prompt obser-
vations of the state of consciousness, respiratory move-
ments, skin color, and the presence or absence of pulses 
in the carotid or femoral arteries. For lay responders, 
the pulse check is no longer recommended. As soon as 
a cardiac arrest is suspected, confirmed, or even con-
sidered to be impending, calling an emergency rescue 
system (e.g., 911) is the immediate priority. With the 
development of AEDs that are easily used by noncon-
ventional emergency responders, an additional layer for 
response has evolved (see later).
Agonal respiratory movements may persist for a 
short time after the onset of cardiac arrest, but it is 
important to observe for severe stridor with a persistent 
pulse as a clue to aspiration of a foreign body or food. 
If this is suspected, a Heimlich maneuver (see later) 
may dislodge the obstructing body. A precordial blow, 
or “thump,” delivered firmly with a clenched fist to the 
junction of the middle and lower thirds of the sternum 
may occasionally revert VT or VF, but there is concern 
about converting VT to VF. Therefore, it is recommended 
to use precordial thumps as a life support technique 
only when monitoring and defibrillation are available. 
This conservative application of the technique remains 
controversial.
The third action during the initial response is to clear 
the airway. The head is tilted back and the chin lifted so 
that the oropharynx can be explored to clear the airway. 
Dentures or foreign bodies are removed, and the Heim-
lich maneuver is performed if there is reason to suspect 
that a foreign body is lodged in the oropharynx. If respi-
ratory arrest precipitating cardiac arrest is suspected, a 
outcome in intensive care units and other in-hospital 
environments is heavily influenced by the patient’s 
preceding clinical status. The immediate outcome is 
good for cardiac arrest occurring in the intensive care 
unit in the presence of an acute cardiac event or tran-
sient metabolic disturbance, but survival among patients 
with far-advanced chronic cardiac disease or advanced 
noncardiac diseases (e.g., renal failure, pneumonia, sep-
sis, diabetes, cancer) is low and not much better in the 
in-hospital than in the out-of-hospital setting. Survival 
from unexpected cardiac arrest in unmonitored areas in 
a hospital is not much better than that it is for witnessed 
out-of-hospital arrests. Since implementation of com-
munity response systems, survival from out-of-hospital 
cardiac arrest has improved although it still remains low, 
under most circumstances. Survival probabilities in pub-
lic sites exceed those in the home environment.
The success rate for initial resuscitation and survival 
to hospital discharge after an out-of-hospital cardiac 
arrest depends heavily on the mechanism of the event. 
When the mechanism is pulseless VT, the outcome is 
best; VF is the next most successful; and asystole and 
PEA generate dismal outcome statistics. Advanced 
age also adversely influences the chances of successful 
resuscitation.
Progression to biologic death is a function of the mecha-
nism of cardiac arrest and the length of the delay before 
interventions. VF or asystole without CPR within the 
first 4–6 min has a poor outcome even if defibrillation is 
successful because of superimposed brain damage; there 
are few survivors among patients who had no life sup-
port activities for the first 8 min after onset. Outcome 
statistics are improved by lay bystander intervention 
(basic life support—see later) before definitive interven-
tions (advanced life support) especially when followed 
by early successful defibrillation. In regard to the latter, 
evaluations of deployment of automatic external defi-
brillators (AEDs) in communities (e.g., police vehicles, 
large buildings, airports, and stadiums) are beginning to 
generate encouraging data. Increased deployment is to 
be encouraged.
Death during the hospitalization after a successfully 
resuscitated cardiac arrest relates closely to the severity 
of central nervous system injury. Anoxic encephalopa-
thy and infections subsequent to prolonged respirator 
dependence account for 60% of the deaths. Another 
30% occur as a consequence of low cardiac output states 
that fail to respond to interventions. Recurrent arrhyth-
mias are the least common cause of death, accounting 
for only 10% of in-hospital deaths.
In the setting of acute MI (Chap. 35), it is important 
to distinguish between primary and secondary cardiac 
arrests. Primary cardiac arrests are those which occur in the 
absence of hemodynamic instability, and secondary cardiac 
arrests are those which occur in patients in whom abnor-
mal hemodynamics dominate the clinical picture before 
 
CHAPTER 29
Cardiovascular Collapse, Cardiac Arrest, and Sudden Cardiac Death
335
second precordial thump is delivered after the airway is 
cleared.
Basic life support, more popularly known as CPR, is 
intended to maintain organ perfusion until definitive 
interventions can be instituted. The elements of CPR are 
the maintenance of ventilation of the lungs and com-
pression of the chest. Mouth-to-mouth respiration may 
be used if no specific rescue equipment is immediately 
available (e.g., plastic oropharyngeal airways, esopha-
geal obturators, masked Ambu bag). Conventional ven-
tilation techniques during single-responder CPR require 
that the lungs be inflated twice in succession after 
every 30 chest compressions. Recent data suggest that 
interrupting chest compressions to perform mouth-to-
mouth respiration may be less effective than a continu-
ous chest compression strategy.
Chest compression is based on the assumption that 
cardiac compression allows the heart to maintain a 
pump function by sequential filling and emptying of 
its chambers, with competent valves maintaining for-
ward direction of flow. The palm of one hand is placed 
over the lower sternum, with the heel of the other 
resting on the dorsum of the lower hand. The sternum 
is depressed, with the arms remaining straight, at a 
rate of approximately 100 per min. Sufficient force is 
applied to depress the sternum 4–5 cm, and relaxation 
is abrupt.
Automated External Defibrillation 
(AED)  AEDs that are easily used by nonconventional 
responders, such as nonparamedic firefighters, police 
officers, ambulance drivers, trained security guards, and 
minimally trained or untrained laypersons, have been 
developed. This advance has inserted another level of 
response into the cardiac arrest paradigm. A number 
of studies have demonstrated that AED use by noncon-
ventional responders in strategic response systems and 
public access lay responders can improve cardiac arrest 
survival rates. This strategy is based on shortening the 
time to the first defibrillation attempt while awaiting the 
arrival of advanced life support.
Advanced 
Cardiac 
Life 
Support 
(ACLS)  ACLS is intended to achieve adequate ven-
tilation, control cardiac arrhythmias, stabilize blood 
pressure and cardiac output, and restore organ perfu-
sion. The activities carried out to achieve these goals 
include (1) defibrillation/cardioversion and/or pacing, 
(2) intubation with an endotracheal tube, and (3) inser-
tion of an intravenous line. The speed with which defi-
brillation/cardioversion is achieved is an important ele-
ment in successful resuscitation, both for restoration of 
spontaneous circulation and for protection of the cen-
tral nervous system. Immediate defibrillation should 
precede intubation and insertion of an intravenous 
line; CPR should be carried out while the defibrillator 
is being charged. As soon as a diagnosis of VF or VT is 
established, a shock of at least 300 J should be delivered 
when one is using a monophasic waveform device or 
120–150 J with a biphasic waveform. Additional shocks 
are escalated to a maximum of 360 J monophasic (200 J 
biphasic) if the initial shock does not successfully revert 
VT or VF. However, it is now recommended that five 
cycles of CPR be carried out before repeated shocks, if 
the first shock fails to restore an organized rhythm, or 
60–90 s of CPR before the first shock if 5 min has elapsed 
between the onset of cardiac arrest and ability to deliver 
a shock (see 2005 update of guidelines for cardiopulmo-
nary resuscitation and emergency cardiac care at http://
circ.ahajournals.org/content/vol112/24_suppl.toc).
Epinephrine, 1 mg intravenously, is given after failed 
defibrillation, and attempts to defibrillate are repeated. 
The dose of epinephrine may be repeated after intervals 
of 3–5 min (Fig. 29-3A). Vasopressin (a single 40-unit 
dose given IV) has been suggested as an alternative to 
epinephrine.
If the patient is less than fully conscious upon rever-
sion or if two or three attempts fail, prompt intuba-
tion, ventilation, and arterial blood gas analysis should 
be carried out. Ventilation with O2 (room air if O2 is not 
immediately available) may promptly reverse hypox-
emia and acidosis. A patient who is persistently acidotic 
after successful defibrillation and intubation should 
be given 1 meq/kg NaHCO3 initially and an additional 
50% of the dose repeated every 10–15 min. However, it 
should not be used routinely.
After initial unsuccessful defibrillation attempts or 
with persistent/recurrent electrical instability, antiar-
rhythmic therapy should be instituted. Intravenous ami-
odarone has emerged as the initial treatment of choice  
(150 mg over 10 min, followed by 1 mg/min for up to 
6 h and 0.5 mg/min thereafter) (Fig. 29-3A). For cardiac 
arrest due to VF in the early phase of an acute coro-
nary syndrome, a bolus of 1 mg/kg of lidocaine may be 
given intravenously as an alternative, and the dose may 
be repeated in 2 min. It also may be tried in patients in 
whom amiodarone is unsuccessful. Intravenous pro-
cainamide (loading infusion of 100 mg/5 min to a total 
dose of 500–800 mg, followed by continuous infusion at 
2–5 mg/min) is now rarely used in this setting but may be 
tried for persisting, hemodynamically stable arrhythmias. 
Intravenous calcium gluconate is no longer considered 
safe or necessary for routine administration. It is used 
only in patients in whom acute hyperkalemia is known to 
be the triggering event for resistant VF, in the presence of 
known hypocalcemia, or in patients who have received 
toxic doses of calcium channel antagonists.
Cardiac arrest due to bradyarrhythmias or asystole 
(B/A cardiac arrest) is managed differently (Fig. 29-3B). 
The patient is promptly intubated, CPR is continued, and 
an attempt is made to control hypoxemia and acidosis. 
SECTION IV
Disorders of the Heart
336
VENTRICULAR FIBRILLATION OR PULSELESS
VENTRICULAR TACHYCARDIA
Immediate defibrillation within 5 minutes of onset;
60-90 seconds of CPR before defibrillation for delay ≥5 minutes
If return of circulation fails
5 cycles of CPR followed by repeat shock; repeat sequence
twice if needed
If return of circulation fails
If return of
circulation fails
If return of
circulation fails
Continue CPR, Intubate, I.V. Access
Epinephrine, 1 mg I.V. -or- Vasopressin, 40 units I.V; follow with
repeat defibrillation at maximum energy within 30-60 seconds
as required; repeat epinephrine
Epinephrine, ↑ dose
NaHCO3, 1 mEq/kg (↑ K+)
Antiarrhythmics
Amiodarone: 150 mg
over 10 min, 1 mg/min
Lidocaine: 1.5 mg/kg;
repeat in 3-5 min
Defibrillate, CPR:  Drug –Shock –Drug –Shock
A
Magnesium sulfate:
1-2 gm I.V. (polymorphic VT)
Procainamide: 30 mg/min,
to 17 mg/kg (limited use-see text)
Bradyarrhythmia/Asystole
Pulseless Electrical Activity
CPR, intubate, I.V. access
Confirm asystole
Assess blood flow
Identify and treat causes
• Hypoxia
• Hyper-/hypokalemia
• Severe acidosis
• Drug overdose
• Hypothermia
• Hypovolemia
• Hypoxia
• Tamponade
• Pneumothorax
• Hypothermia
• Pulmonary embolus
• Drug overdose
• Hyperkalemia
• Severe acidosis
• Massive acute M.I.
Epinephrine
1 mg I.V. (repeat)
Atropine
1 mg I.V. (repeat)
Sodium bicarbonate
1 mEq/kg I.V.
—
—
Pacing—External or pacing wire
B
Figure 29-3 
A. The algorithm of ventricular fibrillation or pulseless ven-
tricular tachycardia begins with defibrillation attempts. If that 
fails, it is followed by epinephrine and then antiarrhythmic 
drugs. See text for details. B. The algorithms for bradyar-
rhythmia/asystole (left) or pulseless electrical activity (right) 
are dominated first by continued life support and a search for 
reversible causes. Subsequent therapy is nonspecific and is 
accompanied by a low success rate. See text for details. CPR, 
cardiopulmonary resuscitation; MI, myocardial infarction.
Epinephrine and/or atropine are given intravenously 
or by an intracardiac route. External pacing devices are 
used to attempt to establish a regular rhythm. The suc-
cess rate may be good when B/A arrest is due to acute 
inferior wall myocardial infarction or to correctable air-
way obstruction or drug-induced respiratory depression 
or with prompt resuscitation efforts. For acute airway 
obstruction, prompt removal of foreign bodies by the 
Heimlich maneuver or, in hospitalized patients, by intu-
bation and suctioning of obstructing secretions in the 
airway is often successful. The prognosis is generally 
very poor in other causes of this form of cardiac arrest, 
such as end-stage cardiac or noncardiac diseases. Treat-
ment of PEA is similar to that for bradyarrhythmias, but 
its outcome is also dismal.
Postresuscitation 
Care  This phase of 
management is determined by the clinical setting of 
the cardiac arrest. Primary VF in acute MI (not accom-
panied by low-output states) (Chap. 35) is generally 
very responsive to life support techniques and easily 
controlled after the initial event. In the in-hospital set-
ting, respirator support is usually not necessary or is 
needed for only a short time, and hemodynamics sta-
bilize promptly after defibrillation or cardioversion. In 
secondary VF in acute MI (those events in which hemo-
dynamic abnormalities predispose to the potentially 
fatal arrhythmia), resuscitative efforts are less often 
successful, and in patients who are successfully resus-
citated, the recurrence rate is high. The clinical picture 
and outcome are dominated by hemodynamic instabil-
ity and the ability to control hemodynamic dysfunction. 
Bradyarrhythmias, asystole, and PEA are commonly sec-
ondary events in hemodynamically unstable patients. 
The in-hospital phase of care of an out-of-hospital 
cardiac arrest survivor is dictated by specific clini-
cal circumstances. The most difficult is the presence 
of anoxic encephalopathy, which is a strong predic-
tor of in-hospital death. A recent addition to the man-
agement of this condition is induced hypothermia to 
reduce metabolic demands and cerebral edema.
The outcome after in-hospital cardiac arrest associated 
with noncardiac diseases is poor, and in the few success-
fully resuscitated patients, the postresuscitation course 
is dominated by the nature of the underlying disease. 
Patients with end-stage cancer, renal failure, acute central 
nervous system disease, and uncontrolled infections, as a 
group, have a survival rate of <10% after in-hospital cardiac 
arrest. Some major exceptions are patients with transient 
airway obstruction, electrolyte disturbances, proarrhyth-
mic effects of drugs, and severe metabolic abnormalities, 
most of whom may have a good chance of survival if they 
can be resuscitated promptly and stabilized while the tran-
sient abnormalities are being corrected.
 
CHAPTER 29
Cardiovascular Collapse, Cardiac Arrest, and Sudden Cardiac Death
337
Prevention of SCD in High-Risk  
Individuals without Prior  
Cardiac Arrest
Post-MI patients with EFs <35% and other markers of 
risk such as ambient ventricular arrhythmias, inducible 
ventricular tachyarrhythmias in the electrophysiology 
laboratory, and a history of heart failure are consid-
ered candidates for ICDs 30 days or more after the 
MI. Total mortality benefits in the range of a 20–35% 
reduction over 2–5 years have been observed in a 
series of clinical trials. One study suggested that an EF 
<30% was a sufficient marker of risk to indicate ICD 
benefit, and another demonstrated benefit for patients 
with Functional Class 2 or 3 heart failure and ejection 
fractions ≤35%, regardless of etiology (ischemic or 
nonischemic) or the presence of ambient or induced 
arrhythmias (see Chaps. 16 and 17). There appears 
to be a gradient of increasing ICD benefit with EFs 
ranging lower than the threshold indications. How-
ever, patients with very low EFs (e.g., <20%) may 
receive less benefit.
Decision making for primary prevention in dis-
orders other than coronary artery disease and dilated 
cardiomyopathy is generally driven by observational 
data and judgment based on clinical observations. 
Controlled clinical trials providing evidence-based 
indicators for ICDs are lacking for these smaller pop-
ulation subgroups. In general, for the rare disorders 
listed earlier, indicators of arrhythmic risk such as 
syncope, documented ventricular tachyarrhythmias, 
aborted cardiac arrest or a family history of prema-
ture SCD in some conditions, and a number of other 
clinical or ECG markers may be used as indicators for 
ICDs.
Long-Term Management After Sur-
vival 
of 
Out-of-Hospital 
Cardiac 
Arrest  Patients who survive cardiac arrest without 
irreversible damage to the central nervous system and who 
achieve hemodynamic stability should have diagnostic 
testing to define appropriate therapeutic interventions for 
their long-term management. This aggressive approach is 
driven by the fact that survival after out-of-hospital cardiac 
arrest is followed by a 10–25% mortality rate during the 
first 2 years after the event, and there are data suggesting 
that significant survival benefits can be achieved by pre-
scription of an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD).
Among patients in whom an acute ST elevation MI, or 
transient and reversible myocardial ischemia, is identified 
as the specific mechanism triggering an out-of-hospital car-
diac arrest, the management is dictated in part by the tran-
sient nature of life-threatening arrhythmia risk during the 
acute coronary syndrome (ACS) and in part by the extent of 
permanent myocardial damage that results. Cardiac arrest 
during the acute ischemic phase is not an ICD indication, 
but survivors of cardiac arrest not associated with an ACS do 
benefit. In addition, patients who survive MI with an ejec-
tion fraction less than 30–35% appear to benefit from ICDs.
For patients with cardiac arrest determined to be due 
to a treatable transient ischemic mechanism, particu-
larly with higher EFs, catheter interventional, surgical, 
and/or pharmacologic anti-ischemic therapy is gener-
ally accepted for long-term management.
Survivors of cardiac arrest due to other categories of 
disease, such as the hypertrophic or dilated cardiomy-
opathies and the various rare inherited disorders (e.g., 
right ventricular dysplasia, long QT syndrome, Brugada 
syndrome, catecholaminergic polymorphic VT, and so-
called idiopathic VF), are all considered ICD candidates.
This page intentionally left blank 
Disorders of the  
vasculature
SECTION V
 Peter libby 
340
 PatHoGeneSiS 
 Atherosclerosis remains the major cause of death and 
premature disability in developed societies. More-
over, current predictions estimate that by the year 2020 
cardiovascular diseases, notably atherosclerosis, will 
become the leading global cause of total disease bur-
den. Although many generalized or systemic risk fac-
tors predispose to its development, atherosclerosis affects 
various regions of the circulation preferentially and has 
distinct clinical manifestations that depend on the par-
ticular circulatory bed affected. Atherosclerosis of the 
coronary arteries commonly causes myocardial infarc-
tion (MI) ( Chap. 35 ) and angina pectoris ( Chap. 33 ). 
Atherosclerosis of the arteries supplying the central ner-
vous system frequently provokes strokes and transient 
cerebral ischemia. In the peripheral circulation, athero-
sclerosis causes intermittent claudication and gangrene 
and can jeopardize limb viability. Involvement of the 
splanchnic circulation can cause mesenteric ischemia. 
Atherosclerosis can affect the kidneys either directly 
(e.g., renal artery stenosis) or as a common site of 
atheroembolic disease ( Chap. 38 ). 
 Even within a particular arterial bed, stenoses due to 
atherosclerosis tend to occur focally, typically in certain 
predisposed regions. In the coronary circulation, for 
example, the proximal left anterior descending coro-
nary artery exhibits a particular predilection for devel-
oping atherosclerotic disease. Similarly, atherosclerosis 
preferentially affects the proximal portions of the renal 
arteries and, in the extracranial circulation to the brain, 
the carotid bifurcation. Indeed, atherosclerotic lesions 
often form at branching points of arteries which are 
regions of disturbed blood fl ow. Not all manifestations 
of atherosclerosis result from stenotic, occlusive disease. 
Ectasia and the development of aneurysmal disease, for 
 THE PATHOGENESIS, PREVENTION, AND 
TREATMENT OF ATHEROSCLEROSIS 
 CHaPter 30 
example, frequently occur in the aorta ( Chap. 38 ). 
In addition to focal, fl ow-limiting stenoses, nonoc-
clusive intimal atherosclerosis also occurs diffusely in 
affected arteries, as shown by intravascular ultrasound 
and postmortem studies. 
 Atherogenesis in humans typically occurs over a 
period of many years, usually many decades. Growth 
of atherosclerotic plaques probably does not occur in a 
smooth, linear fashion but discontinuously, with periods 
of relative quiescence punctuated by periods of rapid 
evolution. After a generally prolonged “silent” period, 
atherosclerosis may become clinically manifest. The 
clinical expressions of atherosclerosis may be  chronic , 
as in the development of stable, effort-induced angina 
pectoris or predictable and reproducible intermittent 
claudication. Alternatively, a dramatic  acute clinical 
event such as MI, stroke, or sudden cardiac death may 
fi rst herald the presence of atherosclerosis. Other indi-
viduals may never experience clinical manifestations of 
arterial disease despite the presence of widespread ath-
erosclerosis demonstrated postmortem. 
 INITIATION Of AThErOSClErOSIS 
 An integrated view of experimental results in animals 
and studies of human atherosclerosis suggests that the 
“fatty streak” represents the initial lesion of atheroscle-
rosis. These early lesions most often seem to arise from 
focal increases in the content of lipoproteins within 
regions of the intima. This accumulation of lipoprotein 
particles may not result simply from increased perme-
ability, or “leakiness,” of the overlying endothelium 
( Fig. 30-1 ) . Rather, the lipoproteins may collect in 
the intima of arteries because they bind to constitu-
ents of the extracellular matrix, increasing the residence 
time of the lipid-rich particles within the arterial wall. 
 
CHAPTER 30
The Pathogenesis, Prevention, and Treatment of Atherosclerosis
341
Monocyte
Figure 30-1 
Cross-sectional view of an artery depicting steps in 
development of an atheroma, from left to right. The upper 
panel shows a detail of the boxed area below. The endothe-
lial monolayer overlying the intima contacts blood. Hyper-
cholesterolemia promotes accumulation of LDL particles 
(light spheres) in the intima. The lipoprotein particles often 
associate with constituents of the extracellular matrix, nota-
bly proteoglycans. Sequestration within the intima sepa-
rates lipoproteins from some plasma antioxidants and favors 
oxidative modification. Such modified lipoprotein particles 
(darker spheres) may trigger a local inflammatory response 
that signals subsequent steps in lesion formation. The aug-
mented expression of various adhesion molecules for leu-
kocytes recruits monocytes to the site of a nascent arterial 
lesion.
Once adherent, some white blood cells migrate into 
the intima. The directed migration of leukocytes probably 
depends on chemoattractant factors, including modified 
lipoprotein particles themselves and chemoattractant cyto-
kines (depicted by the smaller spheres), such as the che-
mokine macrophage chemoattractant protein-1 produced 
by vascular wall cells in response to modified lipoproteins. 
Leukocytes in the evolving fatty streak can divide and exhibit 
augmented expression of receptors for modified lipopro-
teins (scavenger receptors). These mononuclear phagocytes 
ingest lipids and become foam cells, represented by a cyto-
plasm filled with lipid droplets. As the fatty streak evolves 
into a more complicated atherosclerotic lesion, smooth-
muscle cells migrate from the media (bottom of lower panel 
hairline) through the internal elastic membrane (solid wavy 
line) and accumulate within the expanding intima, where 
they lay down extracellular matrix that forms the bulk of the 
advanced lesion (bottom panel, right side).
Lipoproteins that accumulate in the extracellular space 
of the intima of arteries often associate with glycos-
aminoglycans of the arterial extracellular matrix, an 
interaction that may slow the egress of these lipid-
rich particles from the intima. Lipoprotein particles 
in the extracellular space of the intima, particularly 
those retained by binding to matrix macromolecules, 
may undergo oxidative modifications. Considerable 
evidence supports a pathogenic role for products of 
oxidized lipoproteins in atherogenesis. Lipoproteins 
sequestered from plasma antioxidants in the extracellu-
lar space of the intima become particularly susceptible 
to oxidative modification, giving rise to hydroper-
oxides, lysophospholipids, oxysterols, and aldehydic 
breakdown products of fatty acids and phospholipids. 
Modifications of the apoprotein moieties may include 
breaks in the peptide backbone as well as derivatiza-
tion of certain amino acid residues. Local production of 
hypochlorous acid by myeloperoxidase associated with 
inflammatory cells within the plaque yields chlorinated 
species such as chlorotyrosyl moieties. High-density 
lipoprotein (HDL) particles modified by HOCl-mediated 
chlorination function poorly as cholesterol acceptors, a 
finding that links oxidative stress with impaired reverse 
cholesterol transport, which is one likely mechanism of 
the antiatherogenic action of HDL (see later). Con-
siderable evidence supports the presence of such oxi-
dation products in atherosclerotic lesions. A particular 
member of the phospholipase family, lipoprotein-
associated phospholipase A2 (LpPL A2), can gener-
ate proinflammatory lipids, including lysophosphatidyl 
choline-bearing oxidized lipid moieties from oxidized 
phospholipids found in oxidized low-density lipopro-
teins (LDLs). An inhibitor of this enzyme is in clinical 
development.
Leukocyte recruitment
Accumulation of leukocytes characterizes the forma-
tion of early atherosclerotic lesions (Fig. 30-1). Thus, 
from its very inception, atherogenesis involves ele-
ments of inflammation, a process that now provides a 
unifying theme in the pathogenesis of this disease. The 
inflammatory cell types typically found in the evolv-
ing atheroma include monocyte-derived macrophages 
and lymphocytes. A number of adhesion molecules 
or receptors for leukocytes expressed on the surface 
of the arterial endothelial cell probably participate in 
the recruitment of leukocytes to the nascent ather-
oma. Constituents of oxidatively modified low-density 
lipoprotein can augment the expression of leukocyte 
adhesion molecules. This example illustrates how the 
accumulation of lipoproteins in the arterial intima may 
link mechanistically with leukocyte recruitment, a key 
event in lesion formation.
SECTION V
Disorders of the Vasculature
342
Laminar shear forces such as those encountered in 
most regions of normal arteries also can suppress the 
expression of leukocyte adhesion molecules. Sites of 
predilection for atherosclerotic lesions (e.g., branch 
points) often have disturbed flow. Ordered, pulsatile 
laminar shear of normal blood flow augments the pro-
duction of nitric oxide by endothelial cells. This mol-
ecule, in addition to its vasodilator properties, can act 
at the low levels constitutively produced by arterial 
endothelium as a local anti-inflammatory autacoid, e.g., 
limiting local adhesion molecule expression. Expo-
sure of endothelial cells to laminar shear stress increases 
the transcription of Krüppel-like factor 2 (KLF2) and 
reduces the expression of a thioredoxin-interacting pro-
tein (Txnip) that inhibits the activity of the endogenous 
antioxidant thioredoxin. KLF2 augments the activity of 
endothelial nitric oxide synthase, and reduced Txnip 
levels boost the function of thioredoxin. Laminar shear 
stress also stimulates endothelial cells to produce super-
oxide dismutase, an antioxidant enzyme. These exam-
ples indicate how hemodynamic forces may influence 
the cellular events that underlie atherosclerotic lesion 
initiation and potentially explain the favored localization 
of atherosclerotic lesions at sites that experience distur-
bance to laminar shear stress.
Once captured on the surface of the arterial endo-
thelial cell by adhesion receptors, the monocytes and 
lymphocytes penetrate the endothelial layer and take 
up residence in the intima. In addition to products of 
modified lipoproteins, cytokines (protein mediators 
of inflammation) can regulate the expression of adhe-
sion molecules involved in leukocyte recruitment. For 
example, interleukin 1 (IL-1) or tumor necrosis fac-
tor α (TNF-α) induce or augment the expression of 
leukocyte adhesion molecules on endothelial cells. 
Because products of lipoprotein oxidation can induce 
cytokine release from vascular wall cells, this pathway 
may provide an additional link between arterial accu-
mulation of lipoproteins and leukocyte recruitment. 
Chemoattractant cytokines such as monocyte chemoat-
tractant protein 1 appear to direct the migration of leu-
kocytes into the arterial wall.
Foam-cell formation
Once resident within the intima, the mononuclear 
phagocytes mature into macrophages and become lipid-
laden foam cells, a conversion that requires the uptake of 
lipoprotein particles by receptor-mediated endocytosis. 
One might suppose that the well-recognized “classic” 
receptor for LDL mediates this lipid uptake; however, 
humans or animals lacking effective LDL receptors due 
to genetic alterations (e.g., familial hypercholesterolemia) 
have abundant arterial lesions and extraarterial xantho-
mata rich in macrophage-derived foam cells. In addition, 
the exogenous cholesterol suppresses expression of the 
LDL receptor; thus, the level of this cell-surface receptor 
for LDL decreases under conditions of cholesterol excess. 
Candidates for alternative receptors that can mediate 
lipid loading of foam cells include a growing number 
of macrophage “scavenger” receptors, which preferen-
tially endocytose modified lipoproteins, and other recep-
tors for oxidized LDL or very low-density lipoprotein 
(VLDL). Monocyte attachment to the endothelium, 
migration into the intima, and maturation to form lipid-
laden macrophages thus represent key steps in the for-
mation of the fatty streak, the precursor of fully formed 
atherosclerotic plaques.
Atheroma Evolution and 
Complications
Although the fatty streak commonly precedes the devel-
opment of a more advanced atherosclerotic plaque, not 
all fatty streaks progress to form complex atheromata. By 
ingesting lipids from the extracellular space, the mono-
nuclear phagocytes bearing such scavenger receptors 
may remove lipoproteins from the developing lesion. 
Some lipid-laden macrophages may leave the artery 
wall, exporting lipid in the process. Lipid accumulation, 
and hence the propensity to form an atheroma, ensues 
if the amount of lipid entering the artery wall exceeds 
that removed by mononuclear phagocytes or other 
pathways.
Export by phagocytes may constitute one response 
to local lipid overload in the evolving lesion. Another 
mechanism, reverse cholesterol transport mediated by 
high-density lipoproteins, probably provides an inde-
pendent pathway for lipid removal from atheroma. 
This transfer of cholesterol from the cell to the HDL 
particle involves specialized cell-surface molecules 
such as the ATP binding cassette (ABC) transporters. 
ABCA1, the gene mutated in Tangier disease, a con-
dition characterized by very low HDL levels, transfers 
cholesterol from cells to nascent HDL particles and 
ABCG1 to mature HDL particles. “Reverse cholesterol 
transport” mediated by these ABC transporters allows 
HDL loaded with cholesterol to deliver it to hepato-
cytes by binding to scavenger receptor B 1 or other 
receptors. The liver cell can metabolize the sterol to 
bile acids that can be excreted. This export pathway 
from macrophage foam cells to peripheral cells such as 
hepatocytes explains part of the antiatherogenic action 
of HDLs. (Anti-inflammatory and antioxidant proper-
ties also may contribute to the atheroprotective effects 
of HDLs.) Thus, macrophages may play a vital role 
in the dynamic economy of lipid accumulation in the 
arterial wall during atherogenesis.
Some lipid-laden foam cells within the expand-
ing intimal lesion perish. Some foam cells may die as a 
 
CHAPTER 30
The Pathogenesis, Prevention, and Treatment of Atherosclerosis
343
result of programmed cell death, or apoptosis. This death 
of mononuclear phagocytes results in the formation 
of the lipid-rich center, often called the necrotic core, in 
established atherosclerotic plaques. Macrophages loaded 
with modified lipoproteins may elaborate cytokines and 
growth factors that can further signal some of the cellu-
lar events in lesion complication. Whereas accumulation 
of lipid-laden macrophages characterizes the fatty streak, 
buildup of fibrous tissue formed by extracellular matrix 
typifies the more advanced atherosclerotic lesion. The 
smooth-muscle cell synthesizes the bulk of the extra-
cellular matrix of the complex atherosclerotic lesion. 
A number of growth factors or cytokines elaborated 
by mononuclear phagocytes can stimulate smooth- 
muscle cell proliferation and production of extracellular 
matrix. Cytokines found in the plaque, including IL-1 
and TNF-α, can induce local production of growth fac-
tors, including forms of platelet-derived growth factor 
(PDGF), fibroblast growth factors, and others, which 
may contribute to plaque evolution and complication. 
Other cytokines, notably interferon γ (IFN-γ) derived 
from activated T cells within lesions, can limit the syn-
thesis of interstitial forms of collagen by smooth-muscle 
cells. These examples illustrate how atherogenesis 
involves a complex mix of mediators that in the balance 
determines the characteristics of particular lesions.
The arrival of smooth-muscle cells and their elabo-
ration of extracellular matrix probably provide a criti-
cal transition, yielding a fibrofatty lesion in place of a 
simple accumulation of macrophage-derived foam cells. 
For example, PDGF elaborated by activated platelets, 
macrophages, and endothelial cells can stimulate the 
migration of smooth-muscle cells normally resident in 
the tunica media into the intima. Such growth factors 
and cytokines produced locally can stimulate the pro-
liferation of resident smooth-muscle cells in the intima 
as well as those that have migrated from the media. 
Transforming growth factor β (TGF-β), among other 
mediators, potently stimulates interstitial collagen pro-
duction by smooth-muscle cells. These mediators may 
arise not only from neighboring vascular cells or leu-
kocytes (a “paracrine” pathway), but also, in some 
instances, may arise from the same cell that responds to 
the factor (an “autocrine” pathway). Together, these 
alterations in smooth-muscle cells, signaled by these 
mediators acting at short distances, can hasten transfor-
mation of the fatty streak into a more fibrous smooth-
muscle cell and extracellular matrix-rich lesion.
In addition to locally produced mediators, products 
of blood coagulation and thrombosis likely contribute to 
atheroma evolution and complication. This involvement 
justifies the use of the term atherothrombosis to convey the 
inextricable links between atherosclerosis and throm-
bosis. Fatty streak formation begins beneath a morpho-
logically intact endothelium. In advanced fatty streaks, 
however, microscopic breaches in endothelial integrity 
may occur. Microthrombi rich in platelets can form at 
such sites of limited endothelial denudation, owing to 
exposure of the thrombogenic extracellular matrix of 
the underlying basement membrane. Activated platelets 
release numerous factors that can promote the fibrotic 
response, including PDGF and TGF-β. Thrombin not 
only generates fibrin during coagulation, but also stimu-
lates protease-activated receptors that can signal smooth-
muscle migration, proliferation, and extracellular matrix 
production. Many arterial mural microthrombi resolve 
without clinical manifestation by a process of local fibri-
nolysis, resorption, and endothelial repair, yet can lead to 
lesion progression by stimulating these profibrotic func-
tions of smooth-muscle cells (Fig. 30-2D).
Microvessels
As atherosclerotic lesions advance, abundant plex-
uses of microvessels develop in connection with the 
artery’s vasa vasorum. Newly developing microvascu-
lar networks may contribute to lesion complications 
in several ways. These blood vessels provide an abun-
dant surface area for leukocyte trafficking and may 
serve as the portal for entry and exit of white blood 
cells from the established atheroma. Microvessels in 
the plaques may also furnish foci for intraplaque hem-
orrhage. Like the neovessels in the diabetic retina, 
microvessels in the atheroma may be friable and prone 
to rupture and can produce focal hemorrhage. Such a 
vascular leak can pro­voke thrombosis in situ, yielding 
local thrombin generation, which in turn can activate 
smooth-muscle and endothelial cells through ligation 
of protease-activated receptors. Atherosclerotic plaques 
often contain fibrin and hemosiderin, an indication 
that episodes of intraplaque hemorrhage contribute to 
plaque complications.
Calcification
As they advance, atherosclerotic plaques also accumu-
late calcium. Proteins usually found in bone also localize 
in atherosclerotic lesions (e.g., osteocalcin, osteopontin, 
and bone morphogenetic proteins). Mineralization of 
the atherosclerotic plaque recapitulates many aspects of 
bone formation, including the regulatory participation 
of transcription factors such as Runx2.
Plaque evolution
Although atherosclerosis research has focused much 
attention on proliferation of smooth-muscle cells, as in 
the case of macrophages, smooth-muscle cells also can 
undergo apoptosis in the atherosclerotic plaque. Indeed, 
complex atheromata often have a mostly fibrous char-
acter and lack the cellularity of less advanced lesions. 
This relative paucity of smooth-muscle cells in advanced 
SECTION V
Disorders of the Vasculature
344
atheromata may result from the predominance of cyto-
static mediators such as TGF-β and IFN-γ (which can 
inhibit smooth-muscle cell proliferation), and also from 
smooth-muscle cell apoptosis. Some of the same pro-
inflammatory cytokines that activate atherogenic func-
tions of vascular wall cells can also sensitize these cells to 
undergo apoptosis.
Thus, during the evolution of the atherosclerotic 
plaque, a complex balance between entry and egress of 
lipoproteins and leukocytes, cell proliferation and cell 
death, extracellular matrix production, and remodel-
ing, as well as calcification and neovascularization, 
contribute to lesion formation. Multiple and often 
competing signals regulate these various cellular events. 
Many mediators related to atherogenic risk factors, 
including those derived from lipoproteins, cigarette 
smoking, and angiotensin II, provoke the production 
of proinflammatory cytokines and alter the behavior of 
the intrinsic vascular wall cells and infiltrating leuko-
cytes that underlie the complex pathogenesis of these 
lesions. Thus, advances in vascular biology have led to 
increased understanding of the mechanisms that link 
risk factors to the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis and its 
complications.
Clinical Syndromes of 
Atherosclerosis
Atherosclerotic lesions occur ubiquitously in West-
ern societies. Most atheromata produce no symptoms, 
and many never cause clinical manifestations. Numer-
ous patients with diffuse atherosclerosis may succumb 
to unrelated illnesses without ever having experienced 
a clinically significant manifestation of atherosclerosis. 
What accounts for this variability in the clinical expres-
sion of atherosclerotic disease?
Arterial remodeling during atheroma formation 
(Fig.  30-2A) represents a frequently overlooked but 
clinically important feature of lesion evolution. During 
the initial phases of atheroma development, the plaque 
usually grows outward, in an abluminal direction. Vessels 
affected by atherogenesis tend to increase in diameter, a 
phenomenon known as compensatory enlargement, a type 
of vascular remodeling. The growing atheroma does 
not encroach on the arterial lumen until the burden of 
atherosclerotic plaque exceeds ∼40% of the area encom-
passed by the internal elastic lamina. Thus, during much 
of its life history, an atheroma will not cause stenosis that 
can limit tissue perfusion.
Flow-limiting stenoses commonly form later in the 
history of the plaque. Many such plaques cause stable 
syndromes such as demand-induced angina pectoris 
or intermittent claudication in the extremities. In the 
coronary circulation and other circulations, even total 
vascular occlusion by an atheroma does not invariably 
lead to infarction. The hypoxic stimulus of repeated 
bouts of ischemia characteristically induces formation 
of collateral vessels in the myocardium, mitigating the 
consequences of an acute occlusion of an epicardial 
coronary artery. By contrast, many lesions that cause 
acute or unstable atherosclerotic syndromes, particularly 
in the coronary circulation, may arise from atheroscle-
rotic plaques that do not produce a flow-limiting ste-
nosis. Such lesions may produce only minimal luminal 
irregularities on traditional angiograms and often do 
not meet the traditional criteria for “significance” by 
arteriography. Thrombi arising from such nonocclu-
sive stenoses may explain the frequency of MI as an 
initial manifestation of coronary artery disease (CAD) 
(in at least one-third of cases) in patients who report 
no prior history of angina pectoris, a syndrome usually 
caused by flow-limiting stenoses.
Plaque instability and rupture
Postmortem studies afford considerable insight into the 
microanatomic substrate underlying the “instability” of 
plaques that do not cause critical stenoses. A superficial 
erosion of the endothelium or a frank plaque rupture 
or fissure usually produces the thrombus that causes 
episodes of unstable angina pectoris or the occlusive 
and relatively persistent thrombus that causes acute 
MI (Fig. 30-2B). In the case of carotid atheromata, a 
deeper ulceration that provides a nidus for the forma-
tion of platelet thrombi may cause transient cerebral 
ischemic attacks.
Rupture of the plaque’s fibrous cap (Fig. 30-2C) 
permits contact between coagulation factors in the 
blood and highly thrombogenic tissue factor expressed 
by macrophage foam cells in the plaque’s lipid-rich 
core. If the ensuing thrombus is nonocclusive or tran-
sient, the episode of plaque disruption may not cause 
symptoms or may result in episodic ischemic symptoms 
such as rest angina. Occlusive thrombi that endure often 
cause acute MI, particularly in the absence of a well-
developed collateral circulation that supplies the affected 
territory. Repetitive episodes of plaque disruption and 
healing provide one likely mechanism of transition 
of the fatty streak to a more complex fibrous lesion 
(Fig. 30-2D). The healing process in arteries, as in skin 
wounds, involves the laying down of new extracellular 
matrix and fibrosis.
Not all atheromata exhibit the same propensity to 
rupture. Pathologic studies of culprit lesions that have 
caused acute MI reveal several characteristic features. 
Plaques that have caused fatal thromboses tend to have 
thin fibrous caps, relatively large lipid cores, and a high 
content of macrophages. Morphometric studies of such 
culprit lesions show that at sites of plaque rupture, mac-
rophages and T lymphocytes predominate and con-
tain relatively few smooth-muscle cells. The cells that 
 
CHAPTER 30
The Pathogenesis, Prevention, and Treatment of Atherosclerosis
345
Figure 30-2 
Plaque rupture, thrombosis, and healing. A. Arterial 
remodeling during atherogenesis. During the initial part 
of the life history of an atheroma, growth is often out-
ward, preserving the caliber of the lumen. This phenom-
enon of “compensatory enlargement” accounts in part for 
the tendency of coronary arteriography to underestimate 
the degree of atherosclerosis. B. Rupture of the plaque’s 
fibrous cap causes thrombosis. Physical disruption of the 
atherosclerotic plaque commonly causes arterial thrombo-
sis by allowing blood coagulant factors to contact thrombo-
genic collagen found in the arterial extracellular matrix and 
tissue factor produced by macrophage-derived foam cells 
in the lipid core of lesions. In this manner, sites of plaque 
rupture form the nidus for thrombi. The normal artery wall 
has several fibrinolytic or antithrombotic mechanisms that 
tend to resist thrombosis and lyse clots that begin to form 
in situ. Such antithrombotic or thrombolytic molecules 
include thrombomodulin, tissue- and urokinase-type plas-
minogen activators, heparan sulfate proteoglycans, prosta-
cyclin, and nitric oxide. C. When the clot overwhelms the 
endogenous fibrinolytic mechanisms, it may propagate and 
lead to arterial occlusion. The consequences of this occlu-
sion depend on the degree of existing collateral vessels. 
In a patient with chronic multivessel occlusive coronary 
artery disease (CAD), collateral channels have often formed. 
In such circumstances, even a total arterial occlusion 
may not lead to myocardial infarction (MI), or it may pro-
duce an unexpectedly modest or a non-ST-segment eleva-
tion infarct because of collateral flow. In a patient with less 
advanced disease and without substantial stenotic lesions 
to provide a stimulus for collateral vessel formation, sudden 
plaque rupture and arterial occlusion commonly produces 
an ST-segment elevation infarction. These are the types of 
patients who may present with MI or sudden death as a first 
manifestation of coronary atherosclerosis. In some cases, 
the thrombus may lyse or organize into a mural thrombus 
without occluding the vessel. Such instances may be clini-
cally silent. D. The subsequent thrombin-induced fibrosis 
and healing causes a fibroproliferative response that can 
lead to a more fibrous lesion that can produce an eccentric 
plaque that causes a hemodynamically significant stenosis. 
In this way, a nonocclusive mural thrombus, even if clini-
cally silent or causing unstable angina rather than infarc-
tion, can provoke a healing response that can promote 
lesion fibrosis and luminal encroachment. Such a sequence 
of events may convert a “vulnerable” atheroma with a thin 
fibrous cap that is prone to rupture into a more “stable” 
fibrous plaque with a reinforced cap. Angioplasty of unsta-
ble coronary lesions may “stabilize” the lesions by a similar 
mechanism, producing a wound followed by healing.
Smooth-muscle cells
T-lymphocyte
Macrophage
A
B
C
D
concentrate at sites of plaque rupture bear markers of 
inflammatory activation. In addition, patients with 
active atherosclerosis and acute coronary syndromes dis-
play signs of disseminated inflammation. For example, 
atherosclerotic plaques and even microvascular endo-
thelial cells at sites remote from the “culprit” lesion 
of an acute coronary syndrome can exhibit markers of 
inflammatory activation.
Inflammatory mediators regulate processes that govern 
the integrity of the plaque’s fibrous cap and, hence, its 
propensity to rupture. For example, the T cell-derived 
cytokine IFN-γ, which is found in atherosclerotic 
SECTION V
Disorders of the Vasculature
346
Table 30-1
Major Risk Factors (Exclusive of LDL 
Cholesterol) That Modify LDL Goals
Cigarette smoking
Hypertension (BP ≥140/90 mmHg or on antihypertensive 
medication)
Low HDL cholesterola (<1.0 mmol/L [<40 mg/dL])
Diabetes mellitus
Family history of premature CHD
  CHD in male first-degree relative <55 years
  CHD in female first-degree relative <65 years
Age (men ≥45 years; women ≥55 years)
Lifestyle risk factors
  Obesity (BMI ≥30 kg/m2)
  Physical inactivity
  Atherogenic diet
Emerging risk factors
  Lipoprotein(a)
  Homocysteine
  Prothrombotic factors
  Proinflammatory factors
  Impaired fasting glucose
  Subclinical atherosclerosis
aHDL cholesterol ≥1.6 mmol/L (≥60 mg/dL) counts as a “negative” 
risk factor; its presence removes one risk factor from the total count.
Abbreviations: BMI, body mass index; BP, blood pressure; CHD, 
coronary heart disease; HDL, high-density lipoprotein; LDL, low- 
density lipoprotein.
Source: Modified from Third Report of the National Cholesterol 
Education Program (NCEP) Expert Panel on Detection, Evaluation, 
and Treatment of High Blood Cholesterol in Adults (Adult Treatment 
Panel III), Executive Summary. (Bethesda, MD: National Heart, Lung 
and Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health, 2001. NIH Publica-
tion No. 01-3670.)
plaques, can inhibit growth and collagen synthesis of 
smooth-muscle cells, as noted earlier. Cytokines derived 
from activated macrophages and lesional T cells can boost 
production of proteolytic enzymes that can degrade the 
extracellular matrix of the plaque’s fibrous cap. Thus, 
inflammatory mediators can impair the collagen synthe-
sis required for maintenance and repair of the fibrous cap 
and trigger degradation of extracellular matrix macromol-
ecules, processes that weaken the plaque’s fibrous cap and 
enhance its susceptibility to rupture (so-called vulner-
able plaques). In contrast to plaques with these features 
of vulnerability, those with a dense extracellular matrix 
and relatively thick fibrous cap without substantial tissue 
factor–rich lipid cores seem generally resistant to rupture 
and unlikely to provoke thrombosis.
Features of the biology of the atheromatous plaque, 
in addition to its degree of luminal encroachment, 
influence the clinical manifestations of this disease. This 
enhanced understanding of plaque biology provides 
insight into the diverse ways in which atherosclerosis 
can present clinically and the reasons why the disease 
may remain silent or stable for prolonged periods, punc-
tuated by acute complications at certain times. Increased 
understanding of atherogenesis provides new insight 
into the mechanisms linking it to the risk factors dis-
cussed later, indicates the ways in which current thera-
pies may improve outcomes, and suggests new targets 
for future intervention.
Prevention and Treatment
The Concept of Atherosclerotic 
Risk Factors
The systematic study of risk factors for atherosclerosis 
emerged from a coalescence of experimental results, as 
well as from cross-sectional and ultimately longitudinal 
studies in humans. The prospective, community-based 
Framingham Heart Study provided rigorous support 
for the concept that hypercholesterolemia, hyperten-
sion, and other factors correlate with cardiovascular risk. 
Similar observational studies performed worldwide bol-
stered the concept of “risk factors” for cardiovascular 
disease.
From a practical viewpoint, the cardiovascular risk 
factors that have emerged from such studies fall into 
two categories: those modifiable by lifestyle and/or 
pharmacotherapy, and those that are immutable, such as 
age and sex. The weight of evidence supporting various 
risk factors differs. For example, hypercholesterolemia 
and hypertension certainly predict coronary risk, but 
the magnitude of the contributions of other so-called 
nontraditional risk factors, such as levels of homocys-
teine, levels of lipoprotein (a) (Lp[a]), and infection, 
remains controversial. Moreover, some biomarkers that 
predict cardiovascular risk may not participate in the 
causal pathway for the disease or its complications. For 
example, recent genetic studies suggest that C-reactive 
protein (CRP) does not itself mediate atherogenesis, 
despite its ability to predict risk. Table 30-1 lists the 
risk factors recognized by the current National Cho-
lesterol Education Project Adult Treatment Panel III 
(ATP III). The later sections will consider some of these 
risk factors and approaches to their modification.
Lipid disorders
Abnormalities in plasma lipoproteins and derangements 
in lipid metabolism rank among the most firmly estab-
lished and best understood risk factors for atherosclerosis. 
Chapter 31 describes the lipoprotein classes and provides 
a detailed discussion of lipoprotein metabolism. Cur-
rent ATP III guidelines recommend lipid screening in all 
adults >20 years of age. The screen should include a fast-
ing lipid profile (total cholesterol, triglycerides, LDL cho-
lesterol, and HDL cholesterol) repeated every 5 years.
 
CHAPTER 30
The Pathogenesis, Prevention, and Treatment of Atherosclerosis
347
ATP III guidelines strive to match the intensity of 
treatment to an individual’s risk. A quantitative esti-
mate of risk places individuals in one of three treatment 
strata (Table 30-2). The first step in applying these 
guidelines involves counting an individual’s risk fac-
tors (Table 30-1). Individuals with fewer than two risk 
factors fall into the lowest treatment intensity stratum 
(LDL goal <4.1 mmol/L [<160 mg/dL]). In those with 
two or more risk factors, the next step involves a sim-
ple calculation that estimates the 10-year risk of devel-
oping coronary heart disease (CHD) (Table 30-2); see 
http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/guidelines/cholesterol/ 
for 
the 
algorithm and a downloadable risk calculator. Those 
with a 10-year risk ≤20% fall into the intermediate stra-
tum (LDL goal <3.4 mmol/L [<130 mg/dL]). Those 
with a calculated 10-year CHD risk of >20%, any evi-
dence of established atherosclerosis, or diabetes (now 
considered a CHD risk equivalent) fall into the most 
intensive treatment group (LDL goal <2.6 mmol/L 
[<100 mg/dL]). Members of the ATP III panel recently 
suggested <1.8 mmol/L (<70 mg/dL) as a goal for very 
high-risk patients and an optional goal for high-risk 
patients based on recent clinical trial data (Table 30-2). 
Beyond the Framingham algorithm, there are multiple 
risk calculators for various countries or regions. Risk 
calculators that incorporate family history of premature 
(CAD) and a marker of inflammation (CRP) have been 
validated for U.S. women and men.
The first maneuver to achieve the LDL goal involves 
therapeutic lifestyle changes (TLC), including spe-
cific diet and exercise recommendations established 
by the guidelines. According to ATP III criteria, those 
with LDL levels exceeding goal for their risk group by 
>0.8 mmol/L (>30 mg/dL) merit consideration for drug 
therapy. In patients with triglycerides >2.6 mmol/L 
(>200 mg/dL), ATP III guidelines specify a secondary 
goal for therapy: “non-HDL cholesterol” (simply, the 
HDL cholesterol level subtracted from the total choles-
terol). Cut points for the therapeutic decision for non-
HDL cholesterol are 0.8 mmol/L (30 mg/dL) more 
than those for LDL.
An extensive and growing body of rigorous evidence 
now supports the effectiveness of aggressive manage-
ment of LDL. Addition of drug therapy to dietary and 
other nonpharmacologic measures reduces cardiovas-
cular risk in patients with established coronary athero-
sclerosis and also in individuals who have not previously 
experienced CHD events (Fig. 30-3). As guidelines 
often lag the emerging clinical trial evidence base, the 
practitioner may elect to exercise clinical judgment in 
making therapeutic decisions in individual patients.
LDL-lowering therapies do not appear to exert their 
beneficial effect on cardiovascular events by causing 
a marked “regression” of stenoses. Angiographically 
monitored studies of lipid lowering have shown at best 
a modest reduction in coronary artery stenoses over the 
duration of study, despite abundant evidence of event 
reduction. These results suggest that the beneficial 
mechanism of lipid lowering does not require a sub-
stantial reduction in the fixed stenoses. Rather, the ben-
efit may derive from “stabilization” of atherosclerotic 
lesions without decreased stenosis. Such stabilization 
Table 30-2
LDL Cholesterol Goals and Cut points for Therapeutic Lifestyle Changes (TLC) and Drug 
Therapy in Different Risk Categories
LDL Level, mmol/L (mg/dL)
Risk Category
Goal
Initiate TLC
Consider Drug Therapy
Very high
ACS, or CHD w/DM, or multiple CRFs
<1.8 (<70)
≥1.8 (≥70)
≥1.8 (≥70)
High 
CHD or CHD risk equivalents (10-year  
risk >20%)
If LDL <2.6 (<100)
<2.6 (<100)
(optional goal:  
<1.8 [<70])
<1.8 (<70)
≥2.6 (≥100)
≥2.6 (≥100) (<2.6 [<100]: 
consider drug Rx)
Moderately high
2 + risk factors (10-year risk, 10–20%)
<2.6 (<100)
≥3.4 (≥130)
≥3.4 (≥130) (2.6–3.3 [100–129]: 
consider drug Rx)
Moderate
2 + risk factors (risk <10%)
<3.4 (<130)
≥3.4 (≥130)
≥4.1 (≥160)
Lower
0–1 risk factor
<4.1 (<160)
≥4.1 (≥160)
≥4.9 (≥190)
Abbreviations: ACS, acute coronary syndrome; CHD, coronary heart disease; CRFs, coronary risk factors; DM, diabetes mellitus; LDL, low-
density lipoprotein.
Source: Adapted from S Grundy et al: Circulation 110:227, 2004.
SECTION V
Disorders of the Vasculature
348
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
-10%
Major vascular events
Reduction in LDL cholesterol, mmol/L
Proportional reduction in event rate (standard error)
Figure 30-3 
Lipid lowering reduces coronary events, as reflected on 
this graph showing the reduction in major cardiovascu-
lar events as a function of low-density lipoprotein level in a 
compendium of clinical trials with statins. (Adapted from CTT 
Collaborators, Lancet 366:1267, 2005.) The Management 
of Elevated Cholesterol in the Primary Prevention Group of 
Adult Japanese (MEGA), Treating to New Targets (TNT), and 
Incremental Decrease in Endpoints through Aggressive Lipid 
Lowering (IDEAL) studies have been added.
of atherosclerotic lesions and the attendant decrease 
in coronary events may result from the egress of lipids 
or from favorably influencing aspects of the biology of 
atherogenesis discussed earlier. In addition, as sizable 
lesions may protrude abluminally rather than into the 
lumen due to complementary enlargement, shrinkage of 
such plaques may not be apparent on angiograms. The 
consistent benefit of LDL lowering by 3-hydroxy- 
3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase 
inhibitors (statins) observed in many risk groups may 
depend not only on their salutary effects on the lipid 
profile but also on direct modulation of plaque biology 
independent of lipid lowering.
A new class of LDL-lowering medications reduces 
cholesterol absorption from the proximal small bowel 
by targeting an enterocyte cholesterol transporter 
denoted Niemann-Pick C1-like 1 protein (NPC1L1). 
The NPC1L1 inhibitor ezetimibe provides a useful 
adjunct to current therapies to achieve LDL goals; how-
ever, no clinical trial evidence has yet demonstrated that 
ezetimibe improves CHD outcomes.
As the mechanism by which elevated LDL lev-
els promote atherogenesis probably involves oxidative 
modification, several trials have tested the possibility 
that antioxidant vitamin therapy might reduce CHD 
events. Rigorous and well-controlled clinical trials have 
failed to demonstrate that antioxidant vitamin ther-
apy improves CHD outcomes. Therefore, the current 
evidence base does not support the use of antioxidant 
vitamins for this indication.
The clinical use of effective pharmacologic strate-
gies for lowering LDL has reduced cardiovascular events 
markedly, but even their optimal utilization in clini-
cal trials prevents only a minority of these endpoints. 
Hence, other aspects of the lipid profile have become 
tempting targets for addressing the residual burden of 
cardiovascular disease that persists despite aggressive 
LDL lowering. Indeed, in the “poststatin” era, patients 
with LDL levels at or below target not infrequently 
present with acute coronary syndromes. Low levels of 
HDL present a growing problem in patients with CAD 
as the prevalence of metabolic syndrome and diabetes 
increases. Blood HDL levels vary inversely with those 
of triglycerides, and the independent role of triglycer-
ides as a cardiovascular risk factor remains unsettled. 
For these reasons, approaches to raising HDL have 
emerged as a prominent next hurdle in the manage-
ment of dyslipidemia. Weight loss and physical activity 
can raise HDL. Nicotinic acid, particularly in combina-
tion with statins, can robustly raise HDL. Some clini-
cal trial data support the effectiveness of nicotinic acid 
in cardiovascular risk reduction. However, flushing 
and pruritus remain a challenge to patient acceptance, 
even with improved dosage forms of nicotinic acid. 
A combination of nicotinic acid with an inhibitor of 
prostaglandin D receptor, a mediator of flushing, may 
limit this unwanted effect of nicotinic acid and is cur-
rently in clinical trials, but it has not received regulatory 
approval.
Agonists of nuclear receptors provide another poten-
tial avenue for raising HDL levels. Yet patients treated 
with peroxisome proliferator–activated receptors alpha 
and gamma (PPAR-α and -γ) agonists have not con-
sistently shown improved cardiovascular outcomes, 
and at least some PPAR-agonists have been associated 
with worsened cardiovascular outcomes. Other agents 
in clinical development raise HDL levels by inhibiting 
cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP). The first of 
these agents to undergo large-scale clinical evaluation 
showed increased adverse events, leading to cessation 
of its development. Clinical studies currently underway 
will assess the effectiveness of other CETP inhibitors 
that lack some of the adverse off-target actions encoun-
tered with the first agent.
Hypertension
(See also Chap. 37) A wealth of epidemiologic data 
support a relationship between hypertension and ath-
erosclerotic risk, and extensive clinical trial evidence 
has established that pharmacologic treatment of hyper-
tension can reduce the risk of stroke, heart failure, and 
CHD events.
 
CHAPTER 30
The Pathogenesis, Prevention, and Treatment of Atherosclerosis
349
Diabetes mellitus, insulin resistance,  
and the metabolic syndrome
Most patients with diabetes mellitus die of atheroscle-
rosis and its complications. Aging and rampant obesity 
underlie a current epidemic of type 2 diabetes mellitus. 
The abnormal lipoprotein profile associated with insu-
lin resistance, known as diabetic dyslipidemia, accounts 
for part of the elevated cardiovascular risk in patients 
with type 2 diabetes. Although diabetic individu-
als often have LDL cholesterol levels near the aver-
age, the LDL particles tend to be smaller and denser 
and, therefore, more atherogenic. Other features of 
diabetic dyslipidemia include low HDL and elevated 
triglyceride levels. Hypertension also frequently accom-
panies obesity, insulin resistance, and dyslipidemia. 
Indeed, the ATP III guidelines now recognize this 
cluster of risk factors and provide criteria for diagno-
sis of the “metabolic syndrome” (Table 30-3). Despite 
legitimate concerns about whether clustered compo-
nents confer more risk than an individual component, 
the metabolic syndrome concept may offer clinical 
utility.
Therapeutic objectives for intervention in these 
patients include addressing the underlying causes, 
including obesity and low physical activity, by initiat-
ing TLC. The ATP III guidelines provide an explicit 
Table 30-3
Clinical Identification of the Metabolic 
Syndrome—Any Three Risk Factors
Risk Factor
Defining Level
Abdominal obesitya
  Men (waist circumference)b
>102 cm (>40 in.)
  Women
>88 cm (>35 in.)
Triglycerides
>1.7 mmol/L (>150 mg/dL)
HDL cholesterol
  Men
<1 mmol/L (<40 mg/dL)
  Women
<1.3 mmol/L (<50 mg/dL)
Blood pressure
≥130/≥85 mmHg
Fasting glucose
>6.1 mmol/L (>110 mg/dL)
aOverweight and obesity are associated with insulin resistance and 
the metabolic syndrome. However, the presence of abdominal obe-
sity is more highly correlated with the metabolic risk factors than is 
an elevated body mass index (BMI). Therefore, the simple measure 
of waist circumference is recommended to identify the BMI compo-
nent of the metabolic syndrome.
bSome male patients can develop multiple metabolic risk factors 
when the waist circumference is only marginally increased (e.g., 
94–102 cm [37–39 in.]). Such patients may have a strong genetic 
contribution to insulin resistance. They should benefit from life-
style changes, similarly to men with categorical increases in waist 
circumference.
step-by-step plan for implementing TLC, and treatment 
of the component risk factors should accompany TLC. 
Establishing that strict glycemic control reduces the risk 
of macrovascular complications of diabetes has proved 
much more elusive than the established beneficial 
effects on microvascular complications such as retinopa-
thy and renal disease. Indeed, “tight” glycemic control 
may increase adverse events in patients with type 2 dia-
betes, lending even greater importance to aggressive 
control of other aspects of risk in this patient popula-
tion. In this regard, multiple clinical trials, including the 
Collaborative Atorvastatin Diabetes Study (CARDS) 
that addressed specifically the diabetic population, have 
demonstrated unequivocal benefit of HMG-CoA reduc-
tase inhibitor therapy in diabetic patients over all ranges 
of LDL cholesterol levels (but not those with end-stage 
renal disease). In view of the consistent benefit of statin 
treatment for diabetic populations and the thus far 
equivocal results with PPAR agonists, the current stance 
of the American Diabetic Association that statins be 
considered for persons with diabetes older than age 40 
who have a total cholesterol level ≥135 appears amply 
justified. Among the oral hypoglycemic agents, metfor-
min possesses the best evidence base for cardiovascular 
event reduction.
Diabetic populations appear to derive particular 
benefit from antihypertensive strategies that block the 
action of angiotensin II. Thus, the antihypertensive reg-
imen for patients with the metabolic syndrome should 
include angiotensin converting-enzyme inhibitors or 
angiotensin receptor blockers when possible. Most of 
these individuals will require more than one antihyper-
tensive agent to achieve the recently updated Ameri-
can Diabetes Association blood pressure goal of 130/80 
mmHg.
Male sex/postmenopausal state
Decades of observational studies have verified excess 
coronary risk in men compared with premenopausal 
women. After menopause, however, coronary risk 
accelerates in women. At least part of the apparent pro-
tection against CHD in premenopausal women derives 
from their relatively higher HDL levels compared with 
those of men. After menopause, HDL values fall in 
concert with increased coronary risk. Estrogen therapy 
lowers LDL cholesterol and raises HDL cholesterol, 
changes that should decrease coronary risk.
Multiple observational and experimental studies have 
suggested that estrogen therapy reduces coronary risk. 
However, a spate of clinical trials has failed to demon-
strate a net benefit of estrogen with or without proges-
tins on CHD outcomes. In the Heart and Estrogen/
Progestin Replacement Study (HERS), postmenopausal 
female survivors of acute MI were randomized to an 
SECTION V
Disorders of the Vasculature
350
estrogen/progestin combination or to placebo. This 
study showed no overall reduction in recurrent coro-
nary events in the active treatment arm. Indeed, early 
in the 5-year course of this trial, there was a trend 
toward an actual increase in vascular events in the 
treated women. Extended follow-up of this cohort 
did not disclose an accrual of benefit in the treatment 
group. The Women’s Health Initiative (WHI) study 
arm, using a similar estrogen plus progesterone regi-
men, was halted due to a small but significant hazard 
of cardiovascular events, stroke, and breast cancer. The 
estrogen without progestin arm of WHI (conducted 
in women without a uterus) was stopped early due 
to an increase in strokes, and failed to afford protec-
tion from MI or CHD death during observation over 
7 years. The excess cardiovascular events in these trials 
may result from an increase in thromboembolism. Phy-
sicians should work with women to provide informa-
tion and help weigh the small but evident CHD risk of 
estrogen ± progestin versus the benefits for postmeno-
pausal symptoms and osteoporosis, taking personal 
preferences into account. Post hoc analyses of observa-
tional studies suggest that estrogen therapy in women 
younger than or closer to menopause than the women 
enrolled in WHI might confer cardiovascular benefit. 
Thus, the timing in relation to menopause or the age at 
which estrogen therapy begins may influence its risk/
benefit balance.
The lack of efficacy of estrogen therapy in cardiovas-
cular risk reduction highlights the need for redoubled 
attention to known modifiable risk factors in women. 
The recent JUPITER trials randomized over 6000 
women over age 65 without known cardiovascular dis-
ease with LDL <130 mg/dL and high-sensitivity (hs) 
CRP >2 mg/L to a statin or placebo. The statin-treated 
women had a striking reduction in cardiovascular 
events, as did the men. This trial, which included more 
women than any prior statin study, provides strong evi-
dence supporting the efficacy of statins in women who 
meet those entry criteria.
Dysregulated coagulation or fibrinolysis
Thrombosis ultimately causes the gravest complications 
of atherosclerosis. The propensity to form thrombi and/
or lyse clots once they form clearly influences the mani-
festations of atherosclerosis. Thrombosis provoked by 
atheroma rupture and subsequent healing may promote 
plaque growth. Certain individual characteristics can 
influence thrombosis or fibrinolysis and have received 
attention as potential coronary risk factors. For exam-
ple, fibrinogen levels correlate with coronary risk and 
provide information about coronary risk independent of 
the lipoprotein profile.
The stability of an arterial thrombus depends on the 
balance between fibrinolytic factors such as plasmin, and 
inhibitors of the fibrinolytic system such as plasminogen 
activator inhibitor 1 (PAI-1). Individuals with diabetes 
mellitus or the metabolic syndrome have elevated levels 
of PAI-1 in plasma, and this probably contributes to the 
increased risk of thrombotic events. Lp(a) (Chap. 31) 
may modulate fibrinolysis, and individuals with elevated 
Lp(a) levels have increased CHD risk.
Aspirin reduces CHD events in several contexts. 
Chapter 33 discusses aspirin therapy in stable isch-
emic heart disease and Chap. 34 reviews recom-
mendations for aspirin treatment in acute coronary 
syndromes. In primary prevention, pooled trial data 
show that low-dose aspirin treatment (81 mg/d to 
325 mg on alternate days) can reduce the risk of a first 
MI in men. Although the recent Women’s Health 
Study (WHS) showed that aspirin (100 mg on alter-
nate days) reduced strokes by 17%, it did not prevent 
MI in women. Current American Heart Association 
(AHA) guidelines recommend the use of low-dose 
aspirin (75–160 mg/d) for women with high car-
diovascular risk (≥20% 10-year risk), for men with a 
≥10% 10-year risk of CHD, and for all aspirin-tolerant 
patients with established cardiovascular disease who 
lack contraindications.
Homocysteine
A large body of literature suggests a relationship 
between hyperhomocysteinemia and coronary events. 
Several mutations in the enzymes involved in homo-
cysteine accumulation correlate with thrombosis and, 
in some studies, with coronary risk. Prospective studies 
have not shown a robust utility of hyperhomocystein-
emia in CHD risk stratification. Clinical trials have not 
shown that intervention to lower homocysteine levels 
reduces CHD events. Fortification of the U.S. diet with 
folic acid to reduce neural tube defects has lowered 
homocysteine levels in the population at large. Mea-
surement of homocysteine levels should be reserved for 
individuals with atherosclerosis at a young age or out of 
proportion to established risk factors. Physicians who 
advise consumption of supplements containing folic acid 
should consider that this treatment may mask pernicious 
anemia.
Inflammation
An accumulation of clinical evidence shows that 
markers of inflammation correlate with coronary risk. 
For example, plasma levels of CRP, as measured by 
a high-sensitivity assay (hsCRP), prospectively predict 
the risk of MI. CRP levels also correlate with the out-
come in patients with acute coronary syndromes. In 
contrast to several other novel risk factors, CRP adds 
predictive information to that derived from established 
risk factors, such as those included in the Framingham 
 
CHAPTER 30
The Pathogenesis, Prevention, and Treatment of Atherosclerosis
351
10–20
5–10
0.5–1.0
1.0–3.0
3.0–10.0
>10.0
<5
<5
30.0
25.0
20.0
15.0
10.0
5.0
0.0
Calculated Framingham 10-year risk
hsCRP mg/L
CRP-modified Framingham risk
Figure 30-4 
C-reactive protein (CRP) level adds to the predictive 
value of the Framingham score. hsCRP, high-sensitivity 
measurement of CRP. (Adapted from PM Ridker et al: 
Circulation 109:2818, 2004.)
score (Fig. 30-4). Recent Mendelian randomization 
studies do not support a causal role for CRP in car-
diovascular disease. Thus, CRP serves as a validated 
biomarker of risk but probably not as a direct contrib-
utor to pathogenesis.
Elevations in acute-phase reactants such as fibrinogen 
and CRP reflect the overall inflammatory burden, not 
just vascular foci of inflammation. Visceral adipose tissue 
releases proinflammatory cytokines that drive CRP pro-
duction and may represent a major extravascular stimu-
lus to elevation of inflammatory markers in obese and 
overweight individuals. Indeed, CRP levels rise with 
body mass index (BMI), and weight reduction lowers 
CRP levels. Infectious agents might also furnish inflam-
matory stimuli related to cardiovascular risk. To date, 
randomized clinical trials have not supported the use of 
antibiotics to reduce CHD risk.
Intriguing evidence suggests that lipid-lowering 
therapy reduces coronary events in part by muting the 
inflammatory aspects of the pathogenesis of atheroscle-
rosis. For example, in the JUPITER trial, a prespecified 
analysis showed that those who achieved lower levels of 
both LDL and CRP had better clinical outcomes than 
did those who only reached the lower level of either 
the inflammatory marker or the atherogenic lipopro-
tein (Fig. 30-5). Similar analyses of studies of statin 
treatment in patients after acute coronary syndromes 
showed the same pattern. The anti-inflammatory effect 
of statins appears independent of LDL lowering, as these 
two variables correlated very poorly in individual sub-
jects in multiple clinical trials.
Lifestyle modification
The prevention of atherosclerosis presents a long-term 
challenge to all health care professionals and for public 
health policy. Both individual practitioners and orga-
nizations providing health care should strive to help 
patients optimize their risk factor profiles long before 
atherosclerotic disease becomes manifest. The current 
accumulation of cardiovascular risk in youth and in cer-
tain minority populations presents a particularly vexing 
concern from a public health perspective.
The care plan for all patients seen by internists should 
include measures to assess and minimize cardiovascular 
risk. Physicians must counsel patients about the health 
risks of tobacco use and provide guidance and resources 
regarding smoking cessation. Similarly, physicians should 
advise all patients about prudent dietary and physical 
activity habits for maintaining ideal body weight. Both 
National Institutes of Health (NIH) and AHA statements 
recommend at least 30 min of moderate-intensity physical 
activity per day. Obesity, particularly the male pattern 
of centripetal or visceral fat accumulation, can contribute 
to the elements of the metabolic syndrome (Table 30-3). 
Physicians should encourage their patients to take per-
sonal responsibility for behavior related to modifiable 
risk factors for the development of premature athero-
sclerotic disease. Conscientious counseling and patient 
education may forestall the need for pharmacologic 
measures intended to reduce coronary risk.
Issues in risk assessment
A growing panel of markers of coronary risk presents a 
perplexing array to the practitioner. Markers measured in 
peripheral blood include size fractions of LDL particles 
and concentrations of homocysteine, Lp(a), fibrinogen, 
CRP, PAI-1, myeloperoxidase, and lipoprotein-associated 
phospholipase A2, among many others. In general, such 
specialized tests add little to the information available 
Figure 30-5 
Evidence from the JUPITER study that both LDL-lowering 
and anti-inflammatory actions contribute to the benefit of 
statin therapy in primary prevention. See text for explanation. 
Placebo
LDL ≥ 70 mg/dL, hsCRP ≥ 2 mg/L
LDL < 70 mg/dL, hsCRP ≥ 2 mg/L
LDL ≥ 70 mg/dL, hsCRP < 2 mg/L
LDL < 70 mg/dL, hsCRP < 2 mg/L
7832
N
Group
Rate
1.11
1384
1.11
2921
0.62
2685
0.38
726
0.54
P < 0.001
hsCRP, high-sensitivity measurement of C-reactive protein 
(CRP). (Adapted from PM Ridker et al: Lancet 373:1175, 
2009.)
SECTION V
Disorders of the Vasculature
352
from a careful history and physical examination com-
bined with measurement of a plasma lipoprotein profile 
and fasting blood glucose. The high-sensitivity CRP 
measurement may well prove an exception in view 
of its robustness in risk prediction, ease of reproduc-
ible and standardized measurement, relative stability in 
individuals over time, and, most important, ability to 
add to the risk information disclosed by standard mea-
surements such as the components of the Framingham 
risk score (Fig. 30-4). The addition of information 
regarding a family history of premature atherosclero-
sis in parents (a simply obtained indicator of genetic 
susceptibility), together with the marker of inflamma-
tion hsCRP, permits correct reclassification of risk in 
individuals—especially those whose Framingham scores 
place them at intermediate risk. Current advisories, 
however, recommend the use of the hsCRP test only 
in individuals in this CHD event risk group (10–20%, 
10-year risk).
Available data do not support the use of imaging 
studies to screen for subclinical disease (e.g., measure-
ment of carotid-intima/media thickness, coronary 
artery calcification, and use of computed tomographic 
coronary angiograms). Inappropriate use of such imag-
ing modalities may promote excessive alarm in asymp-
tomatic individuals and prompt invasive diagnostic and 
therapeutic procedures of unproven value. Widespread 
application of such modalities for screening should await 
proof that clinical benefit derives from their application.
Progress in human genetics holds considerable 
promise for risk prediction and for individualization 
of cardiovascular therapy. Many reports have identi-
fied single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in can-
didate genes as predictors of cardiovascular risk. To 
date, the validation of such genetic markers of risk 
and drug responsiveness in multiple populations has 
often proved disappointing. The advent of technology 
that permits relatively rapid and inexpensive genome-
wide screens, in contrast to most SNP studies, has 
led to identification of sites of genetic variation that 
do reproducibly indicate heightened cardiovascular 
risk (e.g., chromosome 9p21). The results of genetic 
studies should identify new potential therapeutic tar-
gets (e.g., the enzyme mutated in autosomal dominant 
hypercholesterolemia, abbreviated PCSK9) and may 
lead to genetic tests that help refine cardiovascular risk 
assessment in the future.
The Challenge of Implementation: 
Changing Physician and  
Patient Behavior
Despite declining age-adjusted rates of coronary death, 
cardiovascular mortality worldwide is rising due to the 
aging of the population, and the subsiding of commu-
nicable diseases and increased prevalence of risk factors 
in developing countries. Enormous challenges remain 
regarding translation of the current evidence base into 
practice. Physicians must learn how to help individuals 
adopt a healthy lifestyle in a culturally appropriate man-
ner and to deploy their increasingly powerful pharma-
cologic tools most economically and effectively. The 
obstacles to implementation of current evidence-based 
prevention and treatment of atherosclerosis involve 
economics, education, physician awareness, and patient 
adherence to recommended regimens. Future goals in 
the treatment of atherosclerosis should include more 
widespread implementation of the current evidence-
based guidelines regarding risk factor management and, 
when appropriate, drug therapy.
 Daniel J. Rader  I   Helen H. Hobbs 
353
 Lipoproteins are complexes of lipids and proteins that 
are essential for the transport of cholesterol, triglycer-
ides, and fat-soluble vitamins. Previously, lipoprotein 
disorders were the purview of specialized lipidolo-
gists, but the demonstration that lipid-lowering ther-
apy signifi cantly reduces the clinical complications 
of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (ASCVD) 
has brought the diagnosis and treatment of these dis-
orders into the domain of the internist. The number 
of individuals who are candidates for lipid-lowering 
therapy has continued to increase. The development 
of safe, effective, and well-tolerated pharmacologic 
agents has greatly expanded the therapeutic armamen-
tarium available to the physician to treat disorders of 
lipid metabolism. Therefore, the appropriate diagnosis 
and management of lipoprotein disorders is of critical 
importance in the practice of medicine. This chapter 
will review normal lipoprotein physiology, the patho-
physiology of primary (inherited) disorders of lipo-
protein metabolism, the diseases and environmental 
factors that cause secondary disorders of lipoprotein 
metabolism, and the practical approaches to their diag-
nosis and management. 
 Lipoprotein MetaboLisM 
 Lipoprotein CLassiFiCation 
anD CoMposition 
 Lipoproteins are large macromolecular complexes that 
transport hydrophobic lipids (primarily triglycerides, 
cholesterol, and fat-soluble vitamins) through body fl u-
ids (plasma, interstitial fl uid, and lymph) to and from tis-
sues. Lipoproteins play an essential role in the absorp-
tion of dietary cholesterol, long-chain fatty acids, and 
fat-soluble vitamins; the transport of triglycerides, 
cholesterol, and fat-soluble vitamins from the liver to 
peripheral tissues; and the transport of cholesterol from 
peripheral tissues to the liver. 
 DISORDERS OF LIPOPROTEIN METABOLISM 
 CHapter 31 
 Lipoproteins contain a core of hydrophobic lipids (tri-
glycerides and cholesteryl esters) surrounded by hydrophilic 
lipids (phospholipids, unesterifi ed cholesterol) and proteins 
that interact with body fl uids. The plasma lipoproteins 
are divided into fi ve major classes based on their relative 
density  ( Fig. 31-1 and  Table 31-1 ) : chylomicrons, very 
low-density lipoproteins (VLDLs), intermediate- density 
lipoproteins (IDLs), low-density lipoproteins (LDLs), and 
high-density lipoproteins (HDLs). Each lipoprotein class 
comprises a family of particles that vary slightly in density, 
size, and protein composition. The density of a lipoprotein 
is determined by the amount of lipid per particle. HDL is 
the smallest and most dense lipoprotein, whereas chylomi-
crons and VLDLs are the largest and least dense lipoprotein 
particles. Most plasma triglyceride is transported in chylo-
microns or VLDLs, and most plasma cholesterol is carried 
as cholesteryl esters in LDLs and HDLs. 
Density, g/mL
1.20
5
10
Diameter, nm
1.10
1.02
1.06
20
40
60
80
1000
1.006
0.95
HDL
LDL
IDL
VLDL
Chylomicron
remnants
Chylomicron
 Figure 31-1 
 the density and size distribution of the major classes of 
lipoprotein particles. Lipoproteins are classifi ed by density 
and size, which are inversely related. VLDL, very low-density 
lipoprotein; IDL, intermediate-density lipoprotein; LDL, low-
density lipoprotein; HDL, high-density lipoprotein. 
SECTION V
Disorders of the Vasculature
354
approximately two-thirds of the HDL particles. ApoB 
is the major structural protein of chylomicrons, VLDLs, 
IDLs, and LDLs; one molecule of apoB, either apoB-
48 (chylomicron) or apoB-100 (VLDL, IDL, or LDL), 
is present on each lipoprotein particle. The human liver 
synthesizes apoB-100, and the intestine makes apoB-48, 
which is derived from the same gene by mRNA edit-
ing. ApoE is present in multiple copies on chylomicrons, 
The proteins associated with lipoproteins, called apo-
lipoproteins (Table 31-2), are required for the assem-
bly, structure, and function of lipoproteins. Apolipo-
proteins activate enzymes important in lipoprotein 
metabolism and act as ligands for cell surface receptors. 
ApoA-I, which is synthesized in the liver and intestine, 
is found on virtually all HDL particles. ApoA-II is the 
second most abundant HDL apolipoprotein and is on 
Table 31-1
Major Lipoprotein Classes
Apolipoproteins
Lipoprotein
Density, g/mLa
Size, nmb
Electrophoretic 
Mobilityc
Major
Other
Other 
Constituents
Chylomicrons
0.930
75–1200
Origin
ApoB-48
A-I, A-IV, C-I, C-II, C-III, E
Retinyl esters
Chylomicron 
remnants
0.930–1.006
30–80
Slow pre-β
ApoB-48
A-I, A-IV, C-I, C-II, C-III, E
Retinyl esters
  VLDL
0.930–1.006
30–80
Pre-β
ApoB-100
A-I, A-II, A-V, C-I, C-II, 
C-III, E
Vitamin E
  IDL
1.006–1.019
25–35
Slow pre-β
ApoB-100
C-I, C-II, C-III, E
Vitamin E
  LDL
1.019–1.063
18–25
β
ApoB-100
Vitamin E
  HDL
1.063–1.210
5–12
α
ApoA-I
A-II, A-IV, A-V, C-III, E
LCAT, CETP 
paroxonase
  Lp(a)
1.050–1.120
25
Pre-β
ApoB-100
Apo(a)
aThe density of the particle is determined by ultracentrifugation.
bThe size of the particle is measured using gel electrophoresis.
cThe electrophoretic mobility of the particle on agarose gel electrophores reflects the size and surface charge of the particle, with b being the 
position of LDL and a being the position of HDL.
Note: All of the lipoprotein classes contain phospholipids, esterified and unesterified cholesterol, and triglycerides to varying degrees.
Abbreviations: CETP, cholesteryl ester transfer protein; HDL, high-density lipoprotein; IDL, intermediate-density lipoprotein; LCAT, 
lecithin-cholesterol acyltransferase; LDL, low-density lipoprotein; Lp(a), lipoprotein A; VLDL, very low-density lipoprotein.
Table 31-2
Major Apolipoproteins
Apolipoprotein
Primary Source
Lipoprotein Association
Function
ApoA-I
Intestine, liver
HDL, chylomicrons
Structural protein for HDL
Activates LCAT
ApoA-II
Liver
HDL, chylomicrons
Structural protein for HDL
ApoA-IV
Intestine
HDL, chylomicrons
Unknown
ApoA-V
Liver
VLDL, chylomicrons
Promotes LPL-mediated triglyceride lipolysis
Apo(a)
Liver
Lp(a)
Unknown
ApoB-48
Intestine
Chylomicrons
Structural protein for chylomicrons
ApoB-100
Liver
VLDL, IDL, LDL, Lp(a)
Structural protein for VLDL, LDL, IDL, Lp(a)
Ligand for binding to LDL receptor
ApoC-I
Liver
Chylomicrons, VLDL, HDL
Unknown
ApoC-II
Liver
Chylomicrons, VLDL, HDL
Cofactor for LPL
ApoC-III
Liver
Chylomicrons, VLDL, HDL
Inhibits lipoprotein binding to receptors
ApoE
Liver
Chylomicron remnants, IDL, HDL
Ligand for binding to LDL receptor
ApoH
Liver
Chylomicrons, VLDL, LDL, HDL
B2 glycoprotein I
ApoJ
Liver
HDL
Unknown
ApoL
Unknown
HDL
Unknown
ApoM
Liver
HDL
Unknown
Abbreviations: HDL, high-density lipoprotein; IDL, intermediate-density lipoprotein; LCAT, lecithin-cholesterol acyltransferase; LDL, low-density 
lipoprotein; Lp(a), lipoprotein A; LPL, lipoprotein lipase; VLDL, very low-density lipoprotein.
 
CHAPTER 31
Disorders of Lipoprotein Metabolism
355
VLDL, and IDL, and it plays a critical role in the metab-
olism and clearance of triglyceride-rich particles. Three 
apolipoproteins of the C-series (apoC-I, apoC-II, 
and apoC-III) also participate in the metabolism of 
triglyceride-rich lipoproteins. ApoB is the only major 
apolipoprotein that does not transfer between lipopro-
tein particles. Some of the minor apolipoproteins are 
listed in Table 31-2.
Transport of Dietary Lipids 
(Exogenous Pathway)
The exogenous pathway of lipoprotein metabolism 
permits efficient transport of dietary lipids (Fig. 31-2). 
Dietary triglycerides are hydrolyzed by lipases within the 
intestinal lumen and emulsified with bile acids to form 
micelles. Dietary cholesterol, fatty acids, and fat-soluble 
vitamins are absorbed in the proximal small intestine. 
Cholesterol and retinol are esterified (by the addition of 
a fatty acid) in the enterocyte to form cholesteryl esters 
and retinyl esters, respectively. Longer-chain fatty acids 
(>12 carbons) are incorporated into triglycerides and 
packaged with apoB-48, cholesteryl esters, retinyl esters, 
phospholipids, and cholesterol to form chylomicrons. 
Nascent chylomicrons are secreted into the intesti-
nal lymph and delivered via the thoracic duct directly 
to the systemic circulation, where they are extensively 
processed by peripheral tissues before reaching the liver. 
The particles encounter lipoprotein lipase (LPL), which 
is anchored to a glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored 
protein, GPIHBP1, that is attached to the endothelial 
surfaces of capillaries in adipose tissue, heart, and skeletal 
muscle (Fig. 31-2). The triglycerides of chylomicrons 
are hydrolyzed by LPL, and free fatty acids are released. 
ApoC-II, which is transferred to circulating chylomi-
crons from HDL, acts as a required cofactor for LPL in 
this reaction. The released free fatty acids are taken up 
by adjacent myocytes or adipocytes and either oxidized 
to generate energy or reesterified and stored as triglyc-
eride. Some of the released free fatty acids bind albumin 
before entering cells and are transported to other tissues, 
especially the liver. The chylomicron particle progres-
sively shrinks in size as the hydrophobic core is hydro-
lyzed and the hydrophilic lipids (cholesterol and phos-
pholipids) and apolipoproteins on the particle surface 
are transferred to HDL, creating chylomicron remnants. 
Chylomicron remnants are rapidly removed from the 
circulation by the liver through a process that requires 
Small
intestines
Exogenous
Endogenous
Bile acids
+
cholesterol
Peripheral
tissues
Liver
ApoE
ApoB-48
LDLR
ApoC's
Dietary lipids
LDL
Chylomicron
VLDL
IDL
Chylomicron
remnant
Capillaries
LPL
FFA
Muscle
Adipose
ApoB-100
HL
Capillaries
LPL
FFA
Muscle
Adipose
Figure 31-2 
The exogenous and endogenous lipoprotein metabolic 
pathways. The exogenous pathway transports dietary lip-
ids to the periphery and the liver. The endogenous pathway 
transports hepatic lipids to the periphery. LPL, lipoprotein 
lipase; FFA, free fatty acid; VLDL, very low-density lipopro-
tein; IDL, intermediate-density lipoprotein; LDL, low-density 
lipoprotein; LDLR, low-density lipoprotein receptor; HL, 
hepatic lipase.
SECTION V
Disorders of the Vasculature
356
The liver removes approximately 40–60% of IDL by 
LDL receptor–mediated endocytosis via binding to 
apoE. The remainder of IDL is remodeled by hepatic 
lipase (HL) to form LDL. During this process, most of 
the triglyceride in the particle hydrolyzed, and all apo-
lipoproteins except apoB-100 are transferred to other 
lipoproteins. The cholesterol in LDL accounts for more 
than one-half of the plasma cholesterol in most individ-
uals. Approximately 70% of circulating LDL is cleared 
by LDL receptor–mediated endocytosis in the liver. 
Lipoprotein(a) [Lp(a)] is a lipoprotein similar to LDL in 
lipid and protein composition, but it contains an addi-
tional protein called apolipoprotein(a) [apo(a)]. Apo(a) is 
synthesized in the liver and attached to apoB-100 by a 
disulfide linkage. The major site of clearance of Lp(a) is 
the liver, but the uptake pathway is not known.
HDL Metabolism and Reverse 
Cholesterol Transport
All nucleated cells synthesize cholesterol, but only 
hepatocytes and enterocytes can effectively excrete 
cholesterol from the body, into either the bile or the 
gut lumen. In the liver, cholesterol is secreted into the 
bile, either directly or after conversion to bile acids. 
Cholesterol in peripheral cells is transported from the 
plasma membranes of peripheral cells to the liver and 
intestine by a process termed “reverse cholesterol trans-
port” that is facilitated by HDL (Fig. 31-3).
apoE as a ligand for receptors in the liver. Consequently, 
few, if any, chylomicrons or chylomicron remnants are 
present in the blood after a 12-h fast, except in patients 
with disorders of chylomicron metabolism.
Transport of Hepatic Lipids 
(Endogenous Pathway)
The endogenous pathway of lipoprotein metabolism 
refers to the secretion of apoB-containing lipoproteins 
from the liver and the metabolism of these triglyceride-
rich particles in peripheral tissues (Fig. 31-2). VLDL 
particles resemble chylomicrons in protein composi-
tion but contain apoB-100 rather than apoB-48 and 
have a higher ratio of cholesterol to triglyceride (∼1 mg 
of cholesterol for every 5 mg of triglyceride). The tri-
glycerides of VLDL are derived predominantly from 
the esterification of long-chain fatty acids in the liver. 
The packaging of hepatic triglycerides with the other 
major components of the nascent VLDL particle (apoB-
100, cholesteryl esters, phospholipids, and vitamin E) 
requires the action of the enzyme microsomal triglyc-
eride transfer protein (MTP). After secretion into the 
plasma, VLDL acquires multiple copies of apoE and 
apolipoproteins of the C series by transfer from HDL. 
As with chylomicrons, the triglycerides of VLDL are 
hydrolyzed by LPL, especially in muscle, heart, and 
adipose tissue. After the VLDL remnants dissociate 
from LPL, they are referred to as IDLs, which contain 
roughly similar amounts of cholesterol and triglyceride. 
Small
intestines
Liver
LDL
LDLR
SR-BI
Mature HDL
Chylomicrons
Peripheral cells
LCAT
CETP
Nascent
HDL
IDL
ApoA-I
CETP
ApoA-I
Free
cholesterol
Macrophage
VLDL
Figure 31-3 
HDL metabolism and reverse cholesterol transport. This 
pathway transports excess cholesterol from the periph-
ery back to the liver for excretion in the bile. The liver and 
the intestine produce nascent HDLs. Free cholesterol is 
acquired from macrophages and other peripheral cells and 
esterified by LCAT, forming mature HDLs. HDL cholesterol 
can be selectively taken up by the liver via SR-BI (scaven-
ger receptor class BI). Alternatively, HDL cholesteryl ester 
can be transferred by CETP from HDLs to VLDLs and chy-
lomicrons, which can then be taken up by the liver. LCAT, 
lecithin-cholesterol acyltransferase; CETP, cholesteryl ester 
transfer protein; VLDL, very low-density lipoprotein; IDL, 
intermediate-density lipoprotein; LDL, low-density lipopro-
tein; HDL, high-density lipoprotein; LDLR, low-density lipo-
protein receptor.
 
CHAPTER 31
Disorders of Lipoprotein Metabolism
357
Nascent HDL particles are synthesized by the intes-
tine and the liver. Newly secreted apoA-I rapidly 
acquires phospholipids and unesterified cholesterol from 
its site of synthesis (intestine or liver) via efflux pro-
moted by the membrane protein ATP-binding cassette 
protein A1 (ABCA1). This process results in the for-
mation of discoidal HDL particles, which then recruit 
additional unesterified cholesterol from the periph-
ery. Within the HDL particle, the cholesterol is esteri-
fied by lecithin-cholesterol acyltransferase (LCAT), 
a plasma enzyme associated with HDL, and the more 
hydrophobic cholesteryl ester moves to the core of the 
HDL particle. As HDL acquires more cholesteryl ester 
it becomes spherical, and additional apolipoproteins and 
lipids are transferred to the particles from the surfaces of 
chylomicrons and VLDLs during lipolysis.
HDL cholesterol is transported to hepatocytes by 
both an indirect and a direct pathway. HDL choles-
teryl esters can be transferred to apoB-containing lipo-
proteins in exchange for triglyceride by the cholesteryl 
ester transfer protein (CETP). The cholesteryl esters are 
then removed from the circulation by LDL receptor–
mediated endocytosis. HDL cholesterol can also be 
taken up directly by hepatocytes via the scavenger 
receptor class B1 (SR-B1), a cell surface receptor that 
mediates the selective transfer of lipids to cells.
HDL particles undergo extensive remodeling within 
the plasma compartment by a variety of lipid transfer 
proteins and lipases. The phospholipid transfer protein 
(PLTP) has the net effect of transferring phospholip-
ids from other lipoproteins to HDL or among differ-
ent classes of HDL particles. After CETP- and PLTP-
mediated lipid exchange, the triglyceride-enriched 
HDL becomes a much better substrate for HL, which 
hydrolyzes the triglycerides and phospholipids to gen-
erate smaller HDL particles. A related enzyme called 
endothelial lipase hydrolyzes HDL phospholipids, gener-
ating smaller HDL particles that are catabolized faster. 
Remodeling of HDL influences the metabolism, func-
tion, and plasma concentrations of HDL.
Disorders of Lipoprotein 
Metabolism
Fredrickson and Levy classified hyperlipoproteinemias 
according to the type of lipoprotein particles that accu-
mulate in the blood (Type I to Type V) (Table 31-3). 
A classification scheme based on the molecular etiol-
ogy and pathophysiology of the lipoprotein disorders 
complements this system and forms the basis for this 
chapter. The identification and characterization of genes 
Table 31-3
Fredrickson Classification of Hyperlipoproteinemias
Phenotype
I
IIa
IIb
III
IV
V
Lipoprotein, 
elevated
Chylomicrons
LDL
LDL and 
VLDL
Chylomicron and 
VLDL remnants
VLDL
Chylomicrons 
and VLDL
Triglycerides
↑↑↑
N
↑
↑↑
↑↑
↑↑↑
Cholesterol 
(total)
↑
↑↑↑
↑↑
↑↑
N/↑
↑↑
LDL-cholesterol
↓
↑↑↑
↑↑
↓
↓
↓
HDL-cholesterol
↓↓↓
N/↓
↓
N
↓↓
↓↓↓
Plasma 
appearance
Lactescent
Clear
Clear
Turbid
Turbid
Lactescent
Xanthomas
Eruptive
Tendon, tuberous
None
Palmar, tuberoeruptive
None
Eruptive
Pancreatitis
+++
0
0
0
0
+++
Coronary 
atherosclerosis
0
+++
+++
+++
+/−
+/−
Peripheral 
atherosclerosis
0
+
+
++
+/−
+/−
Molecular 
defects
LPL and 
ApoC-II
LDL receptor, ApoB-100,
PCSK9, LDLRAP, ABCG5, 
and ABCG8
ApoE
ApoA-V
ApoA-V and
  GPIHBP1
Genetic 
nomenclature
FCS
FH, FDB, ADH, ARH, 
sitosterolemia
FCHL
FDBL
FHTG
FHTG
Abbreviations: ADH, autosomal dominant hypercholesterolemia; Apo, apolipoprotein; ARH, autosomal recessive hypercholesterolemia; FCHL, 
familial combined hyperlipidemia; FCS, familial chylomicronemia syndrome; FDB, familial defective ApoB; FDBL, familial dysbetalipoprotein-
emia; FH, familial hypercholesterolemia; FHTG, familial hypertriglyceridemia; LPL, lipoprotein lipase; LDLRAP, LDL receptor associated protein; 
GPIHBP1, glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored high-density lipoprotein binding protein1; N, normal.
SECTION V
Disorders of the Vasculature
358
atherosclerosis. FH is caused by a large number (>1000) 
mutations in the LDL receptor gene. It has a higher inci-
dence in certain founder populations, such as Afrikaners, 
Christian Lebanese, and French Canadians. The elevated 
levels of LDL-C in FH are due to an increase in the pro-
duction of LDL from IDL (since a portion of IDL is nor-
mally cleared by LDL receptor–mediated endocytosis) 
and a delayed removal of LDL from the blood. Individu-
als with two mutated LDL receptor alleles (FH homozy-
gotes) have much higher LDL-C levels than those with 
one mutant allele (FH heterozygotes).
Homozygous FH occurs in approximately 1 in 
1 million persons worldwide. Patients with homozygous 
FH can be classified into one of two groups based on 
the amount of LDL receptor activity measured in their 
skin fibroblasts: those patients with <2% of normal LDL 
receptor activity (receptor negative) and those patients 
with 2–25% of normal LDL receptor activity (receptor 
defective). Most patients with homozygous FH present 
in childhood with cutaneous xanthomas on the hands, 
wrists, elbows, knees, heels, or buttocks. Total choles-
terol levels are usually >500 mg/dL and can be higher 
responsible for the genetic forms of hyperlipidemia have 
provided important molecular insights into the critical 
roles of structural apolipoproteins, enzymes, and recep-
tors in lipid metabolism (Table 31-4).
Primary Disorders of Elevated 
Apob-Containing Lipoproteins
A variety of genetic conditions are associated with the 
accumulation in plasma of specific classes of lipopro-
tein particles. In general, these can be divided into those 
causing elevated LDL-cholesterol (LDL-C) with nor-
mal triglycerides and those causing elevated triglycerides 
(Table 31-4).
Lipid disorders associated with elevated 
LDL-C and normal triglycerides
Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH)
FH is an autosomal codominant disorder characterized 
by elevated plasma levels of LDL-C with normal tri-
glycerides, tendon xanthomas, and premature coronary 
Table 31-4
Primary Hyperlipoproteinemias Caused by Known Single Gene Mutations
Genetic Disorder
Protein (Gene) 
Defect
Lipoproteins 
Elevated
Clinical Findings
Genetic 
Transmission
Estimated 
Incidence
Lipoprotein lipase 
deficiency
LPL (LPL)
Chylomicrons
Eruptive xanthomas, 
hepatosplenomegaly, 
pancreatitis
AR
1/1,000,000
Familial apolipoprotein 
C-II deficiency
ApoC-II (APOC2)
Chylomicrons
Eruptive xanthomas, 
hepatosplenomegaly, 
pancreatitis
AR
<1/1,000,000
ApoA-V deficiency
ApoA-V (APOA5)
Chylomicrons, 
VLDL
Eruptive xanthomas, 
hepatosplenomegaly, 
pancreatitis
AD
<1/1,000,000
GPIHBP1 deficiency
GDIHBP1
Chylomicrons
Eruptive xanthomas, 
pancreatitis
AD
<1/1,000,000
Familial hepatic lipase 
deficiency
Hepatic lipase 
(LIPC)
VLDL remnants
Pancreatitis, CHD
AR
<1/1,000,000
Familial 
dysbetalipoproteinemia
ApoE (APOE)
Chylomicron and 
VLDL remnants
Palmar and tuberoeruptive 
xanthomas, CHD, PVD
AR
AD
1/10,000
Familial 
hypercholesterolemia
LDL receptor 
(LDLR)
LDL
Tendon xanthomas, CHD
AD
1/500
Familial defective 
apoB-100
ApoB-100 
(APOB)
LDL
Tendon xanthomas, CHD
AD
<1/1000
Autosomal dominant 
hypercholesterolemia
PCSK9 (PCSK9)
LDL
Tendon xanthomas, CHD
AD
<1/1,000,000
Autosomal recessive 
hypercholesterolemia
LDLRAP
LDL
Tendon xanthomas, CHD
AR
<1/1,000,000
Sitosterolemia
ABCG5 or 
ABCG8
LDL
Tendon xanthomas, CHD
AR
<1/1,000,000
Abbreviations: AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; ARH, autosomal recessive hypercholesterolemia; CHD, coronary heart 
disease; LDL, low-density lipoprotein; LPL, lipoprotein lipase; PVD, peripheral vascular disease; VLDL, very-low density lipoprotein.
 
CHAPTER 31
Disorders of Lipoprotein Metabolism
359
than 1000 mg/dL. The devastating complication of 
homozygous FH is accelerated atherosclerosis, which 
can result in disability and death in childhood. Athero-
sclerosis often develops first in the aortic root, where 
it can cause aortic valvular or supravalvular stenosis, 
and typically extends into the coronary ostia, which 
become stenotic. Children with homozygous FH often 
develop symptomatic coronary atherosclerosis before 
puberty; symptoms can be atypical, and sudden death is 
not uncommon. Untreated, receptor-negative patients 
with homozygous FH rarely survive beyond the second 
decade; patients with receptor-defective LDL recep-
tor defects have a better prognosis but almost invari-
ably develop clinically apparent atherosclerotic vascular 
disease by age 30, and often much sooner. Carotid and 
femoral disease develops later in life and is usually not 
clinically significant.
A careful family history should be taken, and plasma 
lipid levels should be measured in the parents and other 
first-degree relatives of patients with homozygous FH. 
The disease has >90% penetrance so both parents of 
FH homozygotes usually have hypercholesterolemia. 
The diagnosis of homozygous FH can be confirmed by 
obtaining a skin biopsy and measuring LDL receptor 
activity in cultured skin fibroblasts, or by quantifying 
the number of LDL receptors on the surfaces of lym-
phocytes using cell sorting technology. Molecular assays 
are also available to define the mutations in the LDL 
receptor by DNA sequencing. In selected populations 
where particular mutations predominate (e.g., African-
ers and French Canadians), the common mutations can 
be screened for directly. Alternatively, the entire coding 
region needs to be sequenced for mutation detection 
because a large number of different LDL receptor muta-
tions can cause disease. Ten to 15% of LDL receptor 
mutations are large deletions or insertions, which may 
be missed by routine DNA sequencing.
Combination therapy with an HMG-CoA reduc-
tase inhibitor and a second drug (cholesterol absorp-
tion inhibitor or bile acid sequestrant) sometimes 
reduces plasma LDL-C in those FH homozygotes who 
have residual LDL receptor activity, but patients with 
homozygous FH invariably require additional lipid-
lowering therapy. Since the liver is quantitatively the 
most important tissue for removing circulating LDLs 
via the LDL receptor, liver transplantation is effec-
tive in decreasing plasma LDL-C levels in this dis-
order. Liver transplantation, however, is associated 
with substantial risks, including the requirement for 
long-term immunosuppression. The current treat-
ment of choice for homozygous FH is LDL apheresis 
(a process by which the LDL particles are selectively 
removed from the circulation), which can promote 
regression of xanthomas and may slow the progres-
sion of atherosclerosis. Initiation of LDL apheresis 
should generally be delayed until approximately 5 
years of age, except when evidence of atherosclerotic 
vascular disease is present.
Heterozygous FH is caused by the inheritance of one 
mutant LDL receptor allele and occurs in approximately 
1 in 500 persons worldwide, making it one of the most 
common single-gene disorders. It is characterized by 
elevated plasma levels of LDL-C (usually 200–400 mg/
dL) and normal levels of triglyceride. Patients with het-
erozygous FH have hypercholesterolemia from birth, 
and disease recognition is usually based on detection of 
hypercholesterolemia on routine screening, the appear-
ance of tendon xanthomas, or the development of 
symptomatic ASCVD. Since the disease is codominant 
in inheritance, one parent and ∼50% of the patient’s sib-
lings usually also have hypercholesterolemia. The fam-
ily history is frequently positive for premature ASCVD 
on one side of the family. Corneal arcus is common, 
and tendon xanthomas involving the dorsum of the 
hands, elbows, knees, and especially the Achilles ten-
dons are present in ∼75% of patients. The age of onset 
of ASCVD is highly variable and depends in part on the 
molecular defect in the LDL receptor gene and also on 
coexisting cardiac risk factors. FH heterozygotes with 
elevated plasma levels of Lp(a) appear to be at greater 
risk for cardiovascular complications. Untreated men 
with heterozygous FH have an ∼50% chance of having 
a myocardial infarction before age 60 years. Although 
the age of onset of atherosclerotic heart disease is later 
in women with FH, coronary heart disease (CHD) is 
significantly more common in women with FH than in 
the general female population.
No definitive diagnostic test for heterozygous FH 
is available. Although FH heterozygotes tend to have 
reduced levels of LDL receptor function in skin fibro-
blasts, significant overlap with the LDL receptor activ-
ity levels in normal fibroblasts exists. Molecular assays 
are now available to identify mutations in the LDL 
receptor gene by DNA sequencing, but the clinical 
utility of pinpointing the mutation has not been dem-
onstrated. The clinical diagnosis is usually not prob-
lematic, but it is critical that hypothyroidism, nephrotic 
syndrome, and obstructive liver disease be excluded 
before initiating therapy.
FH patients should be aggressively treated to lower 
plasma levels of LDL-C. Initiation of a low-cholesterol, 
low-fat diet is recommended, but heterozygous FH 
patients require lipid-lowering drug therapy. Statins 
are effective in heterozygous FH, but combination 
drug therapy with the addition of a cholesterol absorp-
tion inhibitor and/or bile acid sequestrant is frequently 
required, and the addition of nicotinic acid is some-
times needed. Heterozygous FH patients who cannot be 
adequately controlled on combination drug therapy are 
candidates for LDL apheresis.
SECTION V
Disorders of the Vasculature
360
Familial defective ApoB-100 (FDB)
FDB is a dominantly inherited disorder that clini-
cally resembles heterozygous FH. The disease is rare 
in most populations except individuals of German 
descent, where the frequency can be as high as 1 in 
1000. FDB is characterized by elevated plasma LDL-C 
levels with normal triglycerides, tendon xanthomas, 
and an increased incidence of premature ASCVD. FDB 
is caused by mutations in the LDL receptor–binding 
domain of apoB-100, most commonly due to a substi-
tution of glutamine for arginine at position 3500. As a 
consequence of the mutation in apoB-100, LDL binds 
the LDL receptor with reduced affinity, and LDL is 
removed from the circulation at a reduced rate. Patients 
with FDB cannot be clinically distinguished from 
patients with heterozygous FH, although patients with 
FDB tend to have lower plasma levels of LDL-C than 
FH heterozygotes. The apoB-100 gene mutation can be 
detected directly, but genetic diagnosis is not currently 
encouraged since the recommended management of 
FDB and heterozygous FH is identical.
Autosomal dominant hypercholesterolemia due 
to mutations in PCSK9 (ADH-PCSK9 or ADH3)
ADH-PCSK9 is a rare autosomal dominant disorder 
caused by gain-of-function mutations in proprotein con-
vertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9). PCSK9 is a 
secreted protein that binds to the LDL receptor, result-
ing in its degradation. Normally, after LDL binds to the 
receptor it is internalized along with the receptor. In 
the low pH of the endosome, LDL dissociates from the 
receptor and returns to the cell surface. The LDL is deliv-
ered to the lysosome. When PCSK9 binds the receptor, 
the complex is internalized and the receptor is redirected 
to the lysosome rather than to the cell surface. The mis-
sense mutations in PCSK9 that cause hypercholesterol-
emia enhance the activity of PCSK9. As a consequence, 
the number of hepatic LDL receptors is reduced. Patients 
with ADH-PCSK9 are indistinguishable clinically from 
patients with FH. Interestingly, loss-of-function muta-
tions in PCSK9 cause low LDL-C levels (see later).
Autosomal recessive hypercholesterolemia (ARH)
ARH is a rare disorder (except in Sardinia, Italy) due to 
mutations in a protein (ARH, also called LDLR adaptor 
protein, LDLRAP) involved in LDL receptor–mediated 
endocytosis in the liver. In the absence of LDLRAP, 
LDL binds to the LDL receptor but the lipoprotein-
receptor complex fails to be internalized. ARH, like 
homozygous FH, is characterized by hypercholesterol-
emia, tendon xanthomas, and premature coronary artery 
disease (CAD). The levels of plasma LDL-C tend to be 
intermediate between the levels present in FH homo-
zygotes and FH heterozygotes, and CAD is not usu-
ally symptomatic until at least the third decade. LDL 
receptor function in cultured fibroblasts is normal or 
only modestly reduced in ARH, whereas LDL recep-
tor function in lymphocytes and the liver is negligible. 
Unlike FH homozygotes, the hyperlipidemia responds 
partially to treatment with HMG-CoA reductase inhibi-
tors, but these patients usually require LDL apheresis to 
lower plasma LDL-C to recommended levels.
Sitosterolemia
Sitosterolemia is another rare autosomal recessive dis-
ease that can result in severe hypercholesterolemia, ten-
don xanthomas, and premature ASCVD. Sitosterolemia 
is caused by mutations in either of two members of 
the ATP-binding cassette (ABC) half transporter fam-
ily, ABCG5 and ABCG8. These genes are expressed 
in enterocytes and hepatocytes. The proteins heterodi-
merize to form a functional complex that pumps plant 
sterols such as sitosterol and campesterol, and animal 
sterols, predominantly cholesterol, into the gut lumen 
and into the bile. In normal individuals, <5% of dietary 
plant sterols are absorbed by the proximal small intes-
tine and delivered to the liver. Absorbed plant sterols 
are preferentially secreted into the bile and are main-
tained at very low levels. In sitosterolemia, the intestinal 
absorption of sterols is increased and biliary excretion of 
the sterols is reduced, resulting in increased plasma and 
tissue levels of both plant sterols and cholesterol.
Incorporation of plant sterols into cell membranes 
results in misshapen red blood cells and megathrombo-
cytes that are visible on blood smear. Episodes of hemo-
lysis are a distinctive clinical feature of this disease com-
pared to other genetic forms of hypercholesterolemia.
Sitosterolemia is diagnosed by demonstrating an 
increase in the plasma level of sitosterol using gas chro-
matography. The hypercholesterolemia is unusually 
responsive to reductions in dietary cholesterol con-
tent and should be suspected in individuals who have 
a >40% reduction in plasma cholesterol level on a low-
cholesterol diet. The hypercholesterolemia does not 
respond to HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors, whereas 
bile acid sequestrants and cholesterol-absorption inhibi-
tors such as ezetimibe, are effective in reducing plasma 
sterol levels in these patients.
Polygenic hypercholesterolemia
This condition is characterized by hypercholesterol-
emia due to elevated LDL-C with a normal plasma level 
of triglyceride in the absence of secondary causes of 
hypercholesterolemia. Plasma LDL-C levels are gener-
ally not as elevated as they are in FH and FDB. Family 
studies are useful to differentiate polygenic hypercho-
lesterolemia from the single-gene disorders described 
above; one-half of the first-degree relatives of patients 
with FH and FDB are hypercholesterolemic, whereas 
<10% of first-degree relatives of patients with polygenic 
 
CHAPTER 31
Disorders of Lipoprotein Metabolism
361
hypercholesterolemia have hypercholesterolemia. Treat-
ment of polygenic hypercholesterolemia is identical to 
that of other forms of hypercholesterolemia.
Elevated plasma levels of lipoprotein(a)
Unlike the other major classes of lipoproteins, that have 
a normal distribution in the population, plasma levels 
of Lp(a) have a highly skewed distribution with lev-
els varying over a 1000-fold range. Levels are strongly 
influenced by genetic factors, with individuals of African 
and South Asian descent having higher levels than those 
of European descent. Although it has been well docu-
mented that elevated levels of Lp(a) are associated with 
an increase in ASCVD, lowering plasma levels of Lp(a) 
has not been demonstrated to reduce cardiovascular risk.
Lipid disorders associated with elevated 
triglycerides
Familial chylomicronemia syndrome  
(Type I hyperlipoproteinemia; lipoprotein  
lipase, and ApoC-II deficiency)
As noted above, LPL is required for the hydrolysis of 
triglycerides in chylomicrons and VLDLs, and apoC-II 
is a cofactor for LPL (Fig. 31-2). Genetic deficiency or 
inactivity of either protein results in impaired lipolysis 
and profound elevations in plasma chylomicrons. These 
patients can also have elevated plasma levels of VLDL, 
but chylomicronemia predominates. The fasting plasma 
is turbid, and if left at 4°C (39.2°F) for a few hours, the 
chylomicrons float to the top and form a creamy super-
natant. In these disorders, called familial chylomicronemia 
syndromes, fasting triglyceride levels are almost invari-
ably >1000 mg/dL. Fasting cholesterol levels are also 
elevated but to a lesser degree.
LPL deficiency has autosomal recessive inheritance and 
has a frequency of approximately 1 in 1 million in the 
population. ApoC-II deficiency is also recessive in inheri-
tance pattern and is even less common than LPL defi-
ciency. Multiple different mutations in the LPL and 
apoC-II genes cause these diseases. Obligate LPL het-
erozygotes have normal or mild-to-moderate eleva-
tions in plasma triglyceride levels, whereas individu-
als heterozygous for mutation in apoC-II do not have 
hypertriglyceridemia.
Both LPL and apoC-II deficiency usually present in 
childhood with recurrent episodes of severe abdominal 
pain due to acute pancreatitis. On funduscopic exami-
nation, the retinal blood vessels are opalescent (lipe-
mia retinalis). Eruptive xanthomas, which are small, 
yellowish-white papules, often appear in clusters on the 
back, buttocks, and extensor surfaces of the arms and 
legs. These typically painless skin lesions may become 
pruritic. Hepatosplenomegaly results from the uptake of 
circulating chylomicrons by reticuloendothelial cells in 
the liver and spleen. For unknown reasons, some patients 
with persistent and pronounced chylomicronemia never 
develop pancreatitis, eruptive xanthomas, or hepato-
splenomegaly. Premature CHD is not generally a feature 
of familial chylomicronemia syndromes.
The diagnoses of LPL and apoC-II deficiency are 
established enzymatically in specialized laboratories 
by assaying triglyceride lipolytic activity in posthepa-
rin plasma. Blood is sampled after an IV heparin injec-
tion to release the endothelial-bound LPL. LPL activity 
is profoundly reduced in both LPL and apoC-II defi-
ciency; in patients with apoC-II deficiency, it normal-
izes after the addition of normal plasma (providing a 
source of apoC-II). Molecular sequencing of the genes 
can be used to confirm the diagnosis.
The major therapeutic intervention in familial chylo-
micronemia syndromes is dietary fat restriction (to as lit-
tle as 15 g/d) with fat-soluble vitamin supplementation. 
Consultation with a registered dietician familiar with 
this disorder is essential. Caloric supplementation with 
medium-chain triglycerides, which are absorbed directly 
into the portal circulation, can be useful but may be asso-
ciated with hepatic fibrosis if used for prolonged periods. 
If dietary fat restriction alone is not successful in resolv-
ing the chylomicronemia, fish oils have been effective 
in some patients. In patients with apoC-II deficiency, 
apoC-II can be provided by infusing fresh-frozen plasma 
to resolve the chylomicronemia in the acute setting. 
Management of patients with familial chylomicronemia 
syndrome is particularly challenging during pregnancy 
when VLDL production is increased and may require 
plasmapheresis to remove the circulating chylomicrons.
ApoA-V deficiency
Another apolipoprotein, apoA-V, circulates at much 
lower concentrations than the other major apolipopro-
teins. Individuals harboring mutations in both apoA-V 
alleles can present as adults with chylomicronemia. The 
exact mechanism of action of apoA-V is not known, 
but it appears to be required for the association of 
VLDL and chylomicrons with LPL.
GPIHBP1 deficiency
After LPL is synthesized in adipocytes, myocytes, or other 
cells, it is transported across the vascular endothelium and 
is attached to a protein on the endothelial surface of cap-
illaries called GPIHBP1. Homozygosity for mutations 
that interfere with GPIHBP1 synthesis or folding cause 
severe hypertriglyceridemia. The frequency of chylomi-
cronemia due to mutations in GHIHBP1 has not been 
established but appears to be very rare.
Hepatic lipase deficiency
HL is a member of the same gene family as LPL and 
hydrolyzes triglycerides and phospholipids in remnant 
SECTION V
Disorders of the Vasculature
362
lipoproteins and HDLs. HL deficiency is a very rare 
autosomal recessive disorder characterized by elevated 
plasma levels of cholesterol and triglycerides (mixed 
hyperlipidemia) due to the accumulation of circulating 
lipoprotein remnants and either a normal or elevated 
plasma level of HDL-C. The diagnosis is confirmed 
by measuring HL activity in postheparin plasma. Due 
to the small number of patients with HL deficiency, 
the association of this genetic defect with ASCVD 
is not clearly known, but lipid-lowering therapy is 
recommended.
Familial dysbetalipoproteinemia  
(Type III hyperlipoproteinemia)
Like HL deficiency, familial dysbetalipoproteinemia 
(FDBL) (also known as Type III hyperlipoproteinemia 
or familial broad β disease) is characterized by a mixed 
hyperlipidemia due to the accumulation of remnant 
lipoprotein particles. ApoE is present in multiple copies 
on chylomicron and VLDL remnants and mediates their 
removal via hepatic lipoprotein receptors (Fig. 31-2). 
FDBL is due to genetic variations in apoE that inter-
fere with its ability to bind lipoprotein receptors. The 
APOE gene is polymorphic in sequence, resulting 
in the expression of three common isoforms: apoE3, 
which is the most common; and apoE2 and apoE4, 
which both differ from apoE3 by a single amino acid. 
Although associated with slightly higher LDL-C levels 
and increased CHD risk, the apoE4 allele is not associ-
ated with FDBL. Patients with apoE4 have an increased 
incidence of late-onset Alzheimer’s disease. ApoE2 has 
a lower affinity for the LDL receptor; therefore, chy-
lomicron and VLDL remnants containing apoE2 are 
removed from plasma at a slower rate. Individuals who 
are homozygous for the E2 allele (the E2/E2 genotype) 
comprise the most common subset of patients with 
FDBL.
Approximately 0.5% of the general population are 
apoE2/E2 homozygotes, but only a small minority of 
these individuals develop FDBL. In most cases, an addi-
tional, identifiable factor precipitates the development 
of hyperlipoproteinemia. The most common precipitat-
ing factors are a high-fat diet, diabetes mellitus, obesity, 
hypothyroidism, renal disease, HIV infection, estrogen 
deficiency, alcohol use, or certain drugs. Other muta-
tions in apoE can cause a dominant form of FDBL 
where the hyperlipidemia is fully manifest in the het-
erozygous state, but these mutations are rare.
Patients with FDBL usually present in adulthood 
with incidental hyperlipidemia, xanthomas, premature 
coronary disease, or peripheral vascular disease. The dis-
ease seldom presents in women before menopause. Two 
distinctive types of xanthomas, tuberoeruptive and pal-
mar, are seen in FDBL patients. Tuberoeruptive xan-
thomas begin as clusters of small papules on the elbows, 
knees, or buttocks and can grow to the size of small 
grapes. Palmar xanthomas (alternatively called xantho-
mata striata palmaris) are orange-yellow discolorations of 
the creases in the palms and wrists. In FDBL, in contrast 
to other disorders of elevated triglycerides, the plasma 
levels of cholesterol and triglyceride are often elevated 
to a similar degree and the level of HDL-C is usually 
normal rather than being low.
The traditional approaches to diagnosis of this dis-
order are lipoprotein electrophoresis (broad β band) or 
ultracentrifugation (ratio of VLDL-C to total plasma tri-
glyceride >0.30). Protein methods (apoE phenotyping) 
or DNA-based methods (apoE genotyping) can be per-
formed to confirm homozygosity for apoE2. However, 
absence of the apoE2/E2 genotype does not rule out 
the diagnosis of FDBL, since other mutations in apoE 
can cause this condition.
Since FDBL is associated with increased risk of pre-
mature ASCVD, it should be treated aggressively. Sub-
jects with FDBL tend to have more peripheral vascular 
disease than is typically seen in FH. Other metabolic 
conditions that can worsen the hyperlipidemia (see 
earlier) should be aggressively treated. Patients with 
FDBL are typically very diet responsive and can respond 
favorably to weight reduction and to low-cholesterol, 
low-fat diets. Alcohol intake should be curtailed. HMG-
CoA reductase inhibitors, fibrates, and niacin are all 
generally effective in the treatment of FDBL, and some-
times combination drug therapy is required.
Familial hypertriglyceridemia (FHTG)
FHTG is a relatively common (∼1 in 500) autosomal 
dominant disorder of unknown etiology characterized 
by moderately elevated plasma triglycerides accompa-
nied by more modest elevations in cholesterol. Since 
the major class of lipoproteins elevated in this disorder 
is VLDL, patients with this disorder are often referred 
to as having Type IV hyperlipoproteinemia (Fredrickson 
classification, Table 31-3). The elevated plasma levels 
of VLDL are due to increased production of VLDL, 
impaired catabolism of VLDL, or a combination of 
these mechanisms. Some patients with FHTG have 
a more severe form of hyperlipidemia in which both 
VLDLs and chylomicrons are elevated (Type V hyper-
lipidemia), since these two classes of lipoproteins com-
pete for the same lipolytic pathway. Increased intake of 
simple carbohydrates, obesity, insulin resistance, alcohol 
use, and estrogen treatment, all of which increase VLDL 
synthesis, can exacerbate this syndrome. FHTG appears 
not to be associated with increased risk of ASCVD in 
many families.
The diagnosis of FHTG is suggested by the triad of 
elevated levels of plasma triglycerides (250–1000 mg/
dL), normal or only mildly increased cholesterol levels 
(<250 mg/dL), and reduced plasma levels of HDL-C. 
Plasma LDL-C levels are generally not increased and 
are often reduced due to defective metabolism of the 
 
CHAPTER 31
Disorders of Lipoprotein Metabolism
363
The presence of a mixed dyslipidemia (plasma tri-
glyceride levels between 200 and 800 mg/dL and total 
cholesterol levels between 200 and 400 mg/dL, usually 
with HDL-C levels <40 mg/dL in men and <50 mg/
dL in women) and a family history of hyperlipidemia 
and/or premature CHD strongly suggests the diagnosis 
of FCHL.
Individuals with FCHL should be treated aggressively 
due to significantly increased risk of premature CHD. 
Decreased dietary intake of saturated fat and simple 
carbohydrates, aerobic exercise, and weight loss can 
all have beneficial effects on the lipid profile. Patients 
with diabetes should be aggressively treated to maintain 
good glucose control. Most patients with FCHL require 
lipid-lowering drug therapy to reduce lipoprotein lev-
els to the recommended range and reduce the high 
risk of ASCVD. Statins are effective in this condition, 
but many patients will require a second drug (choles-
terol absorption inhibitor, niacin, fibrate, or fish oils) for 
optimal control of lipoprotein levels.
Inherited Causes of Low Levels of 
ApoB-Containing Lipoproteins
Familial hypobetalipoproteinemia (FHB)
Low plasma levels of LDL-C (the “β-lipoprotein”) with 
a genetic or inherited basis are referred to generically 
as familial hypobetalipoproteinemia. Traditionally, this term 
has been used to refer to the condition of low total cho-
lesterol and LDL-C due to mutations in apoB, which 
represents the most common inherited form of hypo-
cholesterolemia. Most of the mutations causing FHB 
interfere with the production of apoB, resulting in 
reduced secretion and/or accelerated catabolism of the 
protein. Individuals heterozygous for these mutations 
usually have LDL-C levels <80 mg/dL and may enjoy 
protection from ASCVD, though this has not been rig-
orously demonstrated. Some heterozygotes have ele-
vated levels of hepatic triglycerides.
Mutations in both apoB alleles cause homozygous 
FHB, a disorder resembling abetalipoproteinemia (see 
later), although the neurologic findings tend to be less 
severe. Patients with homozygous hypobetalipoprotein-
emia can be distinguished from individuals with abetali-
poproteinemia by measuring the levels of LDL-C in the 
parents, which are low in hypobetalipoproteinemia and 
normal in abetalipoproteinemia.
PCSK9 deficiency
A phenocopy of FHB results from loss-of-function muta-
tions in PCSK9. As reviewed earlier, PCSK9 normally 
promotes the degradation of the LDL receptor. Mutations 
that interfere with the synthesis of PCSK9, which are 
more common in individuals of African descent, result in 
triglyceride-rich particles. The identification of other 
first-degree relatives with hypertriglyceridemia is useful 
in making the diagnosis. FDBL and familial combined 
hyperlipidemia (FCHL) should also be ruled out since 
these two conditions are associated with a significantly 
increased risk of ASCVD. The plasma apoB levels are 
lower and the ratio of plasma triglyceride to cholesterol 
is higher in FHTG than in either FDBL or FCHL.
It is important to consider and rule out secondary 
causes of hypertriglyceridemia (Table 31-5) before 
making the diagnosis of FHTG. Lipid-lowering drug 
therapy can frequently be avoided with appropriate 
dietary and lifestyle changes. Patients with plasma tri-
glyceride levels >500 mg/dL after a trial of diet and 
exercise should be considered for drug therapy to avoid 
the development of chylomicronemia and pancreatitis. 
Fibrate drugs or fish oils (omega 3 fatty acids) are rea-
sonable first-line approaches for FHTG, and niacin can 
also be considered in this condition. For more moder-
ate elevations in triglyceride levels (250–500 mg/dL), 
statins are effective at lowering triglyceride levels.
Familial combined hyperlipidemia (FCHL)
FCHL is generally characterized by moderate elevations 
in plasma levels of triglycerides (VLDL) and cholesterol 
(LDL) and reduced plasma levels of HDL-C. Approxi-
mately 20% of patients who develop CHD under age 
60 have FCHL. The disease appears to be autosomal 
dominant with incomplete penetrance and affected fam-
ily members typically have one of three possible phe-
notypes: (1) elevated plasma levels of LDL-C, (2) ele-
vated plasma levels of triglycerides due to elevation in 
VLDL, or (3) elevated plasma levels of both LDL-C and 
triglyceride. A classic feature of FCHL is that the lipo-
protein profile can switch among these three pheno-
types in the same individual over time and may depend 
on factors such as diet, exercise, and weight. FCHL can 
manifest in childhood but is usually not fully expressed 
until adulthood. A cluster of other metabolic risk factors 
are often found in association with this hyperlipidemia, 
including obesity, glucose intolerance, insulin resistance, 
and hypertension (the so-called metabolic syndrome, 
Chap. 32). These patients do not develop xanthomas.
Patients with FCHL almost always have significantly 
elevated plasma levels of apoB. The levels of apoB are 
disproportionately high relative to the plasma LDL-C 
concentration, indicating the presence of small, dense 
LDL particles, which are characteristic of this syn-
drome. Hyperapobetalipoproteinemia, which has been used 
to describe the state of elevated plasma levels of apoB 
with normal plasma LDL-C levels, is probably a form of 
FCHL. Individuals with FCHL generally share the same 
metabolic defect, which is overproduction of VLDL 
by the liver. The molecular etiology of FCHL remains 
poorly understood, and it is likely that defects in several 
different genes can cause the phenotype of FCHL.
SECTION V
Disorders of the Vasculature
364
Table 31-5
Secondary Forms of Hyperlipidemia
LDL
HDL
Elevated
Reduced
Elevated
Reduced
VLDL Elevated
IDL Elevated
Chylomicrons 
Elevated
Lp(a) Elevated
Hypothyroidism
Severe liver 
disease
Alcohol
Smoking
Obesity
Multiple 
myeloma
Autoimmune 
disease
Renal  
insufficiency
Nephrotic syndrome
Malabsorption
Exercise
DM type 2
DM type 2
Malnutrition
Exposure to 
chlorinated 
hydrocarbons
Obesity
Glycogen storage disease
Monoclonal 
gammopathy
DM type 2
Inflammation
Cholestasis
Gaucher’s 
disease
Malnutri-
tion
Menopause
Acute intermittent 
porphyria
Chronic 
infectious 
disease
Drugs: 
estrogen
Gaucher’s 
disease
Hepatitis
Alcohol
Autoimmune 
disease
Orchidectomy
Anorexia nervosa
Hepatoma
Drugs: thiazides, 
cyclosporin, tegretol
Hyperthyroid-
ism
Drugs: niacin 
toxicity
Drugs: 
anabolic 
steroids, 
beta 
blockers
Renal failure
Sepsis
Stress
Cushing’s syndrome
Pregnancy
Acromegaly
Lipodystrophy
Drugs: estrogen, beta block-
ers, glucocorticoids, bile acid 
binding resins, retinoic acid
Hypothyroid-
ism
Hypothyroidism
Acromegaly
Nephrosis
Drugs: growth 
hormone, 
isotretinoin
Abbreviations: DM, diabetes mellitus; HDL, high-density lipoprotein; IDL, intermediate-density lipoprotein; LDL, low-density lipoprotein; Lp(a), lipoprotein A; VLDL, very low-density lipoprotein.
 
CHAPTER 31
Disorders of Lipoprotein Metabolism
365
forestall development of neurologic sequelae, which can 
progress even with appropriate therapy. New therapies 
for this serious disease are needed.
Genetic Disorders of HDL 
Metabolism
Mutations in genes encoding proteins that play critical 
roles in HDL synthesis and catabolism can result in both 
reductions and elevations in plasma levels of HDL-C. 
Unlike the genetic forms of hypercholesterolemia, 
which are invariably associated with premature coro-
nary atherosclerosis, genetic forms of hypoalphalipopro-
teinemia (low HDL-C) are not always associated with 
accelerated atherosclerosis.
Inherited Causes of Low Levels of 
HDL-C
Gene deletions in the ApoAV-AI-CIII-AIV locus 
and coding mutations in ApoA-I
Complete genetic deficiency of apoA-I due to dele-
tion of the apoA-I gene results in the virtual absence 
of HDL from the plasma. The genes encoding apoA-I, 
apoC-III, apoA-IV, and apoA-V are clustered together 
on chromosome 11, and some patients with no apoA-I 
have genomic deletions that include other genes in the 
cluster. ApoA-I is required for LCAT activity. In 
the absence of LCAT, free cholesterol levels increase 
in both plasma (not HDL) and in tissues. The free choles-
terol can form deposits in the cornea and in the skin, result-
ing in corneal opacities and planar xanthomas. Premature 
CHD is a common feature of apoA-I deficiency, especially 
when additional genes in the complex are also deleted.
Missense and nonsense mutations in the apoA-I gene 
have been identified in some patients with low plasma 
levels of HDL-C (usually 15–30 mg/dL), but these are 
very rare causes of low HDL-C levels. Patients hetero-
zygous for an Arg173Cys substitution in APOAI (so-
called apoA-IMilano) have very low plasma levels of HDL 
due to impaired LCAT activation and rapid catabolism 
of the mutant apolipoprotein and yet have no increased 
risk of premature CHD. Most other individuals with 
low plasma HDL-C levels due to missense mutations in 
apoA-I do not appear to have premature CHD. A few 
selected missense mutations in apoA-I and apoA-II pro-
mote the formation of amyloid fibrils causing systemic 
amyloidosis.
Tangier disease (ABCA1 deficiency)
Tangier disease is a very rare autosomal codominant 
form of extremely low plasma HDL-C caused by muta-
tions in the gene encoding ABCA1, a cellular trans-
porter that facilitates efflux of unesterified cholesterol 
increased LDL receptor activity and ∼40% reduction in 
plasma level of LDL-C. A sequence variation of higher 
frequency (R46L) is found predominantly in individuals 
of European descent and is associated with a 15% reduc-
tion in LDL-C. Individuals with inactivating mutations are 
protected from developing CHD relative to those without 
these sequence variations, presumably due to having lower 
plasma cholesterol levels since birth.
Abetalipoproteinemia
The synthesis and secretion of apoB-containing lipopro-
teins in the enterocytes of the proximal small bowel and 
in the hepatocytes of the liver involve a complex series 
of events that coordinate the coupling of various lipids 
with apoB-48 and apoB-100, respectively. Abetalipopro-
teinemia is a rare autosomal recessive disease caused by 
loss-of-function mutations in the gene encoding micro-
somal triglyceride transfer protein (MTP), a protein 
that transfers lipids to nascent chylomicrons and VLDLs 
in the intestine and liver, respectively. Plasma levels of 
cholesterol and triglyceride are extremely low in this 
disorder, and chylomicrons, VLDLs, LDLs, and apoB 
are undetectable in plasma. The parents of patients with 
abetalipoproteinemia (obligate heterozygotes) have nor-
mal plasma lipid and apoB levels. Abetalipoproteinemia 
usually presents in early childhood with diarrhea and fail-
ure to thrive due to fat malabsorption. The initial neu-
rologic manifestations are loss of deep-tendon reflexes, 
followed by decreased distal lower extremity vibratory 
and proprioceptive sense, dysmetria, ataxia, and the 
development of a spastic gait, often by the third or fourth 
decade. Patients with abetalipoproteinemia also develop 
a progressive pigmented retinopathy presenting with 
decreased night and color vision, followed by reduc-
tions in daytime visual acuity and ultimately progress-
ing to near-blindness. The presence of spinocerebellar 
degeneration and pigmented retinopathy in this disease 
has resulted in some patients with abetalipoproteinemia 
being misdiagnosed as having Friedreich’s ataxia.
Most clinical manifestations of abetalipoproteinemia 
result from defects in the absorption and transport of 
fat-soluble vitamins. Vitamin E and retinyl esters are 
normally transported from enterocytes to the liver by 
chylomicrons, and vitamin E is dependent on VLDL for 
transport out of the liver and into the circulation. As a 
consequence of the inability of these patients to secrete 
apoB-containing particles, patients with abetalipopro-
teinemia are markedly deficient in vitamin E and are 
also mildly to moderately deficient in vitamins A and K. 
Patients with abetalipoproteinemia should be referred 
to specialized centers for confirmation of the diagnosis 
and appropriate therapy. Treatment consists of a low-
fat, high-caloric, vitamin-enriched diet accompanied by 
large supplemental doses of vitamin E. It is imperative 
that treatment be initiated as soon as possible to help 
SECTION V
Disorders of the Vasculature
366
Primary hypoalphalipoproteinemia
Low plasma levels of HDL-C (the “alpha lipoprotein”) 
is referred to as hypoalphalipoproteinemia. Primary hypoal-
phalipoproteinemia is defined as a plasma HDL-C level 
below the tenth percentile in the setting of relatively 
normal cholesterol and triglyceride levels, no apparent 
secondary causes of low plasma HDL-C, and no clinical 
signs of LCAT deficiency or Tangier disease. This syn-
drome is often referred to as isolated low HDL. A fam-
ily history of low HDL-C facilitates the diagnosis of an 
inherited condition, which usually follows an autosomal 
dominant pattern. The metabolic etiology of this disease 
appears to be primarily accelerated catabolism of HDL 
and its apolipoproteins. Some of these patients may 
have ABCA1 mutations and therefore technically have 
heterozygous Tangier disease. Several kindreds with 
primary hypoalphalipoproteinemia have been described 
in association with an increased incidence of prema-
ture CHD, although this is not an invariant association. 
Association of hypoalphalipoproteinemia with prema-
ture CHD may depend on the specific nature of the 
gene defect or the underlying metabolic defect respon-
sible for the low plasma HDL-C level.
Inherited Causes of High Levels of 
HDL-C
CETP deficiency
Loss-of-function mutations in both alleles of the gene 
encoding CETP cause substantially elevated HDL-C lev-
els (usually >150 mg/dL). As noted earlier, CETP facili-
tates the transfer of cholesteryl esters from HDL to apoB-
containing lipoproteins (Fig. 31-3). The absence of this 
transfer results in an increase in the cholesteryl ester con-
tent of HDL and a reduction in plasma levels of LDL-C. 
The large, cholesterol-rich HDL particles circulating in 
these patients are cleared at a reduced rate. CETP defi-
ciency was first diagnosed in Japanese persons and is rare 
outside of Japan. The relationship of CETP deficiency to 
ASCVD remains unresolved. Heterozygotes for CETP 
deficiency have only modestly elevated HDL-C lev-
els. Based on the phenotype of high HDL-C in CETP 
deficiency, pharmacologic inhibition of CETP is under 
development as a new therapeutic approach to both raise 
HDL-C levels and lower LDL-C levels, but whether it 
will reduce risk of ASCVD remains to be determined.
Familial hyperalphalipoproteinemia
The condition of high plasma levels of HDL-C is 
referred to as hyperalphalipoproteinemia and is defined 
as a plasma HDL-C level above the ninetieth percen-
tile. This trait runs in families, and outside of Japan it is 
unlikely to be due to CETP deficiency. Most, but not 
all, persons with this condition appear to have a reduced 
and phospholipids from cells to apoA-I (Fig. 31-3). 
ABCA1 in the liver and intestine rapidly lipidates the 
apoA-I secreted from these tissues. In the absence of 
ABCA1, the nascent, poorly lipidated apoA-I is imme-
diately cleared from the circulation. Thus, patients with 
Tangier disease have extremely low circulating plasma 
levels of HDL-C (<5 mg/dL) and apoA-I (<5 mg/dL). 
Cholesterol accumulates in the reticuloendothelial sys-
tem of these patients, resulting in hepatosplenomegaly 
and pathognomonic enlarged, grayish yellow or orange 
tonsils. An intermittent peripheral neuropathy (mono-
neuritis multiplex) or a sphingomyelia-like neurologic 
disorder can also be seen in this disorder. Tangier dis-
ease is probably associated with some increased risk of 
premature atherosclerotic disease, although the associa-
tion is not as robust as might be anticipated, given the 
very low levels of HDL-C and apoA-I in these patients. 
Patients with Tangier disease also have low plasma lev-
els of LDL-C, which may attenuate the atherosclerotic 
risk. Obligate heterozygotes for ABCA1 mutations have 
moderately reduced plasma HDL-C levels (15–30 mg/
dL) but their risk of premature CHD remains uncer-
tain. ABCA1 mutations appear to be the cause of low 
HDL-C in a minority of individuals.
LCAT deficiency
This very rare autosomal recessive disorder is caused by 
mutations in LCAT, an enzyme synthesized in the liver 
and secreted into the plasma, where it circulates associ-
ated with lipoproteins (Fig. 31-3). As reviewed earlier, 
the enzyme is activated by apoA-I and mediates the 
esterification of cholesterol to form cholesteryl esters. 
Consequently, in LCAT deficiency the proportion of 
free cholesterol in circulating lipoproteins is greatly 
increased (from ∼25% to >70% of total plasma choles-
terol). Lack of normal cholesterol esterification impairs 
formation of mature HDL particles, resulting in the rapid 
catabolism of circulating apoA-I. Two genetic forms of 
LCAT deficiency have been described in humans: com-
plete deficiency (also called classic LCAT deficiency) and 
partial deficiency (also called fish-eye disease). Progressive 
corneal opacification due to the deposition of free cho-
lesterol in the cornea, very low plasma levels of HDL-C 
(usually <10 mg/dL), and variable hypertriglyceride-
mia are characteristic of both disorders. In partial LCAT 
deficiency, there are no other known clinical sequelae. 
In contrast, patients with complete LCAT deficiency 
have hemolytic anemia and progressive renal insuf-
ficiency that eventually leads to end-stage renal disease 
(ESRD). Remarkably, despite the extremely low plasma 
levels of HDL-C and apoA-I, premature ASCVD is not 
a consistent feature of either LCAT deficiency or fish-
eye disease. The diagnosis can be confirmed in a special-
ized laboratory by assaying plasma LCAT activity or by 
sequencing the LCAT gene.
 
CHAPTER 31
Disorders of Lipoprotein Metabolism
367
LDL-C levels usually are not a feature of diabetes mel-
litus and suggest the presence of an underlying lipopro-
tein abnormality or may indicate the development of 
diabetic nephropathy.
Lipodystrophy is associated with profound insu-
lin resistance and elevated plasma levels of VLDL and 
chylomicrons that can be especially difficult to con-
trol. Those with congenital generalized lipodystrophy 
have absence of subcutaneous fat associated with muscle 
hypertrophy and hepatic steatosis; some of these patients 
have been treated successfully with leptin. Partial lipo-
dystrophy can present with dyslipidemia and the diagnosis 
should be entertained in patients with variations in body 
fat distribution, particularly increased truncal fat accom-
panied by reduced fat in the buttocks and extremities.
Thyroid disease
Hypothyroidism is associated with elevated plasma 
LDL-C levels due primarily to a reduction in hepatic 
LDL receptor function and delayed clearance of LDL. 
Conversely, plasma levels of LDL-C are often reduced 
in the hyperthyroid patient. Hypothyroid patients also 
frequently have increased levels of circulating IDL, 
and some patients with hypothyroidism also have mild 
hypertriglyceridemia. Because hypothyroidism is often 
subtle and therefore easily overlooked, all patients pre-
senting with elevated plasma levels of LDL-C, IDL, or 
triglycerides should be screened for hypothyroidism. 
Thyroid replacement therapy usually ameliorates the 
hypercholesterolemia; if not, the patient probably has a pri-
mary lipoprotein disorder and may require lipid-lowering 
drug therapy.
Renal disorders
Nephrotic syndrome is often associated with pronounced 
hyperlipoproteinemia, which is usually mixed but can 
manifest as hypercholesterolemia or hypertriglyceridemia. 
The hyperlipidemia of nephrotic syndrome appears to 
be due to a combination of increased hepatic production 
and decreased clearance of VLDLs, with increased LDL 
production. Effective treatment of the underlying renal 
disease normalizes the lipid profile, but most patients 
with chronic nephrotic syndrome require lipid-lowering 
drug therapy.
ESRD is often associated with mild hypertriglyc-
eridemia (<300 mg/dL) due to the accumulation of 
VLDLs and remnant lipoproteins in the circulation. 
Triglyceride lipolysis and remnant clearance are both 
reduced in patients with renal failure. Because the risk 
of ASCVD is increased in ESRD subjects with hyper-
lipidemia, they should probably be aggressively treated 
with lipid-lowering agents, even though there is inad-
equate data at present to indicate that this population 
benefits from LDL-lowering therapy.
risk of CHD and increased longevity. Recent evidence 
is consistent with mutations in endothelial lipase con-
tributing to this phenotype in some cases.
Secondary Disorders of Lipoprotein 
Metabolism
Significant changes in plasma levels of lipoproteins are 
seen in a variety of diseases. It is crucial that second-
ary causes of dyslipidemias (Table 31-5) are considered 
prior to initiation of lipid-lowering therapy.
Obesity
Obesity is frequently accompanied by dyslipidemia. 
The increase in adipocyte mass and accompanying 
decreased insulin sensitivity associated with obesity has 
multiple effects on lipid metabolism. More free fatty 
acids are delivered from the expanded adipose tissue 
to the liver, where they are reesterified in hepatocytes 
to form triglycerides, which are packaged into VLDLs 
for secretion into the circulation. The increased insu-
lin levels promote fatty acid synthesis in the liver. 
Increased dietary intake of simple carbohydrates also 
drives hepatic production of VLDLs, resulting in ele-
vations in VLDL and/or LDL in some obese subjects. 
Plasma levels of HDL-C tend to be low in obesity, 
due in part to reduced lipolysis. Weight loss is often 
associated with reductions in plasma levels of circulat-
ing apoB-containing lipoproteins and increases in the 
plasma levels of HDL-C.
Diabetes mellitus
Patients with type I diabetes mellitus generally do not 
have hyperlipidemia if they remain under good glyce-
mic control. Diabetic ketoacidosis is frequently accom-
panied by hypertriglyceridemia due to an increased 
hepatic influx of free fatty acids from adipose tissue. 
Patients with type II diabetes mellitus are usually dys-
lipidemic, even when under relatively good glycemic 
control. The high levels of insulin and insulin resistance 
associated with type II diabetes has multiple effects on 
fat metabolism: (1) a decrease in LPL activity result-
ing in reduced catabolism of chylomicrons and VLDLs, 
(2) an increase in the release of free fatty acid from the 
adipose tissue, (3) an increase in fatty acid synthesis in 
the liver, and (4) an increase in hepatic VLDL pro-
duction. Patients with type II diabetes mellitus have 
several lipid abnormalities, including elevated plasma 
triglycerides (due to increased VLDL and lipoprotein 
remnants), elevated levels of dense LDL, and decreased 
plasma levels of HDL-C. In some diabetic patients, 
especially those with a genetic defect in lipid metabo-
lism, the triglycerides can be extremely elevated, result-
ing in the development of pancreatitis. Elevated plasma 
SECTION V
Disorders of the Vasculature
368
production does not lead to severe hypertriglyceride-
mia. Use of low-dose preparations of estrogen or the 
estrogen patch can minimize the effect of exogenous 
estrogen on lipids.
Lysosomal storage diseases
Cholesteryl ester storage disease (due to deficiency in 
lysosomal acid lipase) and glycogen storage diseases 
such as von Gierke’s disease (caused by mutations in 
glucose-6-phosphatase) are rare causes of secondary 
hyperlipidemias.
Cushing’s syndrome
Glucocorticoid excess is associated with increased VLDL 
synthesis and hypertriglyceridemia. Patients with Cush-
ing’s syndrome can also have mild elevations in plasma 
levels of LDL-C.
Drugs
Many drugs have an impact on lipid metabolism and 
can result in significant alterations in the lipoprotein 
profile (Table 31-5).
Screening
(See also Chaps. 2 and 32) Guidelines for the screen-
ing and management of lipid disorders have been pro-
vided by an expert Adult Treatment Panel (ATP) 
convened by the National Cholesterol Education Pro-
gram (NCEP) of the National Heart, Lung, and Blood 
Institute. The NCEP ATPIII guidelines published in 
2001 recommend that all adults older than age 20 years 
should have plasma levels of cholesterol, triglyceride, 
LDL-C, and HDL-C measured after a 12-h overnight 
fast. In most clinical laboratories, the total cholesterol 
and triglycerides in the plasma are measured enzymati-
cally, and then the cholesterol in the supernatant is mea-
sured after precipitation of apoB-containing lipoproteins 
to determine the HDL-C. The LDL-C is estimated 
using the following equation:
LDL-C = total cholesterol − (triglycerides/5) − HDL-C
(The VLDL-C is estimated by dividing the plasma 
triglyceride by 5, reflecting the ratio of cholesterol to 
triglyceride in VLDL particles.) This formula is rea-
sonably accurate if test results are obtained on fast-
ing plasma and if the triglyceride level does not exceed 
∼200 mg/dL; by convention it cannot be used if the 
triglyceride level is >400 mg/dL. The accurate deter-
mination of LDL-C levels in patients with triglyceride 
levels >200 mg/dL requires application of ultracentri-
fugation techniques or other direct assays for LDL-C. 
Patients with renal transplants usually have increased 
lipid levels due to the effect of the drugs required for 
immunosuppression (cyclosporine and glucocorticoids) 
and present a difficult management problem since 
HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors must be used cau-
tiously in these patients.
Liver disorders
Because the liver is the principal site of formation 
and clearance of lipoproteins, it is not surprising that 
liver diseases can affect plasma lipid levels in a variety 
of ways. Hepatitis due to infection, drugs, or alco-
hol is often associated with increased VLDL synthe-
sis and mild to moderate hypertriglyceridemia. Severe 
hepatitis and liver failure are associated with dramatic 
reductions in plasma cholesterol and triglycerides due 
to reduced lipoprotein biosynthetic capacity. Cho-
lestasis is associated with hypercholesterolemia, which 
can be very severe. A major pathway by which cho-
lesterol is excreted from the body is via secretion into 
bile, either directly or after conversion to bile acids, 
and cholestasis blocks this critical excretory pathway. 
In cholestasis, free cholesterol, coupled with phospho-
lipids, is secreted into the plasma as a constituent of a 
lamellar particle called LP-X. The particles can deposit 
in skinfolds, producing lesions resembling those seen in 
patients with FDBL (xanthomata strata palmaris). Pla-
nar and eruptive xanthomas can also be seen in patients 
with cholestasis.
Alcohol
Regular alcohol consumption has a variable effect on 
plasma lipid levels. The most common effect of alcohol 
is to increase plasma triglyceride levels. Alcohol con-
sumption stimulates hepatic secretion of VLDL, possibly 
by inhibiting the hepatic oxidation of free fatty acids, 
which then promote hepatic triglyceride synthesis and 
VLDL secretion. The usual lipoprotein pattern seen with 
alcohol consumption is Type IV (increased VLDLs), but 
persons with an underlying primary lipid disorder may 
develop severe hypertriglyceridemia (Type V) if they 
drink alcohol. Regular alcohol use also raises plasma 
levels of HDL-C.
Estrogen
Estrogen administration is associated with increased 
VLDL and HDL synthesis, resulting in elevated plasma 
levels of both triglycerides and HDL-C. This lipopro-
tein pattern is distinctive since the levels of plasma tri-
glyceride and HDL-C are typically inversely related. 
Plasma triglyceride levels should be monitored when 
birth control pills or postmenopausal estrogen ther-
apy is initiated to ensure that the increase in VLDL 
 
CHAPTER 31
Disorders of Lipoprotein Metabolism
369
If the triglyceride level is >200 mg/dL, the guidelines 
recommend that the “non-HDL-C” be calculated by 
simple subtraction of HDL-C from the total cholesterol 
and that this be considered a secondary target of ther-
apy. Further evaluation and treatment is based primarily 
on the plasma LDL-C and non-HDL-C levels as well as 
assessment of overall cardiovascular risk.
Diagnosis
The critical first step in managing a lipid disorder is to 
determine the class or classes of lipoproteins that are 
increased or decreased in the patient. The Fredrick-
son classification scheme for hyperlipoproteinemias 
(Table 31-3), though less commonly used now than in 
the past, can be helpful in this regard. Once the hyper-
lipidemia is accurately classified, efforts should be 
directed to rule out any possible secondary causes of the 
hyperlipidemia (Table 31-5). Although many patients 
with hyperlipidemia have a primary or genetic cause of 
their lipid disorder, secondary factors frequently contrib-
ute to the hyperlipidemia. A fasting glucose should be 
obtained in the initial workup of all subjects with an ele-
vated triglyceride level. Nephrotic syndrome and chronic 
renal insufficiency should be excluded by obtaining urine 
protein and serum creatinine. Liver function tests should 
be performed to rule out hepatitis and cholestasis. Hypo-
thyroidism should be ruled out by measuring serum 
TSH. Patients with hyperlipidemia, especially hyper-
triglyceridemia, who drink alcohol should be encour-
aged to decrease their intake. Sedentary lifestyle, obesity, 
and smoking are all associated with low HDL-C levels, 
and patients should be counseled about these issues.
Once secondary causes for the elevated lipoprotein 
levels have been ruled out, attempts should be made to 
diagnose the primary lipid disorder since the underlying 
etiology has a significant effect on the risk of developing 
CHD, on the response to drug therapy, and on the man-
agement of other family members. Often, determining the 
correct diagnosis requires a detailed family medical history 
and, in some cases, lipid analyses in family members.
If the fasting plasma triglyceride level is >1000 mg/
dL, the patient almost always has chylomicronemia 
and either has Type I or Type V hyperlipoproteinemia 
(Table 31-3). The plasma triglyceride to cholesterol 
ratio helps distinguish between these two possibilities 
and is higher in Type I than Type V hyperlipoprotein-
emia. If the patient has Type I hyperlipoproteinemia, 
a postheparin lipolytic assay should be performed to 
determine if the patient has LPL or apoC-II deficiency. 
Type V is a much more frequent form of chylomicro-
nemia in the adult patient. Often treatment of secondary 
factors contributing to the hyperlipidemia (diet, obesity, 
glucose intolerance, alcohol ingestion, estrogen therapy) 
will change a Type V into a Type IV pattern, reducing 
the risk of developing acute pancreatitis.
If the levels of LDL-C are very high (greater than 
a 95th percentile), it is likely the patient has a genetic 
form of hyperlipidemia. The presence of severe hyper-
cholesterolemia, tendon xanthomas, and an autosomal 
dominant pattern of inheritance are consistent with the 
diagnosis of either FH, FDB, or ADH-PCSK9. At the 
present time, there is no compelling reason to perform 
molecular studies to further refine the molecular diag-
nosis, since the treatment of FH and FDB is identical. 
Recessive forms of severe hypercholesterolemia are rare 
and if the patient with severe hypercholesterolemia has 
parents with normal cholesterol levels, sitosterolemia 
should be considered; a clue to the diagnosis of sitos-
terolemia is the greater than expected response of the 
hypercholesterolemia to reductions in dietary cholesterol 
content or to treatment with either a cholesterol absorp-
tion inhibitor (ezetimibe) or to bile acid resins. Patients 
with more moderate hypercholesterolemia that does not 
segregate in families as a monogenic trait are likely to 
have polygenic hypercholesterolemia.
The most common error in the diagnosis and treat-
ment of lipid disorders is in patients with a mixed 
hyperlipidemia without chylomicronemia. Elevations 
in the plasma levels of both cholesterol and triglycerides 
are seen in patients with increased plasma levels of IDL 
(Type III) and of LDL and VLDL (Type IIB) and in 
patients with increased levels of VLDL (Type IV). The 
ratio of triglyceride to cholesterol is higher in Type IV 
than the other two disorders. The plasma levels of apoB 
are highest in Type IIB. A beta quantification to deter-
mine the VLDL-C/triglyceride ratio in plasma (see dis-
cussion of FDBL) or a direct measurement of the plasma 
LDL-C should be performed at least once prior to ini-
tiation of lipid-lowering therapy to determine if the 
hyperlipidemia is due to the accumulation of remnants 
or to an increase in both LDL and VLDL.
Treatment	
Lipoprotein Disorders
Clinical Evidence That Treatment  
of Dyslipidemia Reduces Risk of CHD
Observational Data  Multiple epidemiologic stud-
ies have demonstrated a strong relationship between 
plasma levels of LDL-C and CHD. A direct connection 
between plasma cholesterol levels and the atheroscle-
rotic process was made in humans when aortic fatty 
streaks in young persons were shown to be strongly cor-
related with serum cholesterol levels. The elucidation of 
homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia was proof 
that high plasma levels of LDL-C alone are sufficient to 
cause CAD. Moreover, PCSK9 deficiency proves that hav-
ing a lifelong reduction in plasma level of LDL-C is asso-
ciated with a marked reduction in cardiovascular risk.
SECTION V
Disorders of the Vasculature
370
CHD and with LDL-C <130 mg/dL but with an elevated 
plasma level of C-reactive protein (CRP). Treatment 
with rosuvastatin reduced LDL-C by an average of 50% 
and significantly reduced cardiovascular events, further 
extending the indication for statin therapy in primary 
prevention.
Further studies have compared different statin regi-
mens to show that greater reductions in LDL-C levels 
with treatment are associated with a greater reduc-
tion in major cardiovascular events. Based on several of 
these studies, a white paper was issued by the NCEP in 
2004 establishing an “optional” LDL-C goal of <70 mg/
dL in high-risk patients with CHD and of <100 mg/dL 
in very-high-risk patients without known CHD. These 
optional targets have been widely embraced, and clini-
cal practice is clearly evolving to treating CHD and high-
risk patients more aggressively for LDL reduction.
Clinical Trials: The Triglyceride-HDL Axis 
Abnormalities of the triglyceride high-density lipopro-
tein (TG-HDL) axis are common in patients with CHD, 
although data supporting pharmacologic intervention 
in the TG-HDL axis is less compelling than data support-
ing LDL-C reduction. Fibric acid derivatives (fibrates), 
nicotinic acid (niacin), and omega 3 fatty acids (fish 
oils) are the primary agents currently available to lower 
plasma triglyceride levels and increase plasma levels of 
HDL-C. Fibrates have been used as lipid-lowering drugs 
for several decades and are more effective in reducing 
plasma triglyceride levels and relatively less effective in 
increasing plasma HDL-C levels. The results of clinical tri-
als using fibrates have been mixed. Some studies such 
as the Helsinki Heart Study (HHS) and the Veteran Affairs 
High-Density Lipoprotein Cholesterol Intervention Trial 
(VA-HIT) demonstrated a significant reduction in non-
fatal myocardial infarction and coronary death with 
gemfibrozil therapy. However, the Bezafibrate Infarction 
Prevention (BIP) trial of bezafibrate vs. placebo in CHD 
patients with low HDL-C failed to demonstrate a statisti-
cally significant reduction in coronary events, the Feno-
fibrate Intervention and Event Lowering in Diabetes 
(FIELD) trial of fenofibrate in patients with type 2 diabe-
tes failed to show a significant reduction in its primary 
endpoint of nonfatal myocardial infarction and coronary 
death, and the Action to Control Cardiovascular Risk in 
Diabetes (ACCORD) study of fenofibrate vs. placebo added 
to simvastatin in patients with type 2 diabetes failed to 
show a significant reduction in its primary endpoint of 
major acute cardiovascular events. In each of these 
studies, the subgroup with elevated baseline triglycer-
ides suggested benefit.
While niacin is the most effective HDL-raising drug 
currently available, it has not been tested for its abil-
ity to reduce cardiovascular risk in subjects with low 
plasma levels of HDL-C. The AIM-HIGH and HPS2-THRIVE 
Clinical Trials: LDL-C Reduction  Early clinical 
trials of cholesterol (mostly LDL-C) reduction utilized 
niacin, bile acid sequestrants, and even the surgical 
approach of partial ileal bypass to reduce serum choles-
terol levels. Although most of these early studies found 
a small but significant reduction in cardiac events, no 
decrease in total mortality was seen. The discovery of 
more potent and well-tolerated cholesterol-lowering 
agents, namely HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors (statins), 
ushered in a series of large cholesterol reduction trials 
that unequivocally established the benefit of choles-
terol reduction. The first of these studies was the Scan-
dinavian Simvastatin Survival Study (4S) in which hyper-
cholesterolemic men with CHD who were treated with 
simvastatin had a reduction in major coronary events 
of 44% and a reduction in total mortality of 30%. These 
impressive results were followed by additional studies 
using statins. The consistency of results of these studies 
is remarkable. They demonstrated statins to be effective 
in primary as well as secondary prevention, in women as 
well as men, in elderly as well as middle-aged individu-
als, and in patients with only modestly elevated LDL-C 
levels as well as those with severe hypercholesterol-
emia. In general, these studies demonstrated that a 1% 
reduction in LDL-C level is associated with a reduction in 
coronary events of a similar magnitude, and an ∼40 mg/
dL reduction in LDL-C is associated with an ∼22% reduc-
tion in coronary events.
More recent studies have enrolled subjects with 
average or subaverage plasma LDL-C levels and 
have involved targeting the on-treatment LDL-C to 
even lower levels. For example, the Heart Protection 
Study (HPS) included 20,536 men and women, ages 
40–80 years, who had either established ASCVD or 
were at high risk for the development of CHD (primar-
ily diabetes); the only lipid entry criterion was a total 
plasma cholesterol level of >135 mg/dL. Treatment 
with simvastatin for an average of 5 years resulted in a 
24% reduction in major coronary events and a highly 
significant 13% reduction in all-cause mortality. Impor-
tantly, the relative benefit of statin therapy was similar 
across tertiles of baseline LDL-C, and even the large 
subgroup of individuals with an LDL-C <100 mg/dL at 
baseline experienced significant benefit from therapy. 
This study demonstrated that statin therapy is benefi-
cial in high-risk subjects, even if the baseline LDL-C level 
is below the currently recommended targeted goal; it 
also helped to shift the emphasis from simply treating 
elevated cholesterol to treating patients at high risk of 
CHD. Additional large-scale clinical trials have expanded 
on these findings and confirmed that individuals with 
other cardiovascular risk factors (hypertension, diabe-
tes) benefit from LDL-lowering therapy even when the 
initial LDL-C level is only modestly elevated. The JUPITER 
trial was a primary prevention trial in subjects without 
 
CHAPTER 31
Disorders of Lipoprotein Metabolism
371
trials are ongoing studies of the effect of niacin added 
to baseline statin therapy in patients with CHD and 
low HDL-C. Finally, while low-dose fish oils have been 
shown to reduce cardiovascular events, higher doses 
that reduce triglyceride levels have not been tested for 
their ability to reduce cardiovascular events. Definitive 
proof that treating the TG-HDL axis reduces cardiovas-
cular events is likely to come from new therapies that 
are more effective at specifically targeting VLDL and/or 
HDL particles.
Clinical Approach to Lipid-Modifying 
Therapy  The major goal of lipid-modifying therapy 
in most patients with disorders of lipid metabolism is 
to prevent ASCVD and its complications. Management 
of lipid disorders should be based on clinical trial data 
demonstrating that treatment reduces cardiovascular 
morbidity and mortality, although reasonable extrapo-
lation of these data to specific subgroups is sometimes 
required. Clearly, elevated plasma levels of LDL-C are 
strongly associated with increased risk of ASCVD, and 
treatment to lower the levels of plasma LDL-C decreases 
the risk of clinical cardiovascular events in both second-
ary and primary prevention. Although the proportional 
benefit accrued from reducing plasma LDL-C appears 
to be similar over the entire range of LDL-C values, the 
absolute risk reduction depends on the baseline level of 
cardiovascular risk. The treatment guidelines developed 
by NCEP ATPIII and the 2004 white paper incorporate 
these principles. As noted above, abnormalities in the 
TG-HDL axis (elevated triglyceride, low HDL-C, or both) 
are commonly seen in patients with CHD or who are 
at high risk for developing it, but clinical trial data sup-
porting the treatment of these abnormalities is much 
less compelling, and the pharmacologic tools for their 
management are more limited. Importantly, the NCEP 
ATPIII guidelines promote the use of the “non-HDL-C” as 
a secondary target of therapy in patients with triglyc-
eride levels >200 mg/dL. The goals for non-HDL-C are 
30 mg/dL higher than the goals for LDL-C. Thus, many 
patients with abnormalities of the TG-HDL axis require 
additional therapy for reduction of non-HDL-C to recom-
mended goals.
Nonpharmacologic Treatment
Diet  Dietary modification is an important compo-
nent in the management of dyslipidemia. The physi-
cian should assess the content of the patient’s diet 
and provide suggestions for dietary modifications. In 
the patient with elevated LDL-C, dietary saturated fat 
and cholesterol should be restricted. For individuals 
with hypertriglyceridemia, the intake of simple carbo-
hydrates should be curtailed. For severe hypertriglyc-
eridemia (>1000 mg/dL), restriction of total fat intake 
is critical. The most widely used diet to lower the LDL-C 
level is the “Step I diet” developed by the American 
Heart Association. Most patients have a relatively mod-
est (<10%) decrease in plasma levels of LDL-C on a 
Step I diet in the absence of any associated weight loss. 
Almost all persons experience a decrease in plasma 
HDL-C levels with a reduction in the amount of total and 
saturated fat in their diet.
Foods and Additives  Certain foods and dietary 
additives are associated with modest reductions in 
plasma cholesterol levels. Plant stanol and sterol esters 
are available in a variety of foods, such as spreads, salad 
dressings, and snack bars. Plant sterol and sterol esters 
interfere with cholesterol absorption and reduce plasma 
LDL-C levels by ∼10% when taken three times per day. 
The addition to the diet of psyllium, soy protein, or Chi-
nese red yeast rice (which contains lovastatin) can have 
modest cholesterol-lowering effects. No controlled 
studies have been performed in which several of these 
nonpharmacologic options have been combined to 
address their additive or synergistic effects.
Weight Loss and Exercise  The treatment of 
obesity, if present, can have a favorable impact on 
plasma lipid levels and should be actively encouraged. 
Plasma triglyceride and LDL-C levels tend to fall and 
HDL-C levels tend to increase in obese subjects after 
weight reduction. Regular aerobic exercise can also 
have a positive effect on lipids, in large measure due to 
the associated weight reduction. Aerobic exercise has a 
very modest elevating effect on plasma levels of HDL-C 
in most individuals but also has cardiovascular benefits 
that extend beyond the effects on plasma lipid levels.
Pharmacologic Treatment  The decision 
to use drug therapy depends on the level of cardiovas-
cular risk. Drug therapy for hypercholesterolemia in 
patients with established CHD is well supported by clini-
cal trial data, as reviewed above. Even patients with CHD 
or risk factors who have “average” LDL-C levels benefit 
from treatment. Drug treatment to lower LDL-C levels in 
patients with CHD is also highly cost-effective. Patients 
with diabetes mellitus without known CHD have simi-
lar cardiovascular risk to those without diabetes but 
with preexisting CHD. The NCEP ATPIII guidelines rec-
ommended estimating absolute risk of a cardiovascular 
event over 10 years using a scoring system based on 
the Framingham Heart Study database. Patients with a 
10-year absolute CHD risk of >20% are considered “CHD 
risk equivalents” to be treated as aggressively as patients 
with existing CHD. Current NCEP ATPIII guidelines call for 
drug therapy to reduce LDL-C to <100 mg/dL in patients 
with established CHD, other ASCVD (aortic aneurysm, 
peripheral vascular disease, or cerebrovascular disease), 
diabetes mellitus, or CHD risk equivalents; and “option-
ally” to reduce LDL-C to <70 mg/dL in high-risk CHD 
patients. Based on these guidelines, virtually all CHD 
SECTION V
Disorders of the Vasculature
372
thus accelerated clearance of circulating LDL, result-
ing in a dose-dependent reduction in plasma levels of 
LDL-C. The magnitude of LDL lowering associated with 
statin treatment varies widely among individuals, but 
once a patient is on a statin, the doubling of the statin 
dose produces an ∼6% further reduction in the level of 
plasma LDL-C. The statins currently available differ in 
their LDL-C reducing potency (Table 31-6). Currently, 
there is no convincing evidence that any of the different 
statins confer an advantage that is independent of the 
effect on LDL-C. Statins also reduce plasma triglycerides 
in a dose-dependent fashion, which is roughly propor-
tional to their LDL-C–lowering effects (if the triglycer-
ides are <400 mg/dL). Statins have a modest HDL-raising 
effect (5–10%) that is not generally dose-dependent.
Statins are well tolerated and can be taken in tab-
let form once a day. Potential side effects include dys-
pepsia, headaches, fatigue, and muscle or joint pains. 
Severe myopathy and even rhabdomyolysis occur 
rarely with statin treatment. The risk of statin-associated 
myopathy is increased by the presence of older age, 
frailty, renal insufficiency, and coadministration of drugs 
that interfere with the metabolism of statins such as 
erythromycin and related antibiotics, antifungal agents, 
immunosuppressive drugs, and fibric acid derivatives 
(particularly gemfibrozil). Severe myopathy can usually 
be avoided by careful patient selection, avoidance of 
interacting drugs, and instructing the patient to contact 
the physician immediately in the event of unexplained 
muscle pain. In the event of muscle symptoms, the 
plasma creatine kinase (CK) level should be obtained to 
document the myopathy. Serum CK levels need not be 
monitored on a routine basis in patients taking statins, 
as an elevated CK in the absence of symptoms does not 
predict the development of myopathy and does not 
necessarily suggest the need for discontinuing the drug.
Another consequence of statin therapy can be eleva-
tion in liver transaminases (alanine [ALT] and aspartate 
[AST]). They should be checked before starting therapy, at 
2–3 months, and then annually. Substantial (greater than 
three times the upper limit of normal) elevation in trans-
aminases is relatively rare and mild-to-moderate (one 
to three times normal) elevation in transaminases in the 
absence of symptoms need not mandate discontinuing 
the medication. Severe clinical hepatitis associated with 
statins is exceedingly rare, and the trend is toward less 
frequent monitoring of transaminases in patients taking 
statins. The statin-associated elevation in liver enzymes 
resolves upon discontinuation of the medication.
Statins appear to be remarkably safe. Meta-analyses 
of large randomized controlled clinical trials with statins 
do not suggest an increase in any major noncardiac 
diseases. Statins are the drug class of choice for LDL-C 
reduction and are by far the most widely used class of 
lipid-lowering drugs.
and CHD risk-equivalent patients require cholesterol-
lowering drug therapy. Moderate-risk patients with 
two or more risk factors and a 10-year absolute risk of 
10–20% should be treated to a goal LDL-C of <130 mg/dL 
or “optionally” to LDL-C <100 mg/dL.
Although helpful to consider 10-year absolute risk in 
making clinical decisions about lipid-altering drug ther-
apy, there are situations where 10-year risk is low but 
lifetime risk is very high and therefore treatment is indi-
cated. A typical example would be a young adult with 
heterozygous FH and an LDL-C >220 mg/dL. Despite a 
very low 10-year absolute risk, every such patient should 
be treated with drug therapy to reduce lifetime risk. 
Indeed, all patients with markedly elevated plasma levels 
of LDL-C levels (>190 mg/dL) should be strongly consid-
ered for drug therapy even if their 10-year absolute CHD 
risk is not elevated. The decision of whether to initiate 
drug treatment in individuals with plasma LDL-C levels 
between 130 and 190 mg/dL remains controversial and 
depends on both 10-year and lifetime risk. Although it 
is desirable to avoid drug treatment in patients who are 
unlikely to develop CHD, a high proportion of patients 
who eventually develop CHD have plasma LDL-C levels 
within this range. The presence of other risk factors such 
as a low plasma level of HDL-C (<40 mg/dL) or the diag-
nosis of the metabolic syndrome would argue in favor of 
drug therapy (Chap. 32). Other laboratory tests such as 
an elevated plasma level of apoB, Lp(a), or high-sensitiv-
ity C-reactive protein, may assist in the identification of 
high-risk individuals who should be considered for drug 
therapy when their LDL-C is in a “gray zone.”
Drug treatment is also indicated in patients with tri-
glycerides >500 mg/dL who have been screened and 
treated for secondary causes of hypertriglyceridemia. 
The goal is to reduce fasting plasma triglycerides to 
below 500 mg/dL to prevent the risk of acute pancreati-
tis. When triglycerides are 200–500 mg/dL, the decision 
to use drug therapy depends on the risk of the patient 
developing chylomicronemia and an assessment of 
cardiovascular risk. Most major clinical endpoint trials 
with statins have excluded persons with triglyceride lev-
els >350–450 mg/dL, and there are therefore few data 
regarding the effectiveness of statins in reducing cardio-
vascular risk in persons with hypertriglyceridemia. More 
data are needed regarding the relative effectiveness of 
statins, fibrates, niacin, and fish oils for reducing cardio-
vascular risk in this setting. Combination therapy is often 
required for optimal control of mixed dyslipidemia.
HMG-CoA Reductase Inhibitors (Statins) 
HMG-CoA reductase is a key enzyme in cholesterol 
biosynthesis, and inhibition of this enzyme decreases 
cholesterol synthesis. By inhibiting cholesterol bio-
synthesis, statins lead to increased hepatic LDL recep-
tor activity as a counterregulatory mechanism and 
 
CHAPTER 31
Disorders of Lipoprotein Metabolism
373
resulting in a reduction in delivery of dietary sterols in 
the liver and an increase in hepatic LDL receptor expres-
sion. The mean reduction in plasma LDL-C on ezetimibe 
(10 mg) is 18%, and the effect is additive when used in 
combination with a statin. Effects on triglyceride and 
HDL-C levels are negligible, and no cardiovascular out-
come data have been reported. When used in combina-
tion with a statin, monitoring of liver transaminases is rec-
ommended. The only role for ezetimibe in monotherapy 
Cholesterol Absorption Inhibitors  Choles-
terol within the lumen of the small intestine is derived 
from the diet (about one-third) and the bile (about 
two-thirds) and is actively absorbed by the enterocyte 
through a process that involves the protein NPC1L1. 
Ezetimibe (Table 31-6) is a cholesterol absorption inhibi-
tor that binds directly to and inhibits NPC1L1 and blocks 
the intestinal absorption of cholesterol. Ezetimibe 
(10 mg) inhibits cholesterol absorption by almost 60%, 
Table 31-6
Summary of the Major Drugs Used for the Treatment of Hyperlipidemia
Drug
Major 
Indications
Starting Dose
Maximal Dose
Mechanism
Common Side Effects
HMG-CoA 
reductase inhibitors 
(statins)
Elevated 
LDL-C
↓ Cholesterol 
synthesis, 
↑ hepatic LDL 
receptors, ↓ VLDL 
production
Myalgias, arthralgias, 
elevated transaminases, 
dyspepsia
  Lovastatin
20 mg daily
80 mg daily
  Pravastatin
40 mg qhs
80 mg qhs
  Simvastatin
20 mg qhs
80 mg qhs
  Fluvastatin
20 mg qhs
80 mg qhs
  Atorvastatin
10 mg qhs
80 mg qhs
  Rosuvastatin
10 mg qhs
40 mg qhs
Cholesterol 
absorption 
inhibitors
↓ Intestinal choles-
terol absorption
Elevated transaminases
  Ezetimibe
Elevated 
LDL-C
10 mg daily
10 mg daily
LDL receptors
Bile acid 
sequestrants
Elevated 
LDL-C
↑ Bile acid excre-
tion and ↑ LDL 
receptors
Bloating, constipation, 
elevated triglycerides
  Cholestyramine
4 g daily
32 g daily
  Colestipol
5 g daily
40 g daily
  Colesevelam
3750 mg daily
4375 mg daily
Nicotinic acid
Elevated 
LDL-C, low 
HDL-C, 
elevated TG
↓ VLDL production
Cutaneous flushing, 
GI upset, elevated 
glucose, uric acid, and 
liver function tests
  Immediate-release
100 mg tid
1 g tid
  Sustained-release
250 mg bid
1.5 g bid
  Extended-release
500 mg qhs
2 g qhs
Fibric acid 
derivatives
Elevated TG, 
elevated 
remnants
↑ LPL, ↓ VLDL 
synthesis
Dyspepsia, myalgia, 
gallstones, elevated 
transaminases
  Gemfibrozil
600 mg bid
600 mg bid
  Fenofibrate
145 mg qd
145 mg qd
Omega 3 fatty acids
Elevated TG
3 g daily
6 g daily
↑ TG catabolism
Dyspepsia, diarrhea, 
fishy odor to breath
Abbreviations: GI, gastrointestinal; HDL-C, HDL-cholesterol; LDL, low-density lipoprotein; LDL-C, LDL-cholesterol; LPL, lipoprotein lipase; TG, 
triglyceride; VLDL, very low-density lipoprotein.
SECTION V
Disorders of the Vasculature
374
flushing. There is rapid tachyphylaxis to the flushing. 
Niacin therapy is generally started at lower doses and 
gradually titrated up to higher doses. Immediate-
release crystalline niacin is generally administered 
three times per day, over-the-counter sustained-release 
niacin is taken twice a day, and a prescription form of 
extended-release niacin is taken once a day. Mild eleva-
tions in transaminases occur in up to 15% of patients 
treated with any form of niacin, and on occasion these 
elevations may require stopping the medication. Niacin 
potentiates the effect of warfarin, and these two drugs 
should be prescribed together with caution. Acanthosis 
nigricans, a dark-colored coarse skin lesion, and macu-
lopathy are infrequent side effects of niacin. Niacin is 
contraindicated in patients with peptic ulcer disease 
and can exacerbate the symptoms of esophageal reflux. 
It can also raise plasma levels of uric acid and precipitate 
gouty attacks in susceptible patients.
Niacin can raise fasting plasma glucose levels. A 
study in type 2 diabetics found only a slight increase 
in fasting glucose and no significant change in HbA1c 
level with niacin treatment. Low-dose niacin can be 
used effectively to reduce plasma triglyceride levels 
and increase HDL-C without adversely impacting on 
glycemic control. Thus, niacin can be used in diabetic 
patients, but every effort should be made to optimize 
the diabetes management before initiating niacin. 
Glucose should be carefully monitored in nondiabetic 
patients with impaired fasting glucose after initiation of 
niacin therapy.
Successful therapy with niacin requires careful edu-
cation and motivation on the part of the patient. Its 
advantages are its low cost and long-term safety. It is the 
most effective drug currently available for raising HDL-C 
levels. It is particularly useful in patients with combined 
hyperlipidemia and low plasma levels of HDL-C and is 
effective in combination with statins. Outcome data 
are somewhat limited with niacin, but two clinical tri-
als assessing the benefits of adding niacin to a statin in 
high-risk patients with low HDL-C are currently ongoing.
Fibric Acid Derivatives (Fibrates)  Fibric acid 
derivatives are agonists of PPARa, a nuclear receptor 
involved in the regulation of lipid metabolism. Fibrates 
stimulate LPL activity (enhancing triglyceride hydroly-
sis), reduce apoC-III synthesis (enhancing lipoprotein 
remnant clearance), promote beta-oxidation of fatty 
acids, and may reduce VLDL triglyceride production. 
Fibrates are the most effective drugs available for reduc-
ing triglyceride levels and also raise HDL-C levels mod-
estly (Table 31-6). They have variable effects on LDL-C 
and in hypertriglyceridemic patients can sometimes be 
associated with increases in plasma LDL-C levels.
Fibrates are generally very well tolerated. The most 
common side effect is dyspepsia. Myopathy and hepatitis 
is in patients who do not tolerate statins; the drug is 
often added to a statin in patients who require further 
LDL-C reduction.
Bile Acid Sequestrants (Resins)  Bile acid 
sequestrants bind bile acids in the intestine and pro-
mote their excretion rather than reabsorption in the 
ileum. To maintain the bile acid pool size, the liver 
diverts cholesterol to bile acid synthesis. The decreased 
hepatic intracellular cholesterol content results in 
upregulation of the LDL receptor and enhanced LDL 
clearance from the plasma. Bile acid sequestrants, 
including cholestyramine, colestipol, and colesevelam 
(Table 31-6), primarily reduce plasma LDL-C levels but 
can cause an increase in plasma triglycerides. There-
fore, patients with hypertriglyceridemia should not be 
treated with bile acid–binding resins. Cholestyramine 
and colestipol are insoluble resins that must be sus-
pended in liquids. Colesevelam is available as tablets 
but generally requires up to six to seven tablets per day 
for effective LDL-C lowering. Most side effects of res-
ins are limited to the gastrointestinal tract and include 
bloating and constipation. Since bile acid sequestrants 
are not systemically absorbed, they are very safe and 
the cholesterol-lowering drug of choice in children and 
in women of childbearing age who are lactating, preg-
nant, or could become pregnant. They are effective in 
combination with statins as well as in combination with 
ezetimibe and are particularly useful with one or both of 
these drugs for difficult-to-treat patients or those with 
statin intolerance.
Nicotinic Acid (Niacin)  Nicotinic acid, or niacin, 
is a B-complex vitamin that has been used as a lipid-
modifying agent for more than five decades. Niacin 
reduces the flux of nonesterified fatty acids (NEFAs) 
to the liver, which is thought to be the mechanism for 
reduced hepatic triglyceride synthesis and VLDL secre-
tion. Recently, a nicotinic acid receptor (GPR109A) was 
discovered that suppresses release of NEFA by adipose 
tissue, thus mediating the effect of niacin on NEFA sup-
pression. Niacin reduces plasma triglyceride and LDL-C 
levels and raises the plasma concentration of HDL-C 
(Table 31-6), but it appears that these effects may not 
be mediated solely by GPR109A. Niacin is also the only 
currently available lipid-lowering drug that significantly 
reduces plasma levels of Lp(a) (up to 40%). If properly 
prescribed and monitored, niacin is a safe and effective 
lipid-lowering agent.
The most frequent side effect of niacin is cutaneous 
flushing, which is mediated by activating GPR109A in 
the skin, leading to local generation of prostaglandin D2 
(PGD2) and prostaglandin E2. Flushing can be reduced 
by formulations that slow the absorption and by taking 
aspirin prior to dosing. A product is available in Europe 
that blocks the receptor for PGD2 and attenuates 
 
CHAPTER 31
Disorders of Lipoprotein Metabolism
375
Conversely, in high-risk patients on statin therapy who 
have an elevated plasma triglyceride level, addition of a 
fibrate or fish oils is a reasonable consideration.
Severely hypertriglyceridemic patients treated first 
with a fibrate often fail to reach LDL-C and non-HDL-C  
goals and are therefore candidates for addition of a 
statin. Coadministration of statins and fibrates has obvi-
ous appeal in patients with combined hyperlipidemia, 
but no clinical trial has assessed the effectiveness of a 
statin-fibrate combination compared with either a statin 
or a fibrate alone in reducing cardiovascular events. 
The long-term safety of the statin-fibrate combination 
is not known. Since coadministration of statins and 
fibrates is associated with an increased incidence of 
severe myopathy and rhabdomyolysis, patients treated 
with this combination must be carefully counseled and 
monitored. This combination of drugs should be used 
cautiously in patients with underlying renal or hepatic 
insufficiency; in the elderly, frail, and chronically ill; and 
in those on multiple medications.
Other 
Approaches  Occasionally, patients 
cannot tolerate any of the existing lipid-lowering drugs 
at doses required for adequate control of their lipid 
levels. A larger group of patients, most of whom have 
genetic lipid disorders, remain significantly hypercho-
lesterolemic despite combination drug therapy. These 
patients are at high risk for the development or pro-
gression of CHD and clinical CHD events. The preferred 
option for management of patients with severe refrac-
tory hypercholesterolemia is LDL apheresis. In this pro-
cess, the patient’s plasma is passed over a column that 
selectively removes the LDL, and the LDL-depleted 
plasma is returned to the patient. Patients on maxi-
mally tolerated combination drug therapy who have 
CHD and a plasma LDL-C level >200 mg/dL or no CHD 
and a plasma LDL-C level >300 mg/dL are candidates for 
every-other-week LDL apheresis and should be referred 
to a specialized lipid center.
Management 
of 
Low 
HDL-C  Severely 
reduced plasma levels of HDL-C (<20 mg/dL) accom-
panied by triglycerides <400 mg/dL usually indicate 
the presence of a genetic disorder such as a mutation 
in apoA-I, LCAT deficiency, or Tangier disease. HDL-C 
levels <20 mg/dL are common in the setting of severe 
hypertriglyceridemia, in which case the primary focus 
should be on the management of the triglycerides. 
HDL-C levels <20 mg/dL also occur in individuals using 
anabolic steroids. Secondary causes of more moder-
ate reductions in plasma HDL (20–40 mg/dL) should 
be considered (Table 31-5). Smoking should be discon-
tinued, obese persons should be encouraged to lose 
weight, sedentary persons should be encouraged to 
exercise, and diabetes should be optimally controlled. 
When possible, medications associated with reduced 
occur rarely in the absence of other lipid-lowering 
agents. Fibrates promote cholesterol secretion into bile 
and are associated with an increased risk of gallstones. 
Fibrates can raise creatinine and should be used with 
caution in patients with chronic kidney disease. Impor-
tantly, fibrates can potentiate the effect of warfarin and 
certain oral hypoglycemic agents, so the anticoagulation 
status and plasma glucose levels should be closely moni-
tored in patients on these agents.
Fibrates are useful and are a reasonable consider-
ation for first-line therapy in patients with severe hyper-
triglyceridemia (>500 mg/dL) to prevent pancreatitis. 
Their role in patients with moderate hypertriglyceride-
mia (200–500 mg/dL) is to promote reduction in non-
HDL-C levels, but outcome data regarding their effects 
on coronary events in this setting remains mixed. In 
patients with a triglyceride level <500 mg/dL, the role 
of fibrates is primarily in combination with statins in 
selected patients with mixed dyslipidemia. In this set-
ting, the risk of myopathy can be minimized with appro-
priate patient and drug selection and must be carefully 
weighed against the clinical benefit of the therapy.
Omega 3 Fatty Acids (Fish Oils)  N-3 poly-
unsaturated fatty acids (n-3 PUFAs) are present in high 
concentration in fish and in flaxseeds. The most widely 
used n-3 PUFAs for the treatment of hyperlipidemias 
are the two active molecules in fish oil: eicosapentae-
noic acid (EPA) and decohexanoic acid (DHA). N-3 PUFAs 
have been concentrated into tablets and in doses of 
3–4 g/d are effective at lowering fasting triglyceride lev-
els. Fish oils can cause an increase in plasma LDL-C lev-
els in some patients. Fish oil supplements can be used 
in combination with fibrates, niacin, or statins to treat 
hypertriglyceridemia. In general, fish oils are well toler-
ated and appear to be safe, at least at doses up to 3–4 g. 
Although fish oil administration is associated with a pro-
longation in the bleeding time, no increase in bleeding 
has been seen in clinical trials. A lower dose of omega 3  
(about 1 g) has been associated with reduction in car-
diovascular events in CHD patients and is used by some 
clinicians for this purpose.
Combination Drug Therapy  Combination drug 
therapy is frequently used for (1) patients unable to 
reach LDL-C and non-HDL-C goals on statin monother-
apy, (2) patients with combined elevated LDL-C and 
abnormalities of the TG-HDL axis, and (3) patients with 
severe hypertriglyceridemia who do not achieve non-
HDL-C goal on a fibrate or on fish oils alone. When LDL-C 
and non-HDL-C goals are not achieved on statin mono-
therapy, a cholesterol absorption inhibitor or bile acid 
sequestrant can be added to the drug regimen. Combi-
nation of niacin with a statin is an attractive option for 
high-risk patients who do not attain their target LDL-C 
level on statin monotherapy and have a low HDL-C level. 
SECTION V
Disorders of the Vasculature
376
directed specifically at reducing plasma triglyceride 
levels and raising the level of plasma HDL-C. More data 
are required before broad recommendations are made 
to use drug therapy to specifically raise HDL-C lev-
els to prevent cardiovascular events. New HDL-raising 
approaches are under development that may help to 
address this important issue.
Management of Elevated Levels of Lp(a) 
High levels of Lp(a) are associated with increased risk of 
ASCVD. Genetic studies suggest that this association is 
causal, but there is no evidence that reducing plasma 
Lp(a) levels reduces cardiovascular risk. Until such stud-
ies are performed, the major therapeutic approach to 
patients with high plasma levels of Lp(a) and established 
CAD is to aggressively lower plasma levels of LDL-C. 
Niacin is the only drug currently available that lowers 
Lp(a), and might be considered as an addition to a statin 
in a very-high-risk patient with elevated Lp(a).
plasma levels of HDL-C should be discontinued. The 
presence of an isolated low plasma level of HDL-C in a 
patient with a borderline plasma level of LDL-C should 
prompt consideration of LDL-lowering drug therapy in 
high-risk individuals. Statins increase plasma levels of 
HDL-C only modestly (∼5–10%). Fibrates also have only a 
modest effect on plasma HDL-C levels (increasing levels 
∼5–15%), except in patients with coexisting hypertriglyc-
eridemia, where the effect on HDL levels can be greater. 
Niacin is the most effective HDL-C–raising therapeutic 
agent available and can increase plasma HDL-C by up to 
∼30%, although some patients fail to achieve clinically 
important increases in HDL-C levels from niacin therapy.
The issue of whether pharmacologic intervention 
should be used to specifically raise HDL-C levels has 
not been adequately addressed in clinical trials. In per-
sons with established CHD and low HDL-C levels whose 
plasma LDL-C levels are at or below the goal, it may be 
reasonable to initiate therapy (with a fibrate or niacin) 
 Robert H. Eckel 
377
 The metabolic syndrome (syndrome X, insulin resis-
tance syndrome) consists of a constellation of metabolic 
abnormalities that confer increased risk of cardiovascular 
disease (CVD) and diabetes mellitus (DM). The crite-
ria for the metabolic syndrome have evolved since the 
original defi nition by the World Health Organization in 
1998, refl ecting growing clinical evidence and analysis 
by a variety of consensus conferences and professional 
organizations. The major features of the metabolic syn-
drome include central obesity, hypertriglyceridemia, 
low high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol, hyper-
glycemia, and hypertension  ( Table 32-1 ) . 
 EPIDEMIology 
 The prevalence of metabolic syndrome var-
ies around the world, in part refl ecting the age 
and ethnicity of the populations studied and 
the diagnostic criteria applied. In general, the preva-
lence of metabolic syndrome increases with age. The 
highest recorded prevalence worldwide is in Native 
Americans, with nearly 60% of women ages 45–49 
and 45% of men ages 45–49 meeting National Choles-
terol Education Program and Adult Treatment Panel 
III (NCEP:ATPIII) criteria. In the United States, 
 THE METABOLIC SYNDROME 
 CHAPTER 32 
TABLe 32-1
 NcEP:AtPIII 2001 AND IDF cRItERIA FoR tHE MEtABolIc SyNDRoME 
NcEP:AtPIII 2001
IDF cRItERIA FoR cENtRAl ADIPoSIty a 
three or more of the following: 
Central obesity: Waist circumference >102 cm (M), 
>88 cm (F) 
Hypertriglyceridemia: Triglycerides ≥150 mg/dL or 
specifi c medication 
Low HDL cholesterol: <40 mg/dL and <50 mg/dL, 
respectively, or specifi c medication 
Hypertension: Blood pressure ≥130 mm systolic or 
≥85 mm diastolic or specifi c medication 
Fasting plasma glucose ≥100 mg/dL or specifi c 
medication or previously diagnosed type 2 diabetes
 Waist circumference 
MEN
WoMEN
EtHNIcIty
≥94 cm
≥80 cm
Europid, Sub-Saharan African, Eastern 
and Middle Eastern
≥90 cm
≥80 cm
South Asian, Chinese, and ethnic South 
and Central American
≥85 cm
≥90 cm
Japanese
 two or more of the following: 
Fasting triglycerides >150 mg/dL or specifi c medication 
HDL cholesterol <40 mg/dL and <50 mg/dL for men and women, 
respectively, or specifi c medication 
Blood pressure >130 mm systolic or >85 mm diastolic or previous 
diagnosis or specifi c medication 
Fasting plasma glucose ≥100 mg/dL or previously diagnosed type 2 
diabetes
a In this analysis, the following thresholds for waist circumference were used: white men, ≥94 cm; African-American men, ≥94 cm; Mexican-
American men, ≥90 cm; white women, ≥80 cm; African-American women, ≥80 cm; Mexican-American women, ≥80 cm. For participants 
whose designation was “other race—including multiracial,” thresholds that were once based on Europid cut points (≥94 cm for men and 
≥80 cm for women) and once based on South Asian cut points (≥90 cm for men and ≥80 cm for women) were used. For participants who were 
considered “other Hispanic,” the IDF thresholds for ethnic South and Central Americans were used.
 Abbreviations: HDL, high-density lipoprotein; IDF, International Diabetes Foundation; NCEP:ATPIII, National Cholesterol Education Program, 
Adult Treatment Panel III.
SECTION V
378
Disorders of the Vasculature
normal weight may also be insulin-resistant and have 
the syndrome.
Sedentary lifestyle
Physical inactivity is a predictor of CVD events and 
related mortality rate. Many components of the meta-
bolic syndrome are associated with a sedentary lifestyle, 
including increased adipose tissue (predominantly central), 
reduced HDL cholesterol, and a trend toward increased 
triglycerides, high blood pressure, and increased glucose 
in the genetically susceptible. Compared with individuals 
who watched television or videos or used the computer 
<1 h daily, those who carried out those behaviors for 
>4 h daily had a twofold increased risk of the metabolic 
syndrome.
Aging
The metabolic syndrome affects 44% of the U.S. pop-
ulation older than age 50. A greater percentage of 
women over age 50 have the syndrome than men. The 
age dependency of the syndrome’s prevalence is seen in 
most populations around the world.
Diabetes mellitus
DM is included in both the NCEP and International 
Diabetes Foundation (IDF) definitions of the meta-
bolic syndrome. It is estimated that the great majority 
(∼75%) of patients with type 2 diabetes or impaired 
glucose tolerance (IGT) have the metabolic syndrome. 
The presence of the metabolic syndrome in these popu-
lations relates to a higher prevalence of CVD compared 
with patients with type 2 diabetes or IGT without the 
syndrome.
Coronary heart disease
The approximate prevalence of the metabolic syn-
drome in patients with coronary heart disease (CHD) 
is 50%, with a prevalence of 37% in patients with pre-
mature coronary artery disease (≤age 45), particularly 
in women. With appropriate cardiac rehabilitation and 
changes in lifestyle (e.g., nutrition, physical activity, 
weight reduction, and, in some cases, pharmacologic 
agents), the prevalence of the syndrome can be reduced.
Lipodystrophy
Lipodystrophic disorders in general are associated with 
the metabolic syndrome. Both genetic (e.g., Berardinelli- 
Seip congenital lipodystrophy, Dunnigan familial partial 
lipodystrophy) and acquired (e.g., HIV-related lipodys-
trophy in patients treated with highly active antiretro-
viral therapy) forms of lipodystrophy may give rise to 
Men
Women
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Waist circ
TG150
HDL chol
BP
Glucose
Population prevalence (%)
Figure 32-1
Prevalence of the metabolic syndrome components, from 
NHANES III. NHANES, National Health and Nutrition Exami-
nation Survey; TG, triglyceride; HDL, high-density lipopro-
tein; BP, blood pressure. The prevalence of elevated glucose 
includes individuals with known diabetes mellitus. (Created 
from data in ES Ford et al: Diabetes Care 27:2444, 2004.)
metabolic syndrome is less common in African-Amer-
ican men and more common in Mexican-American 
women. Based on data from the National Health and 
Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) 1999–2000, 
the age-adjusted prevalence of the metabolic syndrome 
in U.S. adults who did not have diabetes is 28% for 
men and 30% for women. In France, a cohort 30 to 
60 years old has shown a <10% prevalence for each sex, 
although 17.5% are affected in the age range 60–64. 
Greater industrialization worldwide is associated with 
rising rates of obesity, which is anticipated to increase 
prevalence of the metabolic syndrome dramatically, 
especially as the population ages. Moreover, the rising 
prevalence and severity of obesity in children is initi-
ating features of the metabolic syndrome in a younger 
population.
The frequency distribution of the five components of 
the syndrome for the U.S. population (NHANES III) is 
summarized in Fig. 32-1. Increases in waist circumfer-
ence predominate in women, whereas fasting triglycerides 
>150 mg/dL and hypertension are more likely in men.
Risk Factors
Overweight/obesity
Although the first description of the metabolic syn-
drome occurred in the early twentieth century, the 
worldwide overweight/obesity epidemic has been 
the driving force for more recent recognition of the 
syndrome. Central adiposity is a key feature of the syn-
drome, reflecting the fact that the syndrome’s preva-
lence is driven by the strong relationship between waist 
circumference and increasing adiposity. However, 
despite the importance of obesity, patients who are 
 
CHAPTER 32
The Metabolic Syndrome
379
severe insulin resistance and many of the components of 
the metabolic syndrome.
Etiology
Insulin resistance
The most accepted and unifying hypothesis to describe 
the pathophysiology of the metabolic syndrome is 
insulin resistance, which is caused by an incompletely 
understood defect in insulin action. The onset of insulin 
resistance is heralded by postprandial hyperinsulinemia, 
followed by fasting hyperinsulinemia and, ultimately, 
hyperglycemia.
An early major contributor to the development of 
insulin resistance is an overabundance of circulating 
fatty acids (Fig. 32-2). Plasma albumin-bound free fatty 
acids (FFAs) are derived predominantly from adipose 
tissue triglyceride stores released by lipolytic enzymes 
lipase. Fatty acids are also derived from the lipolysis of 
triglyceride-rich lipoproteins in tissues by lipoprotein 
lipase (LPL). Insulin mediates both antilipolysis and the 
stimulation of LPL in adipose tissue. Of note, the inhi-
bition of lipolysis in adipose tissue is the most sensitive 
pathway of insulin action. Thus, when insulin resistance 
develops, increased lipolysis produces more fatty acids, 
which further decrease the antilipolytic effect of insulin. 
Excessive fatty acids enhance substrate availability and 
create insulin resistance by modifying downstream sig-
naling. Fatty acids impair insulin-mediated glucose 
uptake and accumulate as triglycerides in both skeletal 
and cardiac muscle, whereas increased glucose produc-
tion and triglyceride accumulation are seen in the liver.
The oxidative stress hypothesis provides a unifying 
theory for aging and the predisposition to the metabolic 
SNS
IL-6
Insulin
Insulin
FFA
Hypertension
TG
VLDL
FFA
Fibrinogen
PAI-1
Prothrombotic
state
Adiponectin
Glycogen
Triglyceride
(intramuscular droplet)
FFA
Glucose
TNF-α
IL-6
Small dense LDL
HDL cholesterol
−
−
−
−
−
−
C-III
B-100 and
C-II
CRP
CO2
Figure 32-2
Pathophysiology of the metabolic syndrome. Free fatty 
acids (FFAs) are released in abundance from an expanded 
adipose tissue mass. In the liver, FFAs result in an increased 
production of glucose and triglycerides and secretion of very 
low-density lipoproteins (VLDLs). Associated lipid/lipoprotein 
abnormalities include reductions in high-density lipoprotein 
(HDL) cholesterol and an increased density of low-density 
lipoproteins (LDLs). FFAs also reduce insulin sensitivity in 
muscle by inhibiting insulin-mediated glucose uptake. Asso-
ciated defects include a reduction in glucose partitioning to 
glycogen and increased lipid accumulation in triglyceride 
(TG). Increases in circulating glucose, and to some extent 
FFA, increase pancreatic insulin secretion, resulting in hyper-
insulinemia. Hyperinsulinemia may result in enhanced sodium 
reabsorption and increased sympathetic nervous system 
(SNS) activity and contribute to the hypertension, as might 
increased levels of circulating FFAs. The proinflammatory 
state is superimposed and contributory to the insulin resis-
tance produced by excessive FFAs. The enhanced secretion 
of interleukin 6 (IL-6) and tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α) pro-
duced by adipocytes and monocyte-derived macrophages 
results in more insulin resistance and lipolysis of adipose 
tissue triglyceride stores to circulating FFAs. IL-6 and other 
cytokines also enhance hepatic glucose production, VLDL 
production by the liver, and insulin resistance in muscle. 
Cytokines and FFAs also increase the hepatic production of 
fibrinogen and adipocyte production of plasminogen activator 
inhibitor 1 (PAI-1), resulting in a prothrombotic state. Higher 
levels of circulating cytokines also stimulate the hepatic 
production of C-reactive protein (CRP). Reduced produc-
tion of the anti-inflammatory and insulin-sensitizing cytokine 
adiponectin is also associated with the metabolic syndrome. 
(Reprinted from RH Eckel et al: Lancet 365:1415, 2005, with 
permission from Elsevier.)
SECTION V
380
Disorders of the Vasculature
syndrome. In studies carried out in insulin-resistant sub-
jects with obesity or type 2 diabetes, the offspring of 
patients with type 2 diabetes, and the elderly, a defect 
has been identified in mitochondrial oxidative phos-
phorylation, leading to the accumulation of triglycerides 
and related lipid molecules in muscle. The accumulation 
of lipids in muscle is associated with insulin resistance.
Increased waist circumference
Waist circumference is an important component of 
the most recent and frequently applied diagnostic cri-
teria for the metabolic syndrome. However, measur-
ing waist circumference does not reliably distinguish 
increases in subcutaneous adipose tissue vs. visceral fat; 
this distinction requires CT or MRI. With increases in 
visceral adipose tissue, adipose tissue-derived FFAs are 
directed to the liver. In contrast, increases in abdomi-
nal subcutaneous fat release lipolysis products into the 
systemic circulation and avoid more direct effects on 
hepatic metabolism. Relative increases in visceral versus 
subcutaneous adipose tissue with increasing waist cir-
cumference in Asians and Asian Indians may explain the 
greater prevalence of the syndrome in those populations 
compared with African-American men in whom subcu-
taneous fat predominates. It is also possible that visceral 
fat is a marker for, but not the source of, excess post-
prandial FFAs in obesity.
Dyslipidemia
(See also Chap. 31) In general, FFA flux to the liver is 
associated with increased production of apoB-containing, 
triglyceride-rich very low-density lipoproteins (VLDLs). 
The effect of insulin on this process is complex, but 
hypertriglyceridemia is an excellent marker of the insulin-
resistant condition.
The other major lipoprotein disturbance in the meta-
bolic syndrome is a reduction in HDL cholesterol. This 
reduction is a consequence of changes in HDL compo-
sition and metabolism. In the presence of hypertriglyc-
eridemia, a decrease in the cholesterol content of HDL 
is a consequence of reduced cholesteryl ester content 
of the lipoprotein core in combination with cholesteryl 
ester transfer protein–mediated alterations in triglycer-
ide, making the particle small and dense. This change in 
lipoprotein composition also results in increased clear-
ance of HDL from the circulation. The relationships of 
these changes in HDL to insulin resistance are proba-
bly indirect, occurring in concert with the changes in 
triglyceride-rich lipoprotein metabolism.
In addition to HDL, low-density lipoproteins (LDLs) 
are modified in composition. With fasting serum tri-
glycerides >2.0 mM (∼180 mg/dL), there is almost 
always a predominance of small dense LDLs. Small 
dense LDLs are thought to be more atherogenic. They 
may be toxic to the endothelium, and they are able to 
transit through the endothelial basement membrane and 
adhere to glycosaminoglycans. They also have increased 
susceptibility to oxidation and are selectively bound to 
scavenger receptors on monocyte-derived macrophages. 
Subjects with increased small dense LDL particles and 
hypertriglyceridemia also have increased cholesterol 
content of both VLDL1 and VLDL2 subfractions. This 
relatively cholesterol-rich VLDL particle may contrib-
ute to the atherogenic risk in patients with metabolic 
syndrome.
Glucose intolerance
The defects in insulin action lead to impaired suppres-
sion of glucose production by the liver and kidney and 
reduced glucose uptake and metabolism in insulin-sensitive 
tissues, i.e., muscle and adipose tissue. The relationship 
between impaired fasting glucose (IFG) or impaired 
glucose tolerance (IGT) and insulin resistance is well 
supported by human, nonhuman primate, and rodent 
studies. To compensate for defects in insulin action, 
insulin secretion and/or clearance must be modified 
to sustain euglycemia. Ultimately, this compensatory 
mechanism fails, usually because of defects in insulin 
secretion, resulting in progress from IFG and/or IGT 
to DM.
Hypertension
The relationship between insulin resistance and hyper-
tension is well established. Paradoxically, under normal 
physiologic conditions, insulin is a vasodilator with sec-
ondary effects on sodium reabsorption in the kidney. 
However, in the setting of insulin resistance, the vaso-
dilatory effect of insulin is lost but the renal effect on 
sodium reabsorption is preserved. Sodium reabsorption 
is increased in whites with the metabolic syndrome but 
not in Africans or Asians. Insulin also increases the activ-
ity of the sympathetic nervous system, an effect that also 
may be preserved in the setting of the insulin resistance. 
Finally, insulin resistance is characterized by pathway-
specific impairment in phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase sig-
naling. In the endothelium, this may cause an imbalance 
between the production of nitric oxide and the secre-
tion of endothelin 1, leading to decreased blood flow. 
Although these mechanisms are provocative, when insu-
lin action is assessed by levels of fasting insulin or by the 
Homeostasis Model Assessment (HOMA), insulin resis-
tance contributes only modestly to the increased preva-
lence of hypertension in the metabolic syndrome.
Proinflammatory cytokines
The increases in proinflammatory cytokines, including 
interleukin (IL)-1, IL-6, IL-18, resistin, tumor necrosis 
 
CHAPTER 32
The Metabolic Syndrome
381
factor (TNF) α, and C-reactive protein (CRP), reflect 
overproduction by the expanded adipose tissue mass 
(Fig. 32-2). Adipose tissue-derived macrophages may be 
the primary source of proinflammatory cytokines locally 
and in the systemic circulation. It remains unclear, 
however, how much of the insulin resistance is caused 
by the paracrine vs. endocrine effects of these cytokines.
Adiponectin
Adiponectin is an anti-inflammatory cytokine produced 
exclusively by adipocytes. Adiponectin enhances insulin 
sensitivity and inhibits many steps in the inflammatory 
process. In the liver, adiponectin inhibits the expres-
sion of gluconeogenic enzymes and the rate of glucose 
production. In muscle, adiponectin increases glucose 
transport and enhances fatty acid oxidation, partially 
due to activation of adenosine monophosphate (AMP) 
kinase. Adiponectin is reduced in the metabolic syn-
drome. The relative contribution of adiponectin defi-
ciency versus overabundance of the proinflammatory 
cytokines is unclear.
Clinical features
Symptoms and signs
The metabolic syndrome is typically not associated with 
symptoms. On physical examination, waist circumfer-
ence may be expanded and blood pressure elevated. 
The presence of one or either of these signs should alert 
the clinician to search for other biochemical abnor-
malities that may be associated with the metabolic 
syndrome. Less frequently, lipoatrophy or acanthosis 
nigricans is found on examination. Because these physi-
cal findings typically are associated with severe insulin 
resistance, other components of the metabolic syndrome 
should be expected.
Associated diseases
Cardiovascular disease
The relative risk for new-onset CVD in patients with 
the metabolic syndrome, in the absence of diabetes, 
averages between 1.5-fold and threefold. However, in 
an 8-year follow-up of middle-aged men and women 
in the Framingham Offspring Study (FOS), the popu-
lation-attributable risk for patients with the metabolic 
syndrome to develop CVD was 34% in men and only 
16% in women. In the same study, both the metabolic 
syndrome and diabetes predicted ischemic stroke, with 
greater risk for patients with the metabolic syndrome 
than for those with diabetes alone (19% vs 7%), par-
ticularly in women (27% vs 5%). Patients with meta-
bolic syndrome are also at increased risk for peripheral 
vascular disease.
Type 2 diabetes
Overall, the risk for type 2 diabetes in patients with the 
metabolic syndrome is increased three- to fivefold. In 
the FOS’s 8-year follow-up of middle-aged men and 
women, the population-attributable risk for developing 
type 2 diabetes was 62% in men and 47% in women.
Other associated conditions
In addition to the features specifically associated with 
metabolic syndrome, insulin resistance is accompanied 
by other metabolic alterations. Those alterations include 
increases in apoB and apoC-III, uric acid, prothrom-
botic factors (fibrinogen, plasminogen activator inhibi-
tor 1), serum viscosity, asymmetric dimethylarginine, 
homocysteine, white blood cell count, proinflammatory 
cytokines, CRP, microalbuminuria, nonalcoholic fatty 
liver disease (NAFLD) and/or nonalcoholic steatohep-
atitis (NASH), polycystic ovarian disease (PCOS), and 
obstructive sleep apnea (OSA).
Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease
Fatty liver is relatively common. However, in NASH, 
both triglyceride accumulation and inflammation coexist. 
NASH is now present in 2–3% of the population in the 
United States and other Western countries. As the prev-
alence of overweight/obesity and the metabolic syn-
drome increases, NASH may become one of the more 
common causes of end-stage liver disease and hepato-
cellular carcinoma.
Hyperuricemia
Hyperuricemia reflects defects in insulin action on the 
renal tubular reabsorption of uric acid, whereas the 
increase in asymmetric dimethylarginine, an endogenous 
inhibitor of nitric oxide synthase, relates to endothe-
lial dysfunction. Microalbuminuria also may be caused 
by altered endothelial pathophysiology in the insulin- 
resistant state.
Polycystic ovary syndrome
PCOS is highly associated with the metabolic syn-
drome, with a prevalence between 40% and 50%. 
Women with PCOS are two to four times more likely 
to have the metabolic syndrome than are women with-
out PCOS.
Obstructive sleep apnea
OSA is commonly associated with obesity, hyperten-
sion, increased circulating cytokines, IGT, and insulin 
resistance. With these associations, it is not surprising 
that the metabolic syndrome is frequently present. 
Moreover, when biomarkers of insulin resistance are 
compared between patients with OSA and weight-
matched controls, insulin resistance is more severe in 
patients with OSA. Continuous positive airway pres-
sure (CPAP) treatment in OSA patients improves insulin 
sensitivity.
SECTION V
382
Disorders of the Vasculature
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of the metabolic syndrome relies on sat-
isfying the criteria listed in Table 32-1 by using tools 
at the bedside and in the laboratory. The medical his-
tory should include evaluation of symptoms for OSA 
in all patients and PCOS in premenopausal women. 
Family history will help determine risk for CVD and 
DM. Blood pressure and waist circumference measure-
ments provide information necessary for the diagnosis.
Laboratory tests
Fasting lipids and glucose are needed to determine if 
the metabolic syndrome is present. The measurement of 
additional biomarkers associated with insulin resistance 
can be individualized. Such tests might include apoB, 
high-sensitivity CRP, fibrinogen, uric acid, urinary 
microalbumin, and liver function tests. A sleep study 
should be performed if symptoms of OSA are present. 
If PCOS is suspected on the basis of clinical features 
and anovulation, testosterone, luteinizing hormone, and 
follicle-stimulating hormone should be measured.
treatment	
The Metabolic Syndrome
Lifestyle  Obesity is the driving force behind the 
metabolic syndrome. Thus, weight reduction is the pri-
mary approach to the disorder. With weight reduction, 
the improvement in insulin sensitivity is often accompa-
nied by favorable modifications in many components of 
the metabolic syndrome. In general, recommendations 
for weight loss include a combination of caloric restric-
tion, increased physical activity, and behavior modifica-
tion. For weight reduction, caloric restriction is the most 
important component, whereas increases in physical 
activity are important for maintenance of weight loss. 
Some, but not all, evidence suggests that the addition 
of exercise to caloric restriction may promote relatively 
greater weight loss from the visceral depot. The ten-
dency for weight regain after successful weight reduc-
tion underscores the need for long-lasting behavioral 
changes.
Diet  Before prescribing a weight-loss diet, it is impor-
tant to emphasize that it takes a long time for a patient 
to achieve an expanded fat mass; thus, the correction 
need not occur quickly. On the basis of ∼3500 kcal = 
1 lb of fat, ∼500 kcal restriction daily equates to weight 
reduction of 1 lb per week. Diets restricted in carbohy-
drate typically provide a rapid initial weight loss. How-
ever, after 1 year, the amount of weight reduction is 
usually unchanged. Thus, adherence to the diet is more 
important than which diet is chosen. Moreover, there 
is concern about diets enriched in saturated fat, par-
ticularly for patients at risk for CVD. Therefore, a high-
quality diet—i.e., enriched in fruits, vegetables, whole 
grains, lean poultry, and fish—should be encouraged to  
provide the maximum overall health benefit.
Physical Activity  Before a physical activity rec-
ommendation is provided to patients with the meta-
bolic syndrome, it is important to ensure that the 
increased activity does not incur risk. Some high-risk 
patients should undergo formal cardiovascular evalua-
tion before initiating an exercise program. For an inac-
tive participant, gradual increases in physical activity 
should be encouraged to enhance adherence and avoid 
injury. Although increases in physical activity can lead 
to modest weight reduction, 60–90 min of daily activ-
ity is required to achieve this goal. Even if an overweight 
or obese adult is unable to achieve this level of activ-
ity, he or she will still derive a significant health benefit 
from at least 30 min of moderate-intensity daily activ-
ity. The caloric value of 30 min of a variety of activities 
can be found at http://www.americanheart.org/presenter
.jhtml?identifier=3040364. Of note, a variety of routine 
activities, such as gardening, walking, and houseclean-
ing, require moderate caloric expenditure. Thus, physi-
cal activity need not be defined solely in terms of formal 
exercise such as jogging, swimming, or tennis.
Obesity  In some patients with the metabolic syn-
drome, treatment options need to extend beyond life-
style intervention. Weight-loss drugs come in two major 
classes: appetite suppressants and absorption inhibitors. 
Appetite suppressants approved by the U.S. Food and 
Drug Administration include phentermine (for short-term 
use only, 3 months) and sibutramine. Orlistat inhibits fat 
absorption by ∼30% and is moderately effective com-
pared to placebo (∼5% weight loss). Orlistat has been 
shown to reduce the incidence of type 2 diabetes, an 
effect that was especially evident in patients with base-
line IGT.
Bariatric surgery is an option for patients with the 
metabolic syndrome who have a body mass index (BMI) 
>40 kg/m2 or >35 kg/m2 with comorbidities. Gastric 
bypass results in a dramatic weight reduction and 
improvement in the features of metabolic syndrome.  
A survival benefit has also been realized.
LDL Cholesterol  (See also Chap. 31) The 
rationale for the NCEP:ATPIII panel to develop crite-
ria for the metabolic syndrome was to go beyond LDL 
cholesterol in identifying and reducing risk for CVD.  
The working assumption by the panel was that LDL  
cholesterol goals had already been achieved, and 
increasing evidence supports a linear reduction in CVD 
events with progressive lowering of LDL cholesterol. For 
patients with the metabolic syndrome and diabetes, 
 
CHAPTER 32
The Metabolic Syndrome
383
LDL cholesterol should be reduced to <100 mg/dL and 
perhaps further in patients with a history of CVD events. 
For patients with the metabolic syndrome without dia-
betes, the Framingham risk score may predict a 10-year 
CVD risk that exceeds 20%. In these subjects, LDL cho-
lesterol should also be reduced to <100 mg/dL. With a 
10-year risk of <20%, however, the targeted LDL choles-
terol goal is <130 mg/dL.
Diets restricted in saturated fats (<7% of calories), 
trans-fats (as few as possible), and cholesterol (<200 mg 
daily) should be applied aggressively. If LDL choles-
terol remains above goal, pharmacologic intervention 
is needed. Statins (HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors), 
which produce a 20–60% lowering of LDL cholesterol, 
are generally the first choice for medication interven-
tion. Of note, for each doubling of the statin dose, there 
is only ∼6% additional lowering of LDL cholesterol. Side 
effects are rare and include an increase in hepatic trans-
aminases and/or myopathy. The cholesterol absorption 
inhibitor ezetimibe is well tolerated and should be the 
second choice. Ezetimibe typically reduces LDL choles-
terol by 15–20%. The bile acid sequestrants cholestyr-
amine and colestipol are more effective than ezetimibe 
but must be used with caution in patients with the met-
abolic syndrome because they can increase triglycer-
ides. In general, bile sequestrants should not be admin-
istered when fasting triglycerides are >200 mg/dL. Side 
effects include gastrointestinal symptoms (palatability, 
bloating, belching, constipation, anal irritation). Nico-
tinic acid has modest LDL cholesterol–lowering capa-
bilities (<20%). Fibrates are best employed to lower LDL 
cholesterol when both LDL cholesterol and triglycerides 
are elevated. Fenofibrate may be more effective than 
gemfibrozil in this group.
Triglycerides  The NCEP:ATPIII has focused on 
non-HDL cholesterol rather than triglycerides. However, 
a fasting triglyceride value of <150 mg/dL is recom-
mended. In general, the response of fasting triglycerides 
relates to the amount of weight reduction achieved. A 
weight reduction of >10% is necessary to lower fasting 
triglycerides.
A fibrate (gemfibrozil or fenofibrate) is the drug 
of choice to lower fasting triglycerides and typically 
achieve a 35–50% reduction. Concomitant administra-
tion with drugs metabolized by the 3A4 cytochrome 
P450 system (including some statins) greatly increases 
the risk of myopathy. In these cases, fenofibrate may be 
preferable to gemfibrozil. In the Veterans Affairs HDL 
Intervention Trial (VA-HIT), gemfibrozil was adminis-
tered to men with known CHD and levels of HDL choles-
terol <40 mg/dL. A coronary disease event and mortal-
ity rate benefit was experienced predominantly in men 
with hyperinsulinemia and/or diabetes, many of whom 
retrospectively were identified as having the metabolic 
syndrome. Of note, the amount of triglyceride lowering 
in the VA-HIT did not predict benefit. Although levels of 
LDL cholesterol did not change, a decrease in LDL par-
ticle number correlated with benefit. Although several 
additional clinical trials have been performed, they have 
not shown clear evidence that fibrates reduce CVD risk 
as a consequence of triglyceride lowering.
Other drugs that lower triglycerides include statins, 
nicotinic acid, and high doses of omega 3 fatty acids. In 
choosing a statin for this purpose, the dose must be high 
for the “less potent” statins (lovastatin, pravastatin, fluva-
statin) or intermediate for the “more potent” statins (simva-
statin, atorvastatin, rosuvastatin). The effect of nicotinic 
acid on fasting triglycerides is dose-related and less than 
that of fibrates (∼20–40%). In patients with the metabolic 
syndrome and diabetes, nicotinic acid may increase fast-
ing glucose. Omega 3 fatty acid preparations that include 
high doses of docosahexaenoic acid and eicosapentae-
noic acid (∼3.0–4.5 g daily) lower fasting triglycerides by 
∼40%. No interactions with fibrates or statins occur, and 
the main side effect is eructation with a fishy taste. This 
can be partially blocked by ingestion of the nutraceuti-
cal after freezing. Clinical trials of nicotinic acid or high-
dose omega 3 fatty acids in patients with the metabolic  
syndrome have not been reported.
HDL Cholesterol  Beyond weight reduction, 
there are very few lipid-modifying compounds that 
increase HDL cholesterol. Statins, fibrates, and bile acid 
sequestrants have modest effects (5–10%), and there is 
no effect on HDL cholesterol with ezetimibe or omega 3 
fatty acids. Nicotinic acid is the only currently available 
drug with predictable HDL cholesterol-raising proper-
ties. The response is dose-related and can increase HDL 
cholesterol ∼30% above baseline. There is limited evi-
dence at present that raising HDL has a benefit on CVD 
events independent of lowering LDL cholesterol, partic-
ularly in patients with the metabolic syndrome.
Blood 
Pressure  (See also Chap. 37) The 
direct relationship between blood pressure and all-
cause mortality rate has been well established, includ-
ing patients with hypertension (>140/90) versus pre-
hypertension (>120/80 but <140/90) versus individuals 
with normal blood pressure (<120/80). In patients with 
the metabolic syndrome without diabetes, the best 
choice for the first antihypertensive should usually be 
an angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor or 
an angiotensin II receptor blocker, as these two classes 
of drugs appear to reduce the incidence of new-onset 
type 2 diabetes. In all patients with hypertension, a 
sodium-restricted diet enriched in fruits and vegetables 
and low-fat dairy products should be advocated. Home 
monitoring of blood pressure may assist in maintaining 
good blood pressure control.
SECTION V
384
Disorders of the Vasculature
Impaired Fasting Glucose  In patients with 
the metabolic syndrome and type 2 diabetes, aggres-
sive glycemic control may favorably modify fasting tri-
glycerides and/or HDL cholesterol. In patients with IFG 
without a diagnosis of diabetes, a lifestyle intervention 
that includes weight reduction, dietary fat restriction, 
and increased physical activity has been shown to 
reduce the incidence of type 2 diabetes. Metformin has 
also been shown to reduce the incidence of diabetes, 
although the effect was less than that seen with life-
style intervention.
Insulin Resistance  Several drug classes (bigua-
nides, thiazolidinediones [TZDs]) increase insulin sensitivity. 
Because insulin resistance is the primary pathophysiologic 
mechanism for the metabolic syndrome, representative 
drugs in these classes reduce its prevalence. Both met-
formin and TZDs enhance insulin action in the liver and 
suppress endogenous glucose production. TZDs, but 
not metformin, also improve insulin-mediated glucose 
uptake in muscle and adipose tissue. Benefits of both 
drugs have also been seen in patients with NAFLD and 
PCOS, and the drugs have been shown to reduce markers 
of inflammation and small dense LDL.
 Elliott M. Antman 
I  Andrew P. Selwyn 
I  Joseph Loscalzo 
385
 Ischemic heart disease (IHD) is a condition in which there 
is an inadequate supply of blood and oxygen to a por-
tion of the myocardium; it typically occurs when there 
is an imbalance between myocardial oxygen supply and 
demand. The most common cause of myocardial isch-
emia is atherosclerotic disease of an epicardial coronary 
artery (or arteries) suffi cient to cause a regional reduc-
tion in myocardial blood fl ow and inadequate perfusion 
of the myocardium supplied by the involved coronary 
artery.  Chapter 30 deals with the development and 
treatment of atherosclerosis. This chapter focuses on the 
chronic manifestations and treatment of ischemic heart 
disease. The following chapters address the acute phases 
of this disease. 
 EpIDEmIology 
IHD causes more deaths and disability and 
incurs greater economic costs than any other ill-
ness in the developed world. IHD is the most 
common, serious, chronic, life-threatening illness in 
the United States, where 13 million persons have IHD, 
>6 million have angina pectoris, and >7 million have 
sustained a myocardial infarction. Genetic factors, a 
high-fat and energy-rich diet, smoking, and a seden-
tary lifestyle are associated with the emergence of IHD 
(Chap. 30). In the United States and Western Europe, 
it is growing among low-income groups, but primary 
prevention has delayed the disease to later in life in all 
socioeconomic groups. Despite these sobering statis-
tics, it is worth noting that epidemiologic data show a 
decline in the rate of deaths due to IHD, about half of 
which is attributable to treatments and half to preven-
tion by risk factor modifi cation.
 Obesity, insulin resistance, and type 2 diabetes mel-
litus are increasing and are powerful risk factors for 
IHD. With urbanization in countries with emerging 
economies and a growing middle class, elements of the 
energy-rich Western diet are being adopted. As a result, 
the prevalence of risk factors for and of IHD itself 
are both increasing rapidly in those regions such that 
a majority of the global burden of IHD occurs there. 
Population subgroups that appear to be particularly 
affected are men in South Asian countries, especially 
India and the Middle East. In light of the projection 
of large increases in IHD throughout the world, IHD 
is likely to become the most common cause of death 
worldwide by 2020. 
 pathophysIology 
 Central to an understanding of the pathophysiology of 
myocardial ischemia is the concept of myocardial supply 
and demand. In normal conditions, for any given level 
of a demand for oxygen, the myocardium will control 
the supply of oxygen-rich blood to prevent underper-
fusion of myocytes and the subsequent development of 
ischemia and infarction. The major determinants of myo-
cardial oxygen demand (MVO 2 ) are heart rate, myocar-
dial contractility, and myocardial wall tension (stress). An 
adequate supply of oxygen to the myocardium requires a 
satisfactory level of oxygen-carrying capacity of the blood 
(determined by the inspired level of oxygen, pulmonary 
function, and hemoglobin concentration and function) 
and an adequate level of coronary blood fl ow. Blood 
fl ows through the coronary arteries in a phasic fashion, 
with the majority occurring during diastole. About 75% 
of the total coronary resistance to fl ow occurs across three 
sets of arteries: (1) large epicardial arteries (Resistance 1 =
R 1 ), (2) prearteriolar vessels (R 2 ), and (3) arteriolar and 
intramyocardial capillary vessels (R 3 ). In the absence of 
signifi cant fl ow-limiting atherosclerotic obstructions, R 1
is trivial; the major determinant of coronary resistance is 
found in R 2 and R 3 . 
 The normal coronary circulation is dominated and 
controlled by the heart’s requirements for oxygen. This 
 ISCHEMIC HEART DISEASE 
 ChaPter 33 
386
SECTION V
Disorders of the Vasculature
need is met by the ability of the coronary vascular bed 
to vary its resistance (and, therefore, blood flow) con-
siderably while the myocardium extracts a high and 
relatively fixed percentage of oxygen. Normally, intra-
myocardial resistance vessels demonstrate an immense 
capacity for dilation (R2 and R3 decrease). For example, 
the changing oxygen needs of the heart with exercise 
and emotional stress affect coronary vascular resistance 
and in this manner regulate the supply of oxygen and 
substrate to the myocardium (metabolic regulation). The 
coronary resistance vessels also adapt to physiologic 
alterations in blood pressure to maintain coronary 
blood flow at levels appropriate to myocardial needs 
(autoregulation).
By reducing the lumen of the coronary arteries, ath-
erosclerosis limits appropriate increases in perfusion 
when the demand for flow is augmented, as occurs dur-
ing exertion or excitement. When the luminal reduc-
tion is severe, myocardial perfusion in the basal state 
is reduced. Coronary blood flow also can be limited 
by spasm (see Prinzmetal’s angina in Chap. 34), arte-
rial thrombi, and, rarely, coronary emboli as well as by 
ostial narrowing due to aortitis. Congenital abnormal-
ities such as the origin of the left anterior descending 
coronary artery from the pulmonary artery may cause 
myocardial ischemia and infarction in infancy, but this 
cause is very rare in adults.
Myocardial ischemia also can occur if myocardial 
oxygen demands are markedly increased and particularly 
when coronary blood flow may be limited, as occurs in 
severe left ventricular hypertrophy due to aortic steno-
sis. The latter can present with angina that is indistin-
guishable from that caused by coronary atherosclerosis 
largely owing to subendocardial ischemia (Chap. 20). 
A reduction in the oxygen-carrying capacity of the 
blood, as in extremely severe anemia or in the presence 
of carboxyhemoglobin, rarely causes myocardial isch-
emia by itself but may lower the threshold for ischemia 
in patients with moderate coronary obstruction.
Not infrequently, two or more causes of ischemia 
coexist in a patient, such as an increase in oxygen 
demand due to left ventricular hypertrophy secondary 
to hypertension and a reduction in oxygen supply sec-
ondary to coronary atherosclerosis and anemia. Abnor-
mal constriction or failure of normal dilation of the 
coronary resistance vessels also can cause ischemia. 
When it causes angina, this condition is referred to as 
microvascular angina.
Coronary Atherosclerosis
Epicardial coronary arteries are the major site of ath-
erosclerotic disease. The major risk factors for athero-
sclerosis (high levels of plasma low-density lipoprotein 
[LDL], low plasma high-density lipoprotein [HDL], 
cigarette smoking, hypertension, and diabetes mellitus 
[Chap. 30]) disturb the normal functions of the vascu-
lar endothelium. These functions include local control 
of vascular tone, maintenance of an antithrombotic sur-
face, and control of inflammatory cell adhesion and dia-
pedesis. The loss of these defenses leads to inappropriate 
constriction, luminal thrombus formation, and abnormal 
interactions between blood cells, especially monocytes 
and platelets, and the activated vascular endothelium. 
Functional changes in the vascular milieu ultimately 
result in the subintimal collections of fat, smooth-muscle 
cells, fibroblasts, and intercellular matrix that define the 
atherosclerotic plaque. This process develops at irregu-
lar rates in different segments of the epicardial coronary 
tree and leads eventually to segmental reductions in 
cross-sectional area, i.e., plaque formation.
There is also a predilection for atherosclerotic plaques 
to develop at sites of increased turbulence in coronary 
flow, such as at branch points in the epicardial arter-
ies. When a stenosis reduces the diameter of an epicar-
dial artery by 50%, there is a limitation of the ability to 
increase flow to meet increased myocardial demand. 
When the diameter is reduced by ∼80%, blood flow at 
rest may be reduced, and further minor decreases in the 
stenotic orifice area can reduce coronary flow dramati-
cally to cause myocardial ischemia at rest or with mini-
mal stress.
Segmental atherosclerotic narrowing of epicar-
dial coronary arteries is caused most commonly by the 
formation of a plaque, which is subject to rupture or 
erosion of the cap separating the plaque from the 
bloodstream. Upon exposure of the plaque contents to 
blood, two important and interrelated processes are set 
in motion: (1) platelets are activated and aggregate, and 
(2) the coagulation cascade is activated, leading to depo-
sition of fibrin strands. A thrombus composed of plate-
let aggregates and fibrin strands traps red blood cells and 
can reduce coronary blood flow, leading to the clinical 
manifestations of myocardial ischemia.
The location of the obstruction influences the quan-
tity of myocardium rendered ischemic and determines 
the severity of the clinical manifestations. Thus, critical 
obstructions in vessels, such as the left main coronary 
artery and the proximal left anterior descending coro-
nary artery, are particularly hazardous. Chronic severe 
coronary narrowing and myocardial ischemia frequently 
are accompanied by the development of collateral ves-
sels, especially when the narrowing develops gradually. 
When well developed, such vessels can by themselves 
provide sufficient blood flow to sustain the viability 
of the myocardium at rest but not during conditions of 
increased demand.
With progressive worsening of a stenosis in a proxi-
mal epicardial artery, the distal resistance vessels (when 
 
CHAPTER 33
Ischemic Heart Disease
387
they function normally) dilate to reduce vascular resis-
tance and maintain coronary blood flow. A pressure 
gradient develops across the proximal stenosis, and 
poststenotic pressure falls. When the resistance vessels 
are maximally dilated, myocardial blood flow becomes 
dependent on the pressure in the coronary artery dis-
tal to the obstruction. In these circumstances, ischemia, 
manifest clinically by angina or electrocardiographi-
cally by ST-segment deviation, can be precipitated 
by increases in myocardial oxygen demand caused by 
physical activity, emotional stress, and/or tachycardia. 
Changes in the caliber of the stenosed coronary artery 
due to physiologic vasomotion, loss of endothelial con-
trol of dilation (as occurs in atherosclerosis), patho-
logic spasm (Prinzmetal’s angina), or small platelet-rich 
plugs also can upset the critical balance between oxygen 
supply and demand and thereby precipitate myocardial 
ischemia.
Effects of Ischemia
During episodes of inadequate perfusion caused by 
coronary atherosclerosis, myocardial tissue oxygen ten-
sion falls and may cause transient disturbances of the 
mechanical, biochemical, and electrical functions of the 
myocardium. Coronary atherosclerosis is a focal process 
that usually causes nonuniform ischemia. During isch-
emia, regional disturbances of ventricular contractil-
ity cause segmental hypokinesia, akinesia, or, in severe 
cases, bulging (dyskinesia), which can reduce myocar-
dial pump function.
The abrupt development of severe ischemia, as 
occurs with total or subtotal coronary occlusion, is asso-
ciated with almost instantaneous failure of normal mus-
cle relaxation and then contraction. The relatively poor 
perfusion of the subendocardium causes more intense 
ischemia of this portion of the wall (compared with the 
subepicardial region). Ischemia of large portions of the 
ventricle causes transient left ventricular failure, and if 
the papillary muscle apparatus is involved, mitral regur-
gitation can occur. When ischemia is transient, it may 
be associated with angina pectoris; when it is prolonged, 
it can lead to myocardial necrosis and scarring with or 
without the clinical picture of acute myocardial infarc-
tion (Chap. 35).
A wide range of abnormalities in cell metabolism, 
function, and structure underlie these mechanical dis-
turbances during ischemia. The normal myocardium 
metabolizes fatty acids and glucose to carbon dioxide 
and water. With severe oxygen deprivation, fatty acids 
cannot be oxidized, and glucose is converted to lac-
tate; intracellular pH is reduced, as are the myocardial 
stores of high-energy phosphates, i.e., ATP and cre-
atine phosphate. Impaired cell membrane function leads 
to the leakage of potassium and the uptake of sodium 
by myocytes as well as an increase in cytosolic calcium. 
The severity and duration of the imbalance between 
myocardial oxygen supply and demand determine 
whether the damage is reversible (≤20 min for total 
occlusion in the absence of collaterals) or permanent, 
with subsequent myocardial necrosis (>20 min).
Ischemia also causes characteristic changes in the 
electrocardiogram (ECG) such as repolarization abnor-
malities, as evidenced by inversion of T waves and, 
when more severe, displacement of ST segments 
(Chap.  11). Transient T-wave inversion probably 
reflects nontransmural, intramyocardial ischemia; tran-
sient ST-segment depression often reflects patchy sub-
endocardial ischemia; and ST-segment elevation is 
thought to be caused by more severe transmural isch-
emia. Another important consequence of myocardial 
ischemia is electrical instability, which may lead to 
isolated ventricular premature beats or even ventricular 
tachycardia or ventricular fibrillation (Chap. 16). Most 
patients who die suddenly from IHD do so as a result 
of 
ischemia-induced 
ventricular 
tachyarrhythmias 
(Chap. 29).
Asymptomatic Versus  
Symptomatic IHD
Postmortem studies of accident victims and military 
casualties in Western countries have shown that coro-
nary atherosclerosis often begins to develop before age 
20 and is widespread even among adults who were 
asymptomatic during life. Exercise stress tests in asymp-
tomatic persons may show evidence of silent myo-
cardial ischemia, i.e., exercise-induced ECG changes 
not accompanied by angina pectoris; coronary angio-
graphic studies of such persons may reveal coronary 
artery plaques and previously unrecognized obstructions 
(Chap. 13). Postmortem examination of patients with 
such obstructions without a history of clinical manifes-
tations of myocardial ischemia often shows macroscopic 
scars secondary to myocardial infarction in regions sup-
plied by diseased coronary arteries, with or without 
collateral circulation. According to population studies, 
∼25% of patients who survive acute myocardial infarc-
tion may not come to medical attention, and these 
patients have the same adverse prognosis as do those 
who present with the classic clinical picture of acute 
myocardial infarction (Chap. 35). Sudden death may 
be unheralded and is a common presenting manifesta-
tion of IHD (Chap. 29).
Patients with IHD also can present with cardiomeg-
aly and heart failure secondary to ischemic damage of 
the left ventricular myocardium that may have caused no 
symptoms before the development of heart failure; this 
condition is referred to as ischemic cardiomyopathy. In 
contrast to the asymptomatic phase of IHD, the 
388
SECTION V
Disorders of the Vasculature
symptomatic phase is characterized by chest discom-
fort due to either angina pectoris or acute myocardial 
infarction (Chap. 35). Having entered the symptom-
atic phase, the patient may exhibit a stable or progres-
sive course, revert to the asymptomatic stage, or die 
suddenly.
Stable Angina Pectoris
This episodic clinical syndrome is due to transient 
myocardial ischemia. Various diseases that cause myo-
cardial ischemia as well as the numerous forms of dis-
comfort with which it may be confused are discussed 
in Chap. 4. Males constitute ∼70% of all patients with 
angina pectoris and an even greater proportion of those 
less than 50 years of age. It is, however, important to 
note that angina pectoris in women is often atypical in 
presentation (see later).
History
The typical patient with angina is a man >50 years or 
a woman >60 years of age who complains of episodes 
of chest discomfort, usually described as heaviness, pres-
sure, squeezing, smothering, or choking and only rarely 
as frank pain. When the patient is asked to localize the 
sensation, he or she typically places a hand over the 
sternum, sometimes with a clenched fist, to indicate a 
squeezing, central, substernal discomfort (Levine’s sign). 
Angina is usually crescendo-decrescendo in nature, 
typically lasts 2 to 5 min, and can radiate to either 
shoulder and to both arms (especially the ulnar surfaces 
of the forearm and hand). It also can arise in or radiate 
to the back, interscapular region, root of the neck, jaw, 
teeth, and epigastrium. Angina is rarely localized below 
the umbilicus or above the mandible. A useful finding 
in assessing a patient with chest discomfort is the fact 
that myocardial ischemic discomfort does not radiate to 
the trapezius muscles; that radiation pattern is more typ-
ical of pericarditis.
Although episodes of angina typically are caused by 
exertion (e.g., exercise, hurrying, or sexual activity) or 
emotion (e.g., stress, anger, fright, or frustration) and 
are relieved by rest, they also may occur at rest (see 
“Unstable Angina Pectoris,” [Chap. 34]) and while 
the patient is recumbent (angina decubitus). The patient 
may be awakened at night by typical chest discomfort 
and dyspnea. Nocturnal angina may be due to episodic 
tachycardia, diminished oxygenation as the respiratory 
pattern changes during sleep, or expansion of the intra-
thoracic blood volume that occurs with recumbency; 
the latter causes an increase in cardiac size (end-diastolic 
volume), wall tension, and myocardial oxygen demand 
that can lead to ischemia and transient left ventricular 
failure.
The threshold for the development of angina pecto-
ris may vary by time of day and emotional state. Many 
patients report a fixed threshold for angina, which 
occurs predictably at a certain level of activity, such as 
climbing two flights of stairs at a normal pace. In these 
patients, coronary stenosis and myocardial oxygen sup-
ply are fixed, and ischemia is precipitated by an increase 
in myocardial oxygen demand; they are said to have 
stable exertional angina. In other patients, the threshold 
for angina may vary considerably within any particular 
day and from day to day. In such patients, variations in 
myocardial oxygen supply, most likely due to changes 
in coronary vasomotor tone, may play an important role 
in defining the pattern of angina. A patient may report 
symptoms upon minor exertion in the morning (a short 
walk or shaving) yet by midday be capable of much 
greater effort without symptoms. Angina may also be 
precipitated by unfamiliar tasks, a heavy meal, exposure 
to cold, or a combination of these factors.
Exertional angina typically is relieved in 1 to 5 min 
by slowing or ceasing activities and even more rapidly 
by rest and sublingual nitroglycerin (see later). Indeed, 
the diagnosis of angina should be suspect if it does not 
respond to the combination of these measures. The 
severity of angina can be conveniently summarized by 
the Canadian Cardiac Society functional classification 
(Table 33-1). Its impact on the patient’s functional 
capacity can be described by using the New York Heart 
Association functional classification (Table 33-1).
Sharp, fleeting chest pain or a prolonged, dull ache 
localized to the left submammary area is rarely due to 
myocardial ischemia. However, especially in women 
and diabetic patients, angina pectoris may be atypical 
in location and not strictly related to provoking factors. 
In addition, this symptom may exacerbate and remit 
over days, weeks, or months. Its occurrence can be sea-
sonal, occurring more frequently in the winter in tem-
perate climates. Anginal “equivalents” are symptoms of 
myocardial ischemia other than angina. They include 
dyspnea, nausea, fatigue, and faintness and are more 
common in the elderly and in diabetic patients.
Systematic questioning of a patient with suspected 
IHD is important to uncover the features of an unstable 
syndrome associated with increased risk, such as angina 
occurring with less exertion than in the past, occur-
ring at rest, or awakening the patient from sleep. Since 
coronary atherosclerosis often is accompanied by similar 
lesions in other arteries, a patient with angina should be 
questioned and examined for peripheral arterial disease 
(intermittent claudication [Chap. 39]), stroke, or tran-
sient ischemic attacks. It is also important to uncover 
a family history of premature IHD (<55 years in first-
degree male relatives and <65 in female relatives) and 
the presence of diabetes mellitus, hyperlipidemia, 
hypertension, cigarette smoking, and other risk factors 
for coronary atherosclerosis (Chap. 30).
 
CHAPTER 33
Ischemic Heart Disease
389
The history of typical angina pectoris establishes the 
diagnosis of IHD until proven otherwise. In patients 
with atypical angina (Chap. 4), the coexistence of 
advanced age, male sex, the postmenopausal state, 
and risk factors for atherosclerosis increase the likeli-
hood of hemodynamically significant coronary disease. 
A particularly challenging problem is the evaluation and 
management of patients with persistent ischemic-type 
chest discomfort but no flow-limiting obstructions in 
their epicardial coronary arteries. This situation arises 
more often in women than in men. Potential etiolo-
gies include microvascular coronary disease (detectable 
on coronary reactivity testing in response to vasoactive 
agents such as intracoronary adenosine, acetylcholine, 
and nitroglycerin) and abnormal cardiac nociception. 
Treatment of microvascular coronary disease should 
focus on efforts to improve endothelial function, includ-
ing nitrates, beta blockers, calcium antagonists, statins, 
and angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibi-
tors. Abnormal cardiac nociception is more difficult 
to manage and may be ameliorated in some cases by 
imipramine.
Physical Examination
The physical examination is often normal in patients 
with stable angina when they are asymptomatic. How-
ever, because of the increased likelihood of ischemic 
heart disease in patients with diabetes and/or periph-
eral arterial disease, clinicians should search for evi-
dence of atherosclerotic disease at other sites, such as 
an abdominal aortic aneurysm, carotid arterial bruits, 
and diminished arterial pulses in the lower extremities. 
The physical examination also should include a search 
for evidence of risk factors for atherosclerosis such as 
xanthelasmas and xanthomas (Chap. 30). Evidence for 
peripheral arterial disease should be sought by evaluat-
ing the pulse contour at multiple locations and compar-
ing the blood pressure between the arms and between 
the arms and the legs (ankle-brachial index). Examina-
tion of the fundi may reveal an increased light reflex 
and arteriovenous nicking as evidence of hypertension. 
There also may be signs of anemia, thyroid disease, and 
nicotine stains on the fingertips from cigarette smoking.
Palpation may reveal cardiac enlargement and abnor-
mal contraction of the cardiac impulse (left ventricular 
dyskinesia). Auscultation can uncover arterial bruits, 
a third and/or fourth heart sound, and, if acute isch-
emia or previous infarction has impaired papillary mus-
cle function, an apical systolic murmur due to mitral 
regurgitation. These auscultatory signs are best appreci-
ated with the patient in the left lateral decubitus posi-
tion. Aortic stenosis, aortic regurgitation (Chap. 20), 
pulmonary hypertension (Chap. 40), and hypertro-
phic cardiomyopathy (Chap. 21) must be excluded, 
since these disorders may cause angina in the absence 
Table 33-1
Cardiovascular Disease Classification Chart
Class
New York Heart Association Functional 
Classification
Canadian Cardiovascular Society Functional 
Classification
I
Patients have cardiac disease but without the 
resulting limitations of physical activity. Ordinary 
physical activity does not cause undue fatigue,  
palpitation, dyspnea, or anginal pain.
Ordinary physical activity, such as walking and  
climbing stairs, does not cause angina. Angina 
present with strenuous or rapid or prolonged exertion  
at work or recreation.
II
Patients have cardiac disease resulting in slight 
limitation of physical activity. They are comfortable 
at rest. Ordinary physical activity results in fatigue, 
palpitation, dyspnea, or anginal pain.
Slight limitation of ordinary activity. Walking or climbing 
stairs rapidly, walking uphill, walking or stair climbing 
after meals, in cold, or when under emotional stress 
or only during the few hours after awakening. Walking 
more than two blocks on the level and climbing more 
than one flight of stairs at a normal pace and in normal 
conditions.
III
Patients have cardiac disease resulting in marked 
limitation of physical activity. They are comfortable 
at rest. Less than ordinary physical activity causes 
fatigue, palpitation, dyspnea, or anginal pain.
Marked limitation of ordinary physical activity. Walking 
one to two blocks on the level and climbing more than 
one flight of stairs in normal conditions.
IV
Patients have cardiac disease resulting in inability to 
carry on any physical activity without discomfort. 
Symptoms of cardiac insufficiency or of the anginal 
syndrome may be present even at rest. If any physical 
activity is undertaken, discomfort is increased.
Inability to carry on any physical activity without 
discomfort—anginal syndrome may be present at rest.
Source: Modified from L Goldman et al: Circulation 64:1227, 1981.
390
SECTION V
Disorders of the Vasculature
of coronary atherosclerosis. Examination during an 
anginal attack is useful, since ischemia can cause tran-
sient left ventricular failure with the appearance of a 
third and/or fourth heart sound, a dyskinetic cardiac 
apex, mitral regurgitation, and even pulmonary edema. 
Tenderness of the chest wall, localization of the discom-
fort with a single fingertip on the chest, or reproduc-
tion of the pain with palpation of the chest makes it 
unlikely that the pain is caused by myocardial ischemia. 
A protuberant abdomen may indicate that the patient 
has the metabolic syndrome and is at increased risk for 
atherosclerosis.
Laboratory Examination
Although the diagnosis of IHD can be made with a 
high degree of confidence from the history and physical 
examination, a number of simple laboratory tests can be 
helpful. The urine should be examined for evidence of 
diabetes mellitus and renal disease (including microalbu-
minuria) since these conditions accelerate atherosclerosis. 
Similarly, examination of the blood should include 
measurements of lipids (cholesterol—total, LDL, 
HDL—and triglycerides), glucose (hemoglobin A1C), 
creatinine, hematocrit, and, if indicated based on the 
physical examination, thyroid function. A chest x-ray 
is important as it may show the consequences of IHD, 
i.e., cardiac enlargement, ventricular aneurysm, or signs 
of heart failure. These signs can support the diagnosis of 
IHD and are important in assessing the degree of car-
diac damage. Evidence exists that an elevated level of 
high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (CRP) (specifically, 
between 0 and 3 mg/dL) is an independent risk fac-
tor for IHD and may be useful in therapeutic decision 
making about the initiation of hypolipidemic treatment. 
The major benefit of high-sensitivity CRP is in reclas-
sifying the risk of IHD in patients in the “intermediate” 
risk category on the basis of traditional risk factors.
Electrocardiogram
A 12-lead ECG recorded at rest may be normal in 
patients with typical angina pectoris, but there may also 
be signs of an old myocardial infarction (Chap.  11). 
Although repolarization abnormalities, i.e., ST-segment 
and T-wave changes, as well as left ventricular hyper-
trophy and disturbances of cardiac rhythm or intra-
ventricular conduction are suggestive of IHD, they are 
nonspecific, since they also can occur in pericardial, 
myocardial, and valvular heart disease or, in the case of 
the former, transiently with anxiety, changes in posture, 
drugs, or esophageal disease. The presence of left ven-
tricular hypertrophy (LVH) is a significant indication of 
increased risk of adverse outcomes from ischemic heart 
disease. Of note, even though LVH and cardiac rhythm 
disturbances are nonspecific indicators of the develop-
ment of IHD, they may be contributing factors to epi-
sodes of angina in patients in whom IHD has developed 
as a consequence of conventional risk factors. Dynamic 
ST-segment and T-wave changes that accompany 
episodes of angina pectoris and disappear thereafter are 
more specific.
Stress Testing
Electrocardiographic
The most widely used test for both the diagnosis of 
IHD and the estimation of risk and prognosis involves 
recording the 12-lead ECG before, during, and after 
exercise, usually on a treadmill (Fig. 33-1). The test 
consists of a standardized incremental increase in exter-
nal workload (Table 33-2) while symptoms, the 
ECG, and arm blood pressure are monitored. Exercise 
duration is usually symptom-limited, and the test is dis-
continued upon evidence of chest discomfort, severe 
shortness of breath, dizziness, severe fatigue, ST- 
segment depression >0.2 mV (2 mm), a fall in systolic 
blood pressure >10 mmHg, or the development of 
a ventricular tachyarrhythmia. This test is used to dis-
cover any limitation in exercise performance, detect 
typical ECG signs of myocardial ischemia, and estab-
lish their relationship to chest discomfort. The ischemic 
ST-segment response generally is defined as a flat or 
downsloping depression of the ST segment >0.1 mV 
below baseline (i.e., the PR segment) and lasting lon-
ger than 0.08 s (Fig. 33-1). Upsloping or junctional 
ST-segment changes are not considered characteristic of 
ischemia and do not constitute a positive test. Although 
T-wave abnormalities, conduction disturbances, and 
ventricular arrhythmias that develop during exercise 
should be noted, they are also not diagnostic. Nega-
tive exercise tests in which the target heart rate (85% 
of maximal predicted heart rate for age and sex) is not 
achieved are considered nondiagnostic.
In interpreting ECG stress tests, the probability that 
coronary artery disease (CAD) exists in the patient or 
population under study (i.e., pretest probability) should 
be considered. Overall, false-positive or false-negative 
results occur in one-third of cases. However, a posi-
tive result on exercise indicates that the likelihood of 
CAD is 98% in males who are >50 years with a his-
tory of typical angina pectoris and who develop chest 
discomfort during the test. The likelihood decreases if 
the patient has atypical or no chest pain by history and/
or during the test.
The incidence of false-positive tests is signifi-
cantly increased in patients with low probabilities 
of IHD, such as asymptomatic men <age 40 or pre-
menopausal women with no risk factors for premature 
 
CHAPTER 33
Ischemic Heart Disease
391
Figure 33-1 
Evaluation of the patient with known or suspected isch-
emic heart disease. At the top of the figure is an algorithm 
for identifying patients who should be referred for stress 
testing and the decision pathway for determining whether 
a standard treadmill exercise with ECG monitoring alone is 
adequate. A specialized imaging study is necessary if the 
patient cannot exercise adequately (pharmacologic challenge 
is given) or if there are confounding features on the resting 
ECG (symptom-limited treadmill exercise may be used to 
stress the coronary circulation). At the bottom of the figure 
are examples of the data obtained with ECG monitoring and 
specialized imaging procedures. CMR, cardiac magnetic res-
onance; EBCT, electron beam computed tomography; ECG, 
electrocardiogram; ECHO, echocardiography; IHD, ischemic 
heart disease; MIBI, methoxyisobutyl isonitrite; MR, magnetic 
resonance; PET, positron emission tomography.
A. Lead V4 at rest (top) and after 4½ min of exercise (bottom). 
There is 3 mm (0.3 mV) of horizontal ST-segment depression, 
indicating a positive test for ischemia. (Modified from BR 
Chaitman, in E Braunwald et al [eds]: Heart Disease, 6th ed, 
Philadelphia, Saunders, 2001.)
B. 45-year-old avid jogger who began experiencing classic 
substernal chest pressure underwent an exercise echo study. 
With exercise the patient’s heart rate increased from 52 to 153 
bpm. The left ventricular chamber dilated with exercise, and the 
septal and apical portions became akinetic to dyskinetic (red 
arrow). These findings are strongly suggestive of a significant 
flow-limiting stenosis in the proximal left anterior descending 
artery, which was confirmed at coronary angiography. (Modified 
from SD Solomon, in E. Braunwald et al [eds]: Primary Cardiol-
ogy, 2nd ed, Philadelphia, Saunders, 2003.)
C. Stress and rest myocardial perfusion SPECT images 
obtained with 99m-technetium sestamibi in a patient with 
chest pain and dyspnea on exertion. The images demon-
strate a medium-size and severe stress perfusion defect 
involving the inferolateral and basal inferior walls, show-
ing nearly complete reversibility, consistent with moderate 
ischemia in the right coronary artery territory (red arrows). 
(Images provided by Dr. Marcello Di Carli, Nuclear Medicine 
Division, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA.)
D. A patient with a prior myocardial infarction presented with 
recurrent chest discomfort. On cardiac magnetic resonance 
(CMR) cine imaging, a large area of anterior akinesia was 
noted (marked by the arrows in the top left and right images, 
systolic frame only). This area of akinesia was matched by a 
larger extent of late gadolinium-DTPA enhancements consis-
tent with a large transmural myocardial infarction (marked by 
arrows in the middle left and right images). Resting (bottom 
left) and adenosine vasodilating stress (bottom right) first-
pass perfusion images revealed reversible perfusion abnor-
mality that extended to the inferior septum. This patient was 
found to have an occluded proximal left anterior descending 
coronary artery with extensive collateral formation. This case 
illustrates the utility of different modalities in a CMR exami-
nation in characterizing ischemic and infarcted myocar-
dium. DTPA, diethylenetriamine penta-acetic acid. (Images 
provided by Dr. Raymond Kwong, Cardiovascular Division, 
Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA.)
Evaluation of the patient with known or suspected IHD
Can patient exercise adequately?
Are confounding features
present on resting ECG?
Perform treadmill
exercise test
An imaging study
should be performed
Yes
No
Possible indications for stress testing of patient:
1. Dx of IHD uncertain
2. Assess functional capacity of patient
3. Assess adequacy of treatment program for IHD
4. Markedly abnormal calcium score on EBCT
2-D
Echo
Nuclear
perfusion
scan
Cardiac
MR
scan
Cardiac
PET
scan
ECHO
ECG
MIBI
CMR
PET
No
Yes
A
392
SECTION V
Disorders of the Vasculature
E. Stress and rest myocardial perfusion PET images 
obtained with rubidium-82 in a patient with chest pain 
on exertion. The images demonstrate a large and severe 
stress perfusion defect involving the mid and apical ante-
rior, anterolateral, and anteroseptal walls and the LV apex, 
Figure 33-1  (Continued)
showing complete reversibility, consistent with extensive and 
severe ischemia in the mid-left anterior descending coronary 
artery territory (red arrows). (Images provided by Dr. Marcello 
Di Carli, Nuclear Medicine Division, Brigham and Women’s 
Hospital, Boston, MA.)
 
CHAPTER 33
Ischemic Heart Disease
393
atherosclerosis. It is also increased in patients taking 
cardioactive drugs, such as digitalis and antiarrhythmic 
agents, and in those with intraventricular conduction 
disturbances, resting ST-segment and T-wave abnor-
malities, ventricular hypertrophy, or abnormal serum 
potassium levels. Obstructive disease limited to the cir-
cumflex coronary artery may result in a false-negative 
stress test since the lateral portion of the heart that 
this vessel supplies is not well represented on the sur-
face 12-lead ECG. Since the overall sensitivity of exer-
cise stress electrocardiography is only ∼75%, a negative 
result does not exclude CAD, although it makes the 
likelihood of three-vessel or left main CAD extremely 
unlikely.
The physician should be present throughout the 
exercise test. It is important to measure total duration 
of exercise, the times to the onset of ischemic ST- 
segment change and chest discomfort, the external work 
performed (generally expressed as the stage of exer-
cise), and the internal cardiac work performed, i.e., by 
the heart rate–blood pressure product. The depth of the 
ST-segment depression and the time needed for recov-
ery of these ECG changes are also important. Because 
the risks of exercise testing are small but real—esti-
mated at one fatality and two nonfatal complications 
per 10,000 tests—equipment for resuscitation should 
be available. Modified (heart rate–limited rather than 
symptom-limited) exercise tests can be performed safely 
in patients as early as 6 days after uncomplicated myo-
cardial infarction (Table 33-2). Contraindications to 
exercise stress testing include rest angina within 48 h, 
unstable rhythm, severe aortic stenosis, acute myocarditis, 
uncontrolled heart failure, severe pulmonary hyperten-
sion, and active infective endocarditis.
The normal response to graded exercise includes 
progressive increases in heart rate and blood pressure. 
Failure of the blood pressure to increase or an actual 
decrease with signs of ischemia during the test is an 
important adverse prognostic sign, since it may reflect 
ischemia-induced global left ventricular dysfunction. 
The development of angina and/or severe (>0.2 mV) 
ST-segment depression at a low workload, i.e., before 
Table 33-2
Relation of Metabolic Equivalent Tasks (METs) to Stages in Various Testing Protocols
Functional Class
Clinical Status
O2 Cost mL/kg/min
METS
Treadmill Protocols
BRUCE Modified  
3 min Stage
BRUCE 3 min 
Stages
MPH
%GR
MPH
%GR
HEALTHY, DEPENDENT ON AGE, ACTIVITY
6.0
22
6.0
22
5.5
20
5.2
20
5.0
18
5.0
18
NORMAL
56.0
16
52.5
15
AND
49.0
14
45.5
13
4.2
16
4.2
16
I
42.0
12
38.5
11
3.4
14
3.4
14
SEDENTARY HEALTHY
35.0
10
31.5
  9
28.0
  8
LIMITED
24.5
  7
2.5
12
2.5
12
II
SYMPTOMATIC
21.0
  6
17.5
  5
1.7
10
1.7
10
III
14.0
  4
10.5
  3
1.7
  5
  7.0
  2
1.7
  0
IV
  3.5
  1
Source: Modified from GF Fletcher et al: Circulation 104:1694, 2001.
394
SECTION V
Disorders of the Vasculature
completion of stage II of the Bruce protocol, and/or 
ST-segment depression that persists >5 min after the 
termination of exercise increases the specificity of the 
test and suggests severe IHD and a high risk of future 
adverse events.
Cardiac imaging
(See also Chap. 12) When the resting ECG is abnor-
mal (e.g., preexcitation syndrome, >1 mm of rest-
ing ST-segment depression, left bundle branch block, 
paced ventricular rhythm), information gained from 
an exercise test can be enhanced by stress myocardial 
radionuclide perfusion imaging after the intravenous 
administration of thallium-201 or 99m-technetium ses-
tamibi during exercise (or with pharmacologic) stress. 
Contemporary data also suggest positron emission 
tomography (PET) imaging (with exercise or pharma-
cologic stress) using N-13 ammonia or rubidium-82 
nuclide as another technique for assessing perfusion. 
Images obtained immediately after cessation of exer-
cise to detect regional ischemia are compared with 
those obtained at rest to confirm reversible ischemia 
and regions of persistently absent uptake that signify 
infarction.
A sizable fraction of patients who need nonin-
vasive stress testing to identify myocardial ischemia 
and increased risk of coronary events cannot exercise 
because of peripheral vascular or musculoskeletal dis-
ease, exertional dyspnea, or deconditioning. In these 
circumstances, an intravenous pharmacologic challenge 
is used in place of exercise. For example, dipyridamole 
or adenosine can be given to create a coronary “steal” 
by temporarily increasing flow in nondiseased segments 
of the coronary vasculature at the expense of diseased 
segments. Alternatively, a graded incremental infusion 
of dobutamine may be administered to increase MVO2. 
A variety of imaging options are available to accompany 
these pharmacologic stressors (Fig. 33-1). The develop-
ment of a transient perfusion defect with a tracer such 
as thallium-201 or 99m-technetium sestamibi is used to 
detect myocardial ischemia.
Echocardiography is used to assess left ventricu-
lar function in patients with chronic stable angina and 
patients with a history of a prior myocardial infarction, 
pathologic Q waves, or clinical evidence of heart fail-
ure. Two-dimensional echocardiography can assess both 
global and regional wall motion abnormalities of the 
left ventricle that are transient when due to ischemia. 
Stress (exercise or dobutamine) echocardiography may 
cause the emergence of regions of akinesis or dyskine-
sis that are not present at rest. Stress echocardiography, 
like stress myocardial perfusion imaging, is more sensi-
tive than exercise electrocardiography in the diagno-
sis of IHD. Cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) stress 
testing is also evolving as an alternative to radionuclide, 
PET, or echocardiographic stress imaging. CMR stress 
testing performed with dobutamine infusion can be 
used to assess wall motion abnormalities accompanying 
ischemia, as well as myocardial perfusion. CMR can be 
used to provide more complete ventricular evaluation 
using multislice MR imaging (MRI) studies.
Atherosclerotic plaques become progressively cal-
cified over time, and coronary calcification in general 
increases with age. For this reason, methods for detect-
ing coronary calcium have been developed as a mea-
sure of the presence of coronary atherosclerosis. These 
methods involve computed tomography (CT) applica-
tions that achieve rapid acquisition of images (electron 
beam [EBCT], and multidetector [MDCT] detection). 
Coronary calcium detected by these imaging techniques 
most commonly is quantified by using the Agatston 
score, which is based on the area and density of calci-
fication. Although the diagnostic accuracy of this imag-
ing method is high (sensitivity, 90–94%; specificity, 
95–97%; negative predictive value, 93–99%), its prog-
nostic utility has not been defined. Thus, its role in CT, 
EBCT, and MDCT scans for the detection and man-
agement of patients with IHD has not been clarified.
Coronary Arteriography
(See also Chap. 13) This diagnostic method outlines 
the lumina of the coronary arteries and can be used to 
detect or exclude serious coronary obstruction. How-
ever, coronary arteriography provides no information 
about the arterial wall, and severe atherosclerosis that 
does not encroach on the lumen may go undetected. Of 
note, atherosclerotic plaques characteristically are scat-
tered throughout the coronary tree, tend to occur more 
frequently at branch points, and grow progressively in 
the intima and media of an epicardial coronary artery 
at first without encroaching on the lumen, causing an 
outward bulging of the artery—a process referred to 
as remodeling (Chap. 30). Later in the course of the 
disease, further growth causes luminal narrowing.
Indications
Coronary arteriography is indicated in (1) patients with 
chronic stable angina pectoris who are severely symp-
tomatic despite medical therapy and are being consid-
ered for revascularization, i.e., a percutaneous coronary 
intervention (PCI) or coronary artery bypass grafting 
(CABG), (2) patients with troublesome symptoms that 
present diagnostic difficulties in whom there is a need 
to confirm or rule out the diagnosis of IHD, (3) patients 
with known or possible angina pectoris who have sur-
vived cardiac arrest, (4) patients with angina or evidence 
of ischemia on noninvasive testing with clinical or 
 
CHAPTER 33
Ischemic Heart Disease
395
laboratory evidence of ventricular dysfunction, and (5) 
patients judged to be at high risk of sustaining coronary 
events based on signs of severe ischemia on noninvasive 
testing, regardless of the presence or severity of symp-
toms (see later).
Examples of other indications for coronary arteriog-
raphy include the following:
1.	 Patients with chest discomfort suggestive of angina 
pectoris but a negative or nondiagnostic stress test 
who require a definitive diagnosis for guiding medi-
cal management, alleviating psychological stress, 
career or family planning, or insurance purposes.
2.	 Patients who have been admitted repeatedly to the 
hospital for a suspected acute coronary syndrome 
(Chaps. 34 and 35) but in whom this diagnosis has 
not been established and in whom the presence or 
absence of CAD should be determined.
3.	 Patients with careers that involve the safety of others 
(e.g., pilots, firefighters, police) who have question-
able symptoms or suspicious or positive noninvasive 
tests and in whom there are reasonable doubts about 
the state of the coronary arteries.
4.	 Patients with aortic stenosis or hypertrophic cardio-
myopathy and angina in whom the chest pain could 
be due to IHD.
5.	 Male patients >45 years and females >55 years who 
are to undergo a cardiac operation such as valve 
replacement or repair and who may or may not have 
clinical evidence of myocardial ischemia.
6.	 Patients after myocardial infarction, especially those 
who are at high risk after myocardial infarction 
because of the recurrence of angina or the presence 
of heart failure, frequent ventricular premature con-
tractions, or signs of ischemia on the stress test.
7.	 Patients with angina pectoris, regardless of severity, 
in whom noninvasive testing indicates a high risk 
of coronary events (poor exercise performance or 
severe ischemia).
8.	 Patients in whom coronary spasm or another nonath-
erosclerotic cause of myocardial ischemia (e.g., coro-
nary artery anomaly, Kawasaki disease) is suspected.
Noninvasive alternatives to diagnostic coronary arte-
riography include CT angiography and cardiac MR 
angiography (Chap. 12). Although these new imag-
ing techniques can provide information about obstruc-
tive lesions in the epicardial coronary arteries, their 
exact role in clinical practice has not been rigorously 
defined. Important aspects of their use that should be 
noted include the substantially higher radiation expo-
sure with CT angiography compared to conventional 
diagnostic arteriography and the limitations on cardiac 
MR imposed by cardiac movement during the cardiac 
cycle, especially at high heart rates.
Prognosis
The principal prognostic indicators in patients known 
to have IHD are age, the functional state of the left 
ventricle, the location(s) and severity of coronary artery 
narrowing, and the severity or activity of myocar-
dial ischemia. Angina pectoris of recent onset, unstable 
angina (Chap. 34), early postmyocardial infarction 
angina, angina that is unresponsive or poorly responsive 
to medical therapy, and angina accompanied by symp-
toms of congestive heart failure all indicate an increased 
risk for adverse coronary events. The same is true for 
the physical signs of heart failure, episodes of pulmonary 
edema, transient third heart sounds, and mitral regur-
gitation and for echocardiographic or radioisotopic (or 
roentgenographic) evidence of cardiac enlargement and 
reduced (<0.40) ejection fraction.
Most important, any of the following signs dur-
ing noninvasive testing indicates a high risk for coro-
nary events: inability to exercise for 6 min, i.e., stage II 
(Bruce protocol) of the exercise test; a strongly positive 
exercise test showing onset of myocardial ischemia at 
low workloads (≥0.1 mV ST-segment depression before 
completion of stage II, ≥0.2 mV ST depression at any 
stage, ST depression for >5 min after the cessation of 
exercise, a decline in systolic pressure >10 mmHg dur-
ing exercise, the development of ventricular tachyar-
rhythmias during exercise); the development of large or 
multiple perfusion defects or increased lung uptake dur-
ing stress radioisotope perfusion imaging; and a decrease 
in left ventricular ejection fraction during exercise on 
radionuclide ventriculography or during stress echocar-
diography. Conversely, patients who can complete stage 
III of the Bruce exercise protocol and have a normal 
stress perfusion scan or negative stress echocardiographic 
evaluation are at very low risk for future coronary 
events. The finding of frequent episodes of ST-segment 
deviation on ambulatory ECG monitoring (even in 
the absence of symptoms) is also an adverse prognostic 
finding.
On cardiac catheterization, elevations of left ventric-
ular end-diastolic pressure and ventricular volume and 
reduced ejection fraction are the most important signs 
of left ventricular dysfunction and are associated with a 
poor prognosis. Patients with chest discomfort but nor-
mal left ventricular function and normal coronary arter-
ies have an excellent prognosis. Obstructive lesions of 
the left main (>50% luminal diameter) or left anterior 
descending coronary artery proximal to the origin of 
the first septal artery are associated with a greater risk 
than are lesions of the right or left circumflex coronary 
artery because of the greater quantity of myocardium at 
risk. Atherosclerotic plaques in epicardial arteries with 
fissuring or filling defects indicate increased risk. These 
lesions go through phases of inflammatory cellular 
396
SECTION V
Disorders of the Vasculature
activity, degeneration, endothelial dysfunction, abnor-
mal vasomotion, platelet aggregation, and fissuring or 
hemorrhage. These factors can temporarily worsen the 
stenosis and cause thrombosis and/or abnormal reactiv-
ity of the vessel wall, thus exacerbating the manifesta-
tions of ischemia. The recent onset of symptoms, the 
development of severe ischemia during stress testing 
(see earlier), and unstable angina pectoris (Chap. 34) all 
reflect episodes of rapid progression in coronary lesions.
With any degree of obstructive CAD, mortal-
ity is greatly increased when left ventricular function 
is impaired; conversely, at any level of left ventricu-
lar function, the prognosis is influenced importantly 
by the quantity of myocardium perfused by critically 
obstructed vessels. Therefore, it is essential to collect 
all the evidence substantiating past myocardial damage 
(evidence of myocardial infarction on ECG, echocar-
diography, radioisotope imaging, or left ventriculogra-
phy), residual left ventricular function (ejection fraction 
and wall motion), and risk of future damage from coro-
nary events (extent of coronary disease and severity of 
ischemia defined by noninvasive stress testing). The 
larger the quantity of established myocardial necrosis is, 
the less the heart is able to withstand additional damage 
and the poorer the prognosis is. Risk estimation must 
include age, presenting symptoms, all risk factors, signs 
of arterial disease, existing cardiac damage, and signs of 
impending damage (i.e., ischemia).
The greater the number and severity of risk factors 
for coronary atherosclerosis (advanced age [>75 years], 
hypertension, dyslipidemia, diabetes, morbid obesity, 
accompanying peripheral and/or cerebrovascular dis-
ease, previous myocardial infarction), the worse the 
prognosis of an angina patient. Evidence exists that ele-
vated levels of C-reactive protein in the plasma, exten-
sive coronary calcification on electron beam CT (see 
earlier), and increased carotid intimal thickening on 
ultrasound examination also indicate an increased risk of 
coronary events.
treatment	
Stable Angina Pectoris
Once the diagnosis of ischemic heart disease has been 
made, each patient must be evaluated individually with 
respect to his or her level of understanding, expecta-
tions and goals, control of symptoms, and prevention 
of adverse clinical outcomes such as myocardial infarc-
tion and premature death. The degree of disability as 
well as the physical and emotional stress that precipi-
tates angina must be recorded carefully to set treatment 
goals. The management plan should include the follow-
ing components: (1) explanation of the problem and 
reassurance about the ability to formulate a treatment 
plan, (2) identification and treatment of aggravating  
conditions, (3) recommendations for adaptation of 
activity as needed, (4) treatment of risk factors that will 
decrease the occurrence of adverse coronary outcomes, 
(5) drug therapy for angina, and (6) consideration of 
revascularization.
Explanation and Reassurance  Patients 
with IHD need to understand their condition and realize 
that a long and productive life is possible even though 
they have angina pectoris or have experienced and 
recovered from an acute myocardial infarction. Offer-
ing results of clinical trials showing improved outcomes 
can be of great value in encouraging patients to resume 
or maintain activity and return to work. A planned pro-
gram of rehabilitation can encourage patients to lose 
weight, improve exercise tolerance, and control risk  
factors with more confidence.
Identification and Treatment of Ag- 
gravating Conditions  A number of condi-
tions may increase oxygen demand or decrease oxy-
gen supply to the myocardium and may precipitate or 
exacerbate angina in patients with IHD. Left ventricular 
hypertrophy, aortic valve disease, and hypertrophic car-
diomyopathy may cause or contribute to angina and 
should be excluded or treated. Obesity, hypertension, 
and hyperthyroidism should be treated aggressively to 
reduce the frequency and severity of anginal episodes. 
Decreased myocardial oxygen supply may be due to 
reduced oxygenation of the arterial blood (e.g., in pul-
monary disease or, when carboxyhemoglobin is pres-
ent, due to cigarette or cigar smoking) or decreased 
oxygen-carrying capacity (e.g., in anemia). Correction 
of these abnormalities, if present, may reduce or even 
eliminate angina pectoris.
Adaptation of Activity  Myocardial ischemia 
is caused by a discrepancy between the demand of the 
heart muscle for oxygen and the ability of the coronary 
circulation to meet that demand. Most patients can 
be helped to understand this concept and utilize it in 
the rational programming of activity. Many tasks that 
ordinarily evoke angina may be accomplished with-
out symptoms simply by reducing the speed at which 
they are performed. Patients must appreciate the diur-
nal variation in their tolerance of certain activities and 
should reduce their energy requirements in the morn-
ing, immediately after meals, and in cold or inclement 
weather. On occasion, it may be necessary to recom-
mend a change in employment or residence to avoid 
physical stress.
Physical conditioning usually improves the exercise 
tolerance of patients with angina and has substan-
tial psychological benefits. A regular program of iso-
tonic exercise that is within the limits of the individual 
patient’s threshold for the development of angina  
 
CHAPTER 33
Ischemic Heart Disease
397
pectoris and that does not exceed 80% of the heart rate 
associated with ischemia on exercise testing should be 
strongly encouraged. Based on the results of an exercise 
test, the number of metabolic equivalent tasks (METs) 
performed at the onset of ischemia can be estimated 
(Table 33-2) and a practical exercise prescription can be 
formulated to permit daily activities that will fall below 
the ischemic threshold (Table 33-3).
Treatment of Risk Factors  A family history 
of premature IHD is an important indicator of increased 
risk and should trigger a search for treatable risk fac-
tors such as hyperlipidemia, hypertension, and diabetes 
mellitus. Obesity impairs the treatment of other risk fac-
tors and increases the risk of adverse coronary events. 
In addition, obesity often is accompanied by three 
other risk factors: diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and 
hyperlipidemia. The treatment of obesity and these 
accompanying risk factors is an important component 
of any management plan. A diet low in saturated and 
trans-unsaturated fatty acids and a reduced caloric 
intake to achieve optimal body weight are a corner-
stone in the management of chronic IHD. It is especially 
important to emphasize weight loss and regular exer-
cise in patients with the metabolic syndrome or overt 
diabetes mellitus.
Table 33-3
Energy Requirements for Some Common Activities
Less Than 3 METs
3–5 METs
5–7 METs
7–9 METs
More Than 9 METs
Self-care
Washing/shaving
Cleaning windows
Easy digging in garden
Heavy shoveling
Carrying loads upstairs 
(objects more than 
90 lb)
Dressing
Raking
Level hand lawn  
mowing
Carrying objects  
(60–90 lb)
Climbing stairs (quickly)
Light housekeeping
Power lawn mowing
Carrying objects  
(30–60 lb)
Shoveling heavy snow
Desk work
Bed making/stripping
Driving auto
Carrying objects  
(15–30 lb)
Occupational
Sitting (clerical/ 
assembly)
Stocking shelves  
(light objects)
Carpentry (exterior)
Digging ditches (pick 
and shovel)
Heavy labor
Desk work
Light welding/carpentry
Shoveling dirt
Standing (store clerk)
Sawing wood
Recreational
Golf (cart)
Knitting
Dancing (social)
Golf (walking)
Sailing
Tennis (doubles)
Tennis (singles)
Snow skiing (downhill)
Light backpacking
Basketball
Stream fishing
Canoeing
Mountain climbing
Squash
Ski touring
Vigorous basketball
Physical conditioning
Walking (2 mph)
Level walking  
(3–4 mph)
Level walking  
(4.5–5.0 mph)
Level jogging (5 mph)
Running more than  
6 mph
Stationary bike
Level biking (6–8 mph)
Bicycling (9–10 mph)
Swimming (crawl 
stroke)
Bicycling (more than  
13 mph)
Very light calisthenics
Light calisthenics
Swimming, breast 
stroke
Rowing machine
Heavy calisthenics
Bicycling (12 mph)
Rope jumping
Walking uphill (5 mph)
Abbreviation: METs, metabolic equivalent tasks.
Source: Modified from WL Haskell: Rehabilitation of the coronary patient, in NK Wenger, HK Hellerstein (eds): Design and Implementation of 
Cardiac Conditioning Program. New York, Churchill Livingstone, 1978.
398
SECTION V
Disorders of the Vasculature
Cigarette smoking accelerates coronary atheroscle-
rosis in both sexes and at all ages and increases the  
risk of thrombosis, plaque instability, myocardial infarc-
tion, and death (Chap. 30). In addition, by increasing 
myocardial oxygen needs and reducing oxygen supply, 
it aggravates angina. Smoking cessation studies have 
demonstrated important benefits with a significant 
decline in the occurrence of these adverse outcomes. 
The physician’s message must be clear and strong  
and supported by programs that achieve and moni-
tor abstinence. Hypertension (Chap. 37) is associated 
with an increased risk of adverse clinical events from 
coronary atherosclerosis as well as stroke. In addi-
tion, the left ventricular hypertrophy that results from 
sustained hypertension aggravates ischemia. There 
is evidence that long-term effective treatment of 
hypertension can decrease the occurrence of adverse  
coronary events.
Diabetes mellitus accelerates coronary and peripheral 
atherosclerosis and is frequently associated with dyslip-
idemias and increases in the risk of angina, myocardial 
infarction, and sudden coronary death. Aggressive control 
of the dyslipidemia (target LDL cholesterol <70 mg/dL) 
and hypertension (target BP 120/80) that are frequently 
found in diabetic patients is highly effective and there-
fore essential, as described later.
Dyslipidemia  The treatment of dyslipidemia 
is central in aiming for long-term relief from angina, 
reduced need for revascularization, and reduction in 
myocardial infarction and death. The control of lipids 
can be achieved by the combination of a diet low in 
saturated and trans-unsaturated fatty acids, exercise, 
and weight loss. Nearly always, HMG-CoA reductase 
inhibitors (statins) are required and can lower LDL 
cholesterol (25–50%), raise HDL cholesterol (5–9%), 
and lower triglycerides (5–30%). A powerful treat-
ment effect of statins on atherosclerosis, IHD, and 
outcomes is seen regardless of the pretreatment LDL 
cholesterol level. Fibrates or niacin can be used to 
raise HDL cholesterol and lower triglycerides (Chaps. 30  
and 31). Controlled trials with lipid-regulating regi-
mens have shown equal proportional benefit for 
men, women, the elderly, diabetic patients, and even 
smokers.
Compliance with the health-promoting behaviors 
listed above is generally very poor, and a conscientious 
physician must not underestimate the major effort 
required to meet this challenge. Fewer than one-half of 
patients in the United States discharged from the hos-
pital with proven coronary disease receive treatment for 
dyslipidemia. In light of the proof that treating dyslipid-
emia brings major benefits, physicians need to establish 
treatment pathways, monitor compliance, and follow up 
regularly.
Risk Reduction in Women with IHD  
The incidence of clinical IHD in premenopausal women 
is very low; however, after menopause, the atherogenic 
risk factors increase (e.g., increased LDL, reduced HDL) 
and the rate of clinical coronary events accelerates to 
the levels observed in men. Women have not given up 
cigarette smoking as effectively as have men. Diabetes  
mellitus, which is more common in women, greatly 
increases the occurrence of clinical IHD and amplifies 
the deleterious effects of hypertension, hyperlipidemia, 
and smoking. Cardiac catheterization and coronary 
revascularization are underused in women and are per-
formed at a later and more severe stage of the disease 
than in men. When cholesterol lowering, beta blockers 
after myocardial infarction, and coronary artery bypass 
grafting are applied in the appropriate patient groups, 
women receive the same benefits of improved outcome 
as do men.
Drug Therapy  The commonly used drugs for 
the treatment of angina pectoris are summarized in 
Tables 33-4 through 33-6. Pharmacotherapy for IHD is 
designed to reduce the frequency of anginal episodes, 
myocardial infarction, and coronary death. There is a 
wealth of positive trial data to emphasize how impor-
tant this medical management is when added to 
the health-promoting behaviors discussed earlier. To 
achieve maximum benefit from medical therapy for IHD, 
it is frequently necessary to combine agents from differ-
ent classes and titrate the doses as guided by the indi-
vidual profile of risk factors, symptoms, hemodynamic 
responses, and side effects.
Nitrates  The organic nitrates are a valuable 
class of drugs in the management of angina pecto-
ris (Table  33-4). Their major mechanisms of action 
include systemic venodilation with concomitant reduc-
tion in left ventricular end-diastolic volume and pres-
sure, thereby reducing myocardial wall tension and 
oxygen requirements; dilation of epicardial coronary 
vessels; and increased blood flow in collateral vessels. 
When metabolized, organic nitrates release nitric oxide  
(NO) that binds to guanylyl cyclase in vascular smooth- 
muscle cells, leading to an increase in cyclic guanosine 
monophosphate, which causes relaxation of vascular 
smooth muscle. Nitrates also exert antithrombotic activ-
ity by NO-dependent activation of platelet guanylyl 
cyclase, impairment of intraplatelet calcium flux, and 
platelet activation.
The absorption of these agents is most rapid and 
complete through the mucous membranes. For this 
reason, nitroglycerin is most commonly administered 
sublingually in tablets of 0.4 or 0.6 mg. Patients with 
angina should be instructed to take the medication both 
to relieve angina and also approximately 5 min before 
 
CHAPTER 33
Ischemic Heart Disease
399
Table 33-5
Properties of Beta Blockers in Clinical Use for Ischemic Heart Disease
Drugs
Selectivity
Partial Agonist Activity
Usual Dose for Angina
Acebutolol
β1
Yes
200–600 mg twice daily
Atenolol
β1
No
50–200 mg/d
Betaxolol
β1
No
10–20 mg/d
Bisoprolol
β1
No
10 mg/d
Esmolol (intravenous)a
β1
No
50–300 mcg/kg/min
Labetalolb
None
Yes
200–600 mg twice daily
Metoprolol
β1
No
50–200 mg twice daily
Nadolol
None
No
40–80 mg/day
Nebivolol
β1 (at low doses)
No
5–40 mg/day
Pindolol
None
Yes
2.5–7.5 mg 3 times daily
Propranolol
None
No
80–120 mg twice daily
Timolol
None
No
10 mg twice daily
aEsmolol is an ultra-short-acting beta blocker that is administered as a continuous intravenous infusion. Its rapid offset of action makes esmolol 
an attractive agent to use in patients with relative contraindications to beta blockade.
bLabetalol is a combined alpha and beta blocker.
Note: This list of beta blockers that may be used to treat patients with angina pectoris is arranged alphabetically. The agents for which there is 
the greatest clinical experience include atenolol, metoprolol, and propranolol. It is preferable to use a sustained-release formulation that may be 
taken once daily to improve the patient’s compliance with the regimen.
Source: Modified from RJ Gibbons et al: J Am Coll Cardiol 41:159, 2002.
Table 33-4
Nitroglycerin and Nitrates for Patients With Ischemic Heart Disease
Compound
Route
Dose
Duration of Effect
Nitroglycerin
Sublingual tablets
Spray
Ointment
0.3–0.6 mg up to 1.5 mg
0.4 mg as needed
2% 6 × 6 in. 15 ×15 cm
7.5–40 mg
Approximately 10 min
Similar to sublingual tablets
Effect up to 7 h
Transdermal
Oral sustained release
Intravenous
0.2–0.8 mg/h every 12 h
2.5–13 mg
5–200 mcg/min
8–12 h during intermittent therapy
4–8 h
Tolerance may be seen in 7–8 h
Isosorbide dinitrate
Sublingual
Oral
Spray
Chewable
Oral slow release
Intravenous
Ointment
2.5–10 mg
5–80 mg, 2–3 times daily
1.25 mg daily
5 mg
40 mg 1–2 daily
1.25–5.0 mg/h
100 mg/24 h
Up to 60 min
Up to 8 h
2–3 min
2–2½ h
Up to 8 h
Tolerance in 7–8 h
Not effective
Isosorbide mononitrate
Oral
20 mg twice daily
60–240 mg once daily
12–24 h
Pentaerythritol tetranitrate
Sublingual
10 mg as needed
Not known
Source: Modified from RJ Gibbons et al: J Am Coll Cardiol 41:159, 2002.
400
SECTION V
Disorders of the Vasculature
stress that is likely to induce an episode. The value of this 
prophylactic use of the drug cannot be overemphasized.
Nitrates improve exercise tolerance in patients with 
chronic angina and relieve ischemia in patients with 
unstable angina as well as patients with Prinzmetal’s 
variant angina (Chap. 34). A diary of angina and nitro-
glycerin use may be valuable for detecting changes in 
the frequency, severity, or threshold for discomfort that 
may signify the development of unstable angina pecto-
ris and/or herald an impending myocardial infarction.
Long-Acting Nitrates  None of the long-acting 
nitrates are as effective as sublingual nitroglycerin for the 
acute relief of angina. These organic nitrate preparations 
can be swallowed, chewed, or administered as a patch 
or paste by the transdermal route (Table 33-4). They can 
provide effective plasma levels for up to 24 h, but the 
therapeutic response is highly variable. Different prepa-
rations and/or administration during the daytime should 
be tried only to prevent discomfort while avoiding side 
effects such as headache and dizziness. Individual dose 
titration is important to prevent side effects. To minimize 
the effects of tolerance, the minimum effective dose 
should be used and a minimum of 8 h each day kept free 
of the drug to restore any useful response(s).
a-Adrenergic Blockers  These drugs represent 
an important component of the pharmacologic treat-
ment of angina pectoris (Table 33-5). They reduce myo-
cardial oxygen demand by inhibiting the increases in 
heart rate, arterial pressure, and myocardial contractility 
caused by adrenergic activation. Beta blockade reduces 
these variables most strikingly during exercise but 
causes only small reductions at rest. Long-acting beta-
blocking drugs or sustained-release formulations offer 
the advantage of once-daily dosing (Table 33-5). The 
therapeutic aims include relief of angina and ischemia. 
These drugs also can reduce mortality and reinfarction 
rates in patients after myocardial infarction and are 
moderately effective antihypertensive agents.
Relative contraindications include asthma and revers-
ible airway obstruction in patients with chronic lung dis-
ease, atrioventricular conduction disturbances, severe 
bradycardia, Raynaud’s phenomenon, and a history of 
mental depression. Side effects include fatigue, reduced 
exercise tolerance, nightmares, impotence, cold extrem-
ities, intermittent claudication, bradycardia (sometimes 
severe), impaired atrioventricular conduction, left ven-
tricular failure, bronchial asthma, worsening claudica-
tion, and intensification of the hypoglycemia produced 
Table 33-6
Calcium Channel Blockers in Clinical Use for Ischemic Heart Disease
Drugs
Usual Dose
Duration of Action
Side Effects
Dihydropyridines
Amlodipine
5–10 mg qd
Long
Headache, edema
Felodipine
5–10 mg qd
Long
Headache, edema
Isradipine
2.5–10 mg bid
Medium
Headache, fatigue
Nicardipine
20–40 mg tid
Short
Headache, dizziness, flushing, edema
Nifedipine
Immediate release:a 30–90 mg 
daily orally
Short
Hypotension, dizziness, flushing,  
nausea, constipation, edema
Nisoldipine
Slow release: 30–180 mg orally 
20–40 mg qd
Short
Similar to nifedipine
Nondihydropyridines
Diltiazem
Immediate release: 30–80 mg  
4 times daily
Short
Hypotension, dizziness, flushing,  
bradycardia, edema
Slow release: 120–320 mg qd
Long
Verapamil
Immediate release: 80–160 mg tid
Short
Hypotension, myocardial depression, 
heart failure, edema, bradycardia
Slow release: 120–480 mg qd
Long
aMay be associated with increased risk of mortality if administered during acute myocardial infarction.
Note: This list of calcium channel blockers that may be used to treat patients with angina pectoris is divided into two broad classes, dihydropyr-
idines and nondihydropyridines, and arranged alphabetically within each class. Among the dihydropyridines, the greatest clinical experience has 
been obtained with amlodipine and nifedipine. After the initial period of dose titration with a short-acting formulation, it is preferable to switch to 
a sustained-release formulation that may be taken once daily to improve patient compliance with the regimen.
Source: Modified from RJ Gibbons et al: J Am Coll Cardiol 41:159, 2002.
 
CHAPTER 33
Ischemic Heart Disease
401
by oral hypoglycemic agents and insulin. Reducing 
the dose or even discontinuation may be necessary if 
these side effects develop and persist. Since sudden dis-
continuation can intensify ischemia, the doses should 
be tapered over 2 weeks. Beta blockers with relative 
β1-receptor specificity such as metoprolol and ateno-
lol may be preferable in patients with mild bronchial 
obstruction and insulin-requiring diabetes mellitus.
Calcium Channel Blockers  Calcium channel 
blockers (Table 33-6) are coronary vasodilators that 
produce variable and dose-dependent reductions in 
myocardial oxygen demand, contractility, and arterial 
pressure. These combined pharmacologic effects are 
advantageous and make these agents as effective as 
beta blockers in the treatment of angina pectoris. They 
are indicated when beta blockers are contraindicated, 
poorly tolerated, or ineffective. Verapamil and diltiazem 
may produce symptomatic disturbances in cardiac con-
duction and bradyarrhythmias. They also exert negative 
inotropic actions and are more likely to aggravate left 
ventricular failure, particularly when used in patients 
with left ventricular dysfunction, especially if the 
patients are also receiving beta blockers. Although use-
ful effects usually are achieved when calcium channel 
blockers are combined with beta blockers and nitrates, 
individual titration of the doses is essential with these 
combinations. Variant (Prinzmetal’s) angina responds 
particularly well to calcium channel blockers (especially 
members of the dihydropyridine class), supplemented 
when necessary by nitrates (Chap. 34).
Verapamil ordinarily should not be combined with 
beta blockers because of the combined adverse effects 
on heart rate and contractility. Diltiazem can be com-
bined with beta blockers in patients with normal ven-
tricular function and no conduction disturbances. 
Amlodipine and beta blockers have complementary 
actions on coronary blood supply and myocardial oxy-
gen demands. Whereas the former decreases blood 
pressure and dilates coronary arteries, the latter slows 
heart rate and decreases contractility. Amlodipine and 
the other second-generation dihydropyridine calcium 
antagonists (nicardipine, isradipine, long-acting nife-
dipine, and felodipine) are potent vasodilators and are 
useful in the simultaneous treatment of angina and 
hypertension. Short-acting dihydropyridines should be 
avoided because of the risk of precipitating infarction, 
particularly in the absence of concomitant beta-blocker 
therapy.
Choice between Beta Blockers and Cal-
cium Channel Blockers for Initial Therapy 
Since beta blockers have been shown to improve 
life expectancy after acute myocardial infarction  
(Chaps.  34 and 35) and calcium channel blockers  
have not, the former may also be preferable in patients 
with angina and a damaged left ventricle. However, 
calcium channel blockers are indicated in patients 
with the following: (1) inadequate responsiveness to 
the combination of beta blockers and nitrates; many 
of these patients do well with a combination of a beta 
blocker and a dihydropyridine calcium channel blocker,  
(2) adverse reactions to beta blockers such as depres-
sion, sexual disturbances, and fatigue, (3) angina and a 
history of asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary dis-
ease, (4) sick-sinus syndrome or significant atrioventric-
ular conduction disturbances, (5) Prinzmetal’s angina, or 
(6) symptomatic peripheral arterial disease.
Antiplatelet 
Drugs  Aspirin is an irreversible 
inhibitor of platelet cyclooxygenase and thereby inter-
feres with platelet activation. Chronic administration 
of 75–325 mg orally per day has been shown to reduce 
coronary events in asymptomatic adult men over age 
50, patients with chronic stable angina, and patients 
who have or have survived unstable angina and myo-
cardial infarction. There is a dose-dependent increase 
in bleeding when aspirin is used chronically. It is prefer-
able to use an enteric-coated formulation in the range 
of 81–162 mg/d. Administration of this drug should 
be considered in all patients with IHD in the absence  
of gastrointestinal bleeding, allergy, or dyspepsia.  
Clopidogrel (300–600 mg loading and 75 mg/d) is an 
oral agent that blocks P2Y12 ADP receptor–mediated 
platelet aggregation. It provides benefits similar to 
those of aspirin in patients with stable chronic IHD and 
may be substituted for aspirin if aspirin causes the side 
effects listed above. Clopidogrel combined with aspirin 
reduces death and coronary ischemic events in patients  
with an acute coronary syndrome (Chap. 34) and also 
reduces the risk of thrombus formation in patients 
undergoing implantation of a stent in a coronary artery 
(Chap.  36). Alternative antiplatelet agents that block  
the P2Y12 platelet receptor such as prasugrel have been 
shown to be more effective than clopidogrel for preven-
tion of ischemic events after placement of a stent for an 
acute coronary syndrome but are associated with an 
increased risk of bleeding. Although combined treat-
ment with clopidogrel and aspirin for at least a year is 
recommended in patients with an acute coronary syn-
drome treated with implantation of a drug-eluting 
stent, studies have not shown any benefit from the rou-
tine addition of clopidogrel to aspirin in patients with 
chronic stable IHD.
Other Therapies  The angiotensin-converting 
enzyme (ACE) inhibitors are widely used in the treat-
ment of survivors of myocardial infarction, patients with 
hypertension or chronic IHD including angina pectoris, 
and those at high risk of vascular diseases such as dia-
betes. The benefits of ACE inhibitors are most evident 
in IHD patients at increased risk, especially if diabetes 
402
SECTION V
Disorders of the Vasculature
mellitus or LV dysfunction is present, and those who 
have not achieved adequate control of blood pres-
sure and LDL cholesterol on beta blockers and statins. 
However, the routine administration of ACE inhibitors 
to IHD patients who have normal LV function and have 
achieved blood pressure and LDL goals on other thera-
pies does not reduce the incidence of events and there-
fore is not cost-effective.
Despite treatment with nitrates, beta blockers, or cal-
cium channel blockers, some patients with IHD continue 
to experience angina, and additional medical therapy 
is now available to alleviate their symptoms. Ranola-
zine, a piperazine derivative, may be useful for patients 
with chronic angina despite standard medical therapy. 
Its antianginal action is believed to occur via inhibition 
of the late inward sodium current (INa). The benefits of 
INa inhibition include limitation of the Na overload of 
ischemic myocytes and prevention of Ca2+ overload via 
the Na+−Ca2+ exchanger. A dose of 500–1000 mg orally 
twice daily is usually well tolerated. Ranolazine is con-
traindicated in patients with hepatic impairment or with 
conditions or drugs associated with QTc prolongation 
and when drugs that inhibit the CYP3A metabolic sys-
tem (e.g., ketoconazole, diltiazem, verapamil, macrolide 
antibiotics, HIV protease inhibitors, and large quantities 
of grapefruit juice) are being used.
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) use in 
patients with IHD may be associated with a small but 
finite increased risk of MI and mortality. For this reason, 
they generally should be avoided in IHD patients. If they 
are required for symptom relief, it is advisable to coad-
minister aspirin and strive to use the lowest NSAID dose 
required for the shortest period of time.
Another class of agents open ATP-sensitive potas-
sium channels in myocytes, leading to a reduction of 
free intracellular calcium ions. The major drug in this 
class is nicorandil, which typically is administered orally 
in a dose of 20 mg twice daily for prevention of angina. 
(Nicorandil is not available for use in the United States 
but is used in several other countries.)
Angina and Heart Failure  Transient left ventric-
ular failure with angina can be controlled by the use of 
nitrates. For patients with established congestive heart 
failure the increased left ventricular wall tension raises 
myocardial oxygen demand. Treatment of congestive 
heart failure with an angiotensin-converting enzyme 
inhibitor, a diuretic, and digoxin (Chap. 17) reduces 
heart size, wall tension, and myocardial oxygen demand, 
which helps control angina and ischemia. If the symp-
toms and signs of heart failure are controlled, an effort 
should be made to use beta blockers not only for angina 
but because trials in heart failure have shown signifi-
cant improvement in survival. A trial of the intravenous 
ultra-short-acting beta blocker esmolol may be useful to 
establish the safety of beta blockade in selected patients. 
Nocturnal angina often can be relieved by the treatment 
of heart failure.
The combination of congestive heart failure and 
angina in patients with IHD usually indicates a poor 
prognosis and warrants serious consideration of cardiac 
catheterization and coronary revascularization.
Coronary Revascularization
Clinical trials have confirmed that with the initial 
diagnosis of stable IHD, it is first appropriate to initi-
ate a thorough medical regimen as described earlier. 
Revascularization should be considered in the presence 
of unstable phases of the disease, intractable symptoms, 
severe ischemia or high-risk coronary anatomy, diabe-
tes, and impaired LV function. Revascularization should 
be employed in conjunction with but not replace the continu-
ing need to modify risk factors and assess medical therapy. An 
algorithm for integrating medical therapy and revas-
cularization options in patients with IHD is shown in 
Fig. 33-2.
Percutaneous Coronary 
Intervention
(See also Chap. 36) Percutaneous coronary interven-
tion (PCI) involving balloon dilatation usually accom-
panied by coronary stenting is widely used to achieve 
revascularization of the myocardium in patients with 
symptomatic IHD and suitable stenoses of epicardial 
coronary arteries. Whereas patients with stenosis of the 
left main coronary artery and those with three-vessel 
IHD (especially with diabetes and/or impaired left ven-
tricular function) who require revascularization are best 
treated with CABG. PCI is widely employed in patients 
with symptoms and evidence of ischemia due to steno-
ses of one or two vessels and even in selected patients 
with three-vessel disease (and, perhaps, in some patients 
with left main disease) and may offer many advantages 
over surgery.
Indications and patient selection
The most common clinical indication for PCI is symp-
tom-limiting angina pectoris, despite medical therapy, 
accompanied by evidence of ischemia during a stress 
test. PCI is more effective than medical therapy for the 
relief of angina. PCI improves outcomes in patients 
with unstable angina or when used early in the course 
of myocardial infarction with and without cardiogenic 
shock. However, in patients with stable exertional 
angina, clinical trials have confirmed that PCI does not 
reduce the occurrence of death or myocardial infarction 
 
CHAPTER 33
Ischemic Heart Disease
403
compared to optimum medical therapy. PCI can be 
used to treat stenoses in native coronary arteries as well 
as in bypass grafts in patients who have recurrent angina 
after CABG.
Risks
When coronary stenoses are discrete and symmet-
ric, two and even three vessels can be treated in 
sequence. However, case selection is essential to avoid 
MANAGEMENT OF THE PATIENT WITH IHD
Initiate medical therapy:
1. Decrease demand ischemia
2. Minimize IHD risk factors
3. ASA (clopidogrel if ASA intolerant)
Any high-risk features?
Low exercise capacity or ischemia at low workload, large
area of ischemic myocardium, EF <40%, ACS presentation
No
Yes
Are exertional
symptoms controlled?
Refer for coronary
arteriography
Yes
No
Yes
No
Single-vessel
disease
LM +/or multi-
vessel disease
PCI
Assess:
PCI vs CABG
Consider
unconventional
treatments
Continue medical therapy periodic stress assessment
(see Fig. 33-1)
Anatomy suitable
for revascularization?
Figure 33-2 
Algorithm for management of a patient with ischemic 
heart disease. All patients should receive the core elements 
of medical therapy as shown at the top of the algorithm. If 
high-risk features are present, as established by the clinical 
history, exercise test data, and imaging studies, the patient 
should be referred for coronary arteriography. Based on the 
number and location of the diseased vessels and their suit-
ability for revascularization, the patient is treated with a per-
cutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) or coronary artery 
bypass graft (CABG) surgery or should be considered for 
unconventional treatments. See text for further discus-
sion. IHD, ischemic heart disease; ASA, aspirin; EF, ejection 
fraction; ACS, acute coronary syndrome; LM, left main.
a prohibitive risk of complications, which are usu-
ally due to dissection or thrombosis with vessel occlu-
sion, uncontrolled ischemia, and ventricular failure 
(Chap. 36). Oral aspirin, a thienopyridine, and an anti-
thrombin agent are given to reduce coronary thrombus 
formation. Left main coronary artery stenosis generally 
is regarded as a contraindication to PCI; such patients 
should be treated with CABG. In selected cases such 
as patients with prohibitive surgical risks, PCI of an 
unprotected left main can be considered, but such a 
procedure should be performed only by a highly skilled 
operator; importantly, there are regional differences in 
the use of this approach internationally.
Efficacy
Primary success, i.e., adequate dilation (an increase in 
luminal diameter >20% to a residual diameter obstruc-
tion <50%) with relief of angina, is achieved in 
>95% of cases. Recurrent stenosis of the dilated ves-
sels occurs in ∼20% of cases within 6 months of PCI 
with bare metal stents, and angina will recur within 
6 months in 10% of cases. Restenosis is more common 
in patients with diabetes mellitus, arteries with small 
caliber, incomplete dilation of the stenosis, long stents, 
occluded vessels, obstructed vein grafts, dilation of the 
left anterior descending coronary artery, and steno-
ses containing thrombi. In diseased vein grafts, proce-
dural success has been improved by the use of capture 
devices or filters that prevent embolization, ischemia, 
and infarction.
It is usual clinical practice to administer aspirin indef-
initely and a thienopyridine for 1–3 months after the 
implantation of a bare metal stent. Although aspirin in 
combination with a thienopyridine may help prevent 
coronary thrombosis during and shortly after PCI with 
stenting, there is no evidence that these medications 
reduce the incidence of restenosis.
The use of drug-eluting stents that locally deliver 
antiproliferative drugs can reduce restenosis to less 
than 10%. Advances in PCI, especially the availability 
of drug-eluting stents, have vastly extended the use of 
this revascularization option in patients with IHD. Of 
note, however, the delayed endothelial healing in the 
region of a drug-eluting stent also extends the period 
during which the patient is at risk for subacute stent 
thrombosis. Current recommendations are to adminis-
ter aspirin indefinitely and a thienopyridine daily for at 
least 1 year after implantation of a drug-eluting stent. 
When a situation arises in which temporary discontinu-
ation of antiplatelet therapy is necessary, the clinical cir-
cumstances should be reviewed with the operator who 
performed the PCI and a coordinated plan should be 
established for minimizing the risk of late stent throm-
bus; central to this plan is the discontinuation of anti-
platelet therapy for the shortest acceptable period. 
404
SECTION V
Disorders of the Vasculature
The risk of stent thrombosis is dependent on stent size 
and length, complexity of the lesions, age, diabetes, and 
technique. However, compliance with dual antiplatelet 
therapy and individual responsiveness to platelet inhibi-
tion are very important factors as well.
Successful PCI produces effective relief of angina 
in >95% of cases. More than one-half of patients with 
symptomatic IHD who require revascularization can 
be treated initially by PCI. Successful PCI is less inva-
sive and expensive than CABG and permits savings in 
the initial cost of care. Successful PCI avoids the risk 
of stroke associated with CABG surgery, allows earlier 
return to work, and allows the resumption of an active 
life. However, the early health-related and economic 
benefit of PCI is reduced over time because of the 
greater need for follow-up and the increased need for 
repeat procedures. When directly compared in patients 
with diabetes or three-vessel or left main coronary 
artery disease, CABG was superior to PCI in preventing 
major adverse cardiac or cerebrovascular events over a 
12-month follow-up.
Coronary Artery Bypass Grafting
Anastomosis of one or both of the internal mammary 
arteries or a radial artery to the coronary artery distal to 
the obstructive lesion is the preferred procedure. For 
additional obstructions that cannot be bypassed by an 
artery, a section of a vein (usually the saphenous) is used 
to form a connection between the aorta and the coro-
nary artery distal to the obstructive lesion.
Although some indications for CABG are controver-
sial, certain areas of agreement exist:
1.	 The operation is relatively safe, with mortality rates 
<1% in patients without serious comorbid disease 
and normal left ventricular function and when the 
procedure is performed by an experienced surgical 
team.
2.	 Intraoperative and postoperative mortality rates 
increase with the severity of ventricular dysfunc-
tion, comorbidities, age >80 years, and lack of surgi-
cal experience. The effectiveness and risk of CABG 
vary widely depending on case selection and the skill 
and experience of the surgical team.
3.	 Occlusion of venous grafts is observed in 10% to 20% 
of patients during the first postoperative year and 
in approximately 2% per year during 5- to 7-year 
follow-up and 4% per year thereafter. Long-term 
patency rates are considerably higher for internal 
mammary and radial artery implantations than for 
saphenous vein grafts. In patients with left anterior 
descending coronary artery obstruction, survival is 
better when coronary bypass involves the internal 
mammary artery rather than a saphenous vein. Graft 
patency and outcomes are improved by meticulous 
treatment of risk factors, particularly dyslipidemia.
4.	 Angina is abolished or greatly reduced in ∼90% of 
patients after complete revascularization. Although 
this usually is associated with graft patency and res-
toration of blood flow, the pain may also have been 
alleviated as a result of infarction of the ischemic 
segment or a placebo effect. Within 3 years, angina 
recurs in about one-fourth of patients but is rarely 
severe.
5.	 Survival may be improved by operation in patients 
with stenosis of the left main coronary artery as well 
as in patients with three- or two-vessel disease with 
significant obstruction of the proximal left anterior 
descending coronary artery. The survival benefit is 
greater in patients with abnormal LV function (ejec-
tion fraction <50%). Survival may also be improved 
in the following patients: (a) with obstructive CAD 
who have survived sudden cardiac death or sustained 
ventricular tachycardia, (b) who have undergone 
previous CABG and have multiple saphenous vein 
graft stenoses, especially of a graft supplying the left 
anterior descending coronary artery, and (c) with 
recurrent stenosis after PCI and high-risk criteria on 
noninvasive testing.
6.	 Minimally invasive CABG through a small thora-
cotomy and/or off-pump surgery can reduce mor-
bidity and shorten convalescence in suitable patients 
but does not appear to reduce significantly the risk 
of neurocognitive dysfunction postoperatively.
7.	 Among patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus and 
multivessel coronary disease, CABG surgery plus 
optimal medical therapy is superior to optimal medi-
cal therapy alone in preventing major cardiovascu-
lar events, a benefit mediated largely by a significant 
reduction in nonfatal MI. The benefits of CABG are 
especially evident in diabetic patients treated with an 
insulin-sensitizing strategy as opposed to an insulin-
providing strategy.
Indications for CABG usually are based on the sever-
ity of symptoms, coronary anatomy, and ventricular 
function. The ideal candidate is male, is <80 years of 
age, has no other complicating disease, and has trouble-
some or disabling angina that is not adequately con-
trolled by medical therapy or does not tolerate medical 
therapy. The patient wishes to lead a more active life 
and has severe stenoses of two or three epicardial cor-
onary arteries with objective evidence of myocar-
dial ischemia as a cause of the chest discomfort. Great 
symptomatic benefit can be anticipated in such patients. 
Congestive heart failure and/or left ventricular dysfunc-
tion, advanced age (>80 years), reoperation, urgent need 
for surgery, and the presence of diabetes mellitus are all 
associated with a higher perioperative mortality rate.
 
CHAPTER 33
Ischemic Heart Disease
405
Left ventricular dysfunction can be due to noncon-
tractile or hypocontractile segments that are viable but 
are chronically ischemic (hibernating myocardium). 
As a consequence of chronic reduction in myocardial 
blood flow, these segments downregulate their con-
tractile function. They can be detected by using radio-
nuclide scans of myocardial perfusion and metabolism, 
PET, cardiac MRI, or delayed scanning with thal-
lium-201 or by improvement of regional functional 
impairment provoked by low-dose dobutamine. In such 
patients, revascularization improves myocardial blood 
flow, can return function, and can improve survival.
The choice between PCI and CABG
All the clinical characteristics of each individual patient 
must be used to decide on the method of revascular-
ization (LV function, diabetes, lesion complexity, etc.). 
A number of randomized clinical trials have compared 
PCI and CABG in patients with multivessel CAD who 
were suitable technically for both procedures. The rede-
velopment of angina requiring repeat coronary angiog-
raphy and repeat revascularization is higher with PCI. 
This is a result of restenosis in the stented segment (a 
problem largely solved with drug-eluting stents) and the 
development of new stenoses in unstented portions of 
the coronary vasculature. It has been argued that PCI 
with stenting focuses on culprit lesions whereas a bypass 
graft to the target vessel also provides a conduit around 
future culprit lesions proximal to the anastomosis of 
the graft to the native vessel (Fig. 33-3). By contrast, 
stroke rates are lower with PCI.
Comparison of mortality rates in patients treated with 
CABG versus PCI is a complex issue. There is an early 
increased risk of mortality with CABG, but mortality 
rates appear similar in the two revascularization strate-
gies over the long term.
Based on available evidence, it is now recommended 
that patients with an unacceptable level of angina despite 
optimal medical management be considered for coro-
nary revascularization. Patients with single- or two-vessel 
disease with normal LV function and anatomically suit-
able lesions ordinarily are advised to undergo PCI (Chap. 
36). Patients with three-vessel disease (or two-vessel dis-
ease that includes the proximal left descending coronary 
artery) and impaired global LV function (LV ejection 
fraction <50%) or diabetes mellitus and those with left 
main coronary artery disease or other lesions unsuitable 
for catheter-based procedures should be considered for 
CABG as the initial method of revascularization. In light 
of the complexity of the decision making, it is desirable 
to have a multidisciplinary team, including a cardiologist 
and a cardiac surgeon in conjunction with the patient’s 
primary care physician, provide input in conjunction 
with ascertaining the patient’s preferences before com-
mitting to a particular revascularization option.
Figure 33-3 
Difference in the approach to the lesion with 
percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) and 
coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG). PCI is 
targeted at the “culprit” lesion or lesions, whereas 
CABG is directed at the epicardial vessel, includ-
ing the culprit lesion or lesions and future cul-
prits, proximal to the insertion of the vein graft, a 
difference that may account for the superiority of 
CABG, at least in the intermediate term, in patients 
with multivessel disease. (Reproduced from BJ 
Gersh et al: N Engl J Med 352:2235, 2005.)
Stent
Coronary
artery
Bypass
graft
Lesion
Lesion
Future
culprit
lesion
Future
culprit
lesion
A
B
PCI
CABG
406
SECTION V
Disorders of the Vasculature
Unconventional Treatments for IHD
On occasion, clinicians will encounter a patient who 
has persistent disabling angina despite maximally toler-
ated medical therapy and for whom revascularization is 
not an option (e.g., small diffusely diseased vessels not 
amenable to stent implantation or acceptable targets for 
bypass grafting). In such situations unconventional treat-
ments should be considered.
Enhanced external counterpulsation utilizes pneumatic 
cuffs on the lower extremities to provide diastolic aug-
mentation and systolic unloading of blood pressure 
to decrease cardiac work and oxygen consumption while 
enhancing coronary blood flow. Clinical trials have 
shown that regular application improves angina, exercise 
capacity, and regional myocardial perfusion. Experimen-
tal approaches such as gene and stem cell therapies are 
also under active study.
Asymptomatic (Silent) Ischemia
Obstructive CAD, acute myocardial infarction, and 
transient myocardial ischemia are frequently asymptom-
atic. During continuous ambulatory ECG monitoring, 
the majority of ambulatory patients with typical chronic 
stable angina are found to have objective evidence of 
myocardial ischemia (ST-segment depression) during 
episodes of chest discomfort while they are active out-
side the hospital. In addition, many of these patients also 
have more frequent episodes of asymptomatic ischemia. 
Frequent episodes of ischemia (symptomatic and asymp-
tomatic) during daily life appear to be associated with an 
increased likelihood of adverse coronary events (death 
and myocardial infarction). In addition, patients with 
asymptomatic ischemia after a myocardial infarction are 
at greater risk for a second coronary event. The wide-
spread use of exercise ECG during routine examinations 
has also identified some of these previously unrecog-
nized patients with asymptomatic CAD. Longitudinal 
studies have demonstrated an increased incidence of 
coronary events in asymptomatic patients with positive 
exercise tests.
treatment	
Asymptomatic Ischemia
The management of patients with asymptomatic isch-
emia must be individualized. When coronary disease 
has been confirmed, the aggressive treatment of hyper-
tension and dyslipidemia is essential and will decrease 
the risk of infarction and death. In addition, the physi-
cian should consider the following: (1) the degree of 
positivity of the stress test, particularly the stage of 
exercise at which ECG signs of ischemia appear; the 
magnitude and number of the ischemic zones of myo-
cardium on imaging; and the change in LV ejection 
fraction that occurs on radionuclide ventriculography 
or echocardiography during ischemia and/or during  
exercise, (2) the ECG leads showing a positive response, 
with changes in the anterior precordial leads indicating 
a less favorable prognosis than changes in the inferior 
leads, and (3) the patient’s age, occupation, and general 
medical condition.
Most would agree that an asymptomatic 45-year-old 
commercial airline pilot with significant (0.4-mV) ST-
segment depression in leads V1 to V4 during mild exer-
cise should undergo coronary arteriography, whereas 
an asymptomatic, sedentary 85-year-old retiree with 
0.1-mV ST-segment depression in leads II and III during 
maximal activity need not. However, there is no con-
sensus about the most appropriate approach in the 
large majority of patients for whom the situation is less 
extreme. Asymptomatic patients with silent ischemia, 
three-vessel CAD, and impaired LV function may be  
considered appropriate candidates for CABG.
The treatment of risk factors, particularly lipid lower-
ing and blood pressure control as described above, and 
the use of aspirin, statins, and beta blockers after infarc-
tion have been shown to reduce events and improve 
outcomes in asymptomatic as well as symptomatic 
patients with ischemia and proven CAD. Although the 
incidence of asymptomatic ischemia can be reduced by 
treatment with beta blockers, calcium channel block-
ers, and long-acting nitrates, it is not clear whether this 
is necessary or desirable in patients who have not had a 
myocardial infarction.
 Christopher P. Cannon 
I  Eugene Braunwald 
407
 Patients with ischemic heart disease fall into two large 
groups: patients with chronic coronary artery dis-
ease (CAD) who most commonly present with stable 
angina ( Chap. 33 ) and patients with acute coronary 
syndromes (ACSs). The latter group, in turn, is com-
posed of patients with acute myocardial infarction 
(MI) with ST-segment elevation on their presenting 
electrocardiogram (ECG) (STEMI;  Chap. 35 ) and 
those with unstable angina (UA) and non-ST-segment 
elevation MI (UA/NSTEMI;  Fig. 35-1 ). Every year 
in the United States, approximately 1 million patients 
are admitted to hospitals with UA/NSTEMI as com-
pared with ∼300,000 patients with acute STEMI. 
The relative incidence of UA/NSTEMI compared to 
STEMI appears to be increasing. More than one-third 
of patients with UA/NSTEMI are women, while less 
than one-fourth of patients with STEMI are women. 
 DEFINITION 
 The diagnosis of UA is based largely on the clinical pre-
sentation.  Stable angina pectoris is characterized by chest 
or arm discomfort that may not be described as pain 
but is reproducibly associated with physical exertion 
or stress and is relieved within 5–10 min by rest and/
or sublingual nitroglycerin ( Chap. 4 ). UA is deﬁ ned 
as angina pectoris or equivalent ischemic discomfort 
with at least one of three features: (1) it occurs at rest 
(or with minimal exertion), usually lasting >10 min; 
(2) it is severe and of new onset (i.e., within the prior 
4–6 weeks); and/or (3) it occurs with a crescendo pattern 
(i.e., distinctly more severe, prolonged, or frequent than 
previously). The diagnosis of NSTEMI is established if 
a patient with the clinical features of UA develops evi-
dence of myocardial necrosis, as reﬂ ected in elevated 
cardiac biomarkers. 
 PATHOPHYSIOLOGY 
 UA/NSTEMI is most commonly caused by a reduc-
tion in oxygen supply and/or by an increase in myo-
cardial oxygen demand superimposed on a lesion that 
causes coronary arterial obstruction, usually an athero-
thrombotic coronary plaque. Four pathophysiologic 
processes that may contribute to the development of 
UA/NSTEMI have been identiﬁ ed: (1) plaque rup-
ture or erosion with a superimposed nonocclusive 
thrombus, believed to be the most common cause; in 
such patients, NSTEMI may occur with downstream 
embolization of platelet aggregates and/or athero-
sclerotic debris; (2) dynamic obstruction (e.g., coro-
nary spasm, as in Prinzmetal’s variant angina [PVA]); 
(3) progressive mechanical obstruction (e.g., rapidly 
advancing coronary atherosclerosis or restenosis fol-
lowing percutaneous coronary intervention [PCI]); 
and (4) UA secondary to increased myocardial oxygen 
demand and/or decreased supply (e.g., tachycardia, 
anemia). More than one of these processes may be 
involved. 
 Among patients with UA/NSTEMI studied at angi-
ography, approximately 5% have stenosis of the left 
main coronary artery, 15% have three-vessel CAD, 
30% have two-vessel disease, 40% have single-vessel 
disease, and 10% have no apparent critical epicardial 
coronary artery stenosis; some of the latter may have 
obstruction of the coronary microcirculation. The 
“culprit lesion” may show an eccentric stenosis with 
scalloped or overhanging edges and a narrow neck on 
angiography. Angioscopy has been reported to show 
“white” (platelet-rich) thrombi, as opposed to “red” 
(ﬁ brin- and cell-rich) thrombi; the latter are more often 
seen in patients with acute STEMI. Patients with UA/
NSTEMI frequently have multiple plaques at risk of 
disruption (vulnerable plaques). 
 UNSTABLE ANGINA AND NON-ST-SEGMENT 
ELEVATION MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION 
 CHAPTER 34 
SECTION V
Disorders of the Vasculature
408
Clinical Presentation
History and physical examination
The clinical hallmark of UA/NSTEMI is chest pain, 
typically located in the substernal region or sometimes 
in the epigastrium, that radiates to the neck, left shoul-
der, and/or the left arm (Chap. 4). This discomfort 
is usually severe enough to be described as frank pain. 
Anginal “equivalents” such as dyspnea and epigastric 
discomfort may also occur, and these appear to be more 
frequent in women. The physical examination resem-
bles that in patients with stable angina (Chap. 33) and 
may be unremarkable. If the patient has a large area of 
myocardial ischemia or a large NSTEMI, the physical 
findings can include diaphoresis; pale, cool skin; sinus 
tachycardia; a third and/or fourth heart sound; basilar 
rales; and, sometimes, hypotension, resembling the find-
ings of large STEMI.
Electrocardiogram
In UA, ST-segment depression, transient ST-segment 
elevation, and/or T-wave inversion occur in 30% to 
50% of patients. In patients with the clinical features of 
UA, the presence of new ST-segment deviation, even 
of only 0.05 mV, is an important predictor of adverse 
outcome. T-wave changes are sensitive for ischemia but 
less specific, unless they are new, deep T-wave inver-
sions (≥0.3 mV).
Cardiac biomarkers
Patients with UA/NSTEMI who have elevated bio-
markers of necrosis, such as CK-MB and troponin 
(a much more specific and sensitive marker of myocar-
dial necrosis), are at increased risk for death or recur-
rent MI. Elevated levels of these markers distinguish 
patients with NSTEMI from those with UA. There is 
a direct relationship between the degree of troponin 
elevation and mortality. However, in patients without 
a clear clinical history of myocardial ischemia, minor 
troponin elevations have been reported and can be 
caused by congestive heart failure (CHF), myocarditis, 
or pulmonary embolism, or they may be false-positive 
readings. Thus, in patients with an unclear history, small 
troponin elevations may not be diagnostic of an ACS.
Diagnostic Evaluation
(See also Chap. 4) Approximately 6 million persons 
per year in the United States present to hospital emer-
gency departments (EDs) with a complaint of chest pain 
or other symptoms suggestive of ACS. A diagnosis of 
an ACS is established in 20% to 25% of such patients. 
The first step in evaluating patients with possible UA/
NSTEMI is to determine the likelihood that CAD is the 
cause of the presenting symptoms. The American Col-
lege of Cardiology/American Heart Association (ACC/
AHA) guidelines include, among the factors associated 
with a high likelihood of ACS, a prior history typical of 
stable angina, a history of established CAD by angiog-
raphy, prior MI, CHF, new ECG changes, or elevated 
cardiac biomarkers.
Diagnostic pathways
Four major diagnostic tools are used in the diagnosis 
of UA/NSTEMI in the ED: clinical history, the ECG, 
cardiac markers, and stress testing (coronary imaging is 
an emerging option). The goals are to: (1) recognize 
or exclude MI (using cardiac markers), (2) evaluate 
for rest ischemia (using serial or continuous ECGs), 
and (3) evaluate for significant CAD (using provoca-
tive stress testing). Patients with a low likelihood of 
ischemia are usually managed with an ED-based criti-
cal pathway (which, in some institutions, is carried 
out in a “chest-pain unit” Fig. 34-1). Evaluation of 
such patients includes clinical monitoring for recurrent 
ischemic discomfort, serial ECGs, and cardiac markers, 
typically obtained at baseline and at 4–6 h and 12 h 
after presentation. If new elevations in cardiac mark-
ers or ECG changes are noted, the patient should be 
admitted to the hospital. If the patient remains pain 
free and the markers are negative, the patient may 
proceed to stress testing. CT angiography is used with 
increasing frequency to exclude obstructive CAD 
(Chap. 12).
Risk Stratification and Prognosis
Patients with documented UA/NSTEMI exhibit a wide 
spectrum of early (30 days) risk of death, ranging from 
1% to 10%, and of new or recurrent infarction of 3–5% 
or recurrent ACS (5-15%). Assessment of risk can be 
accomplished by clinical risk scoring systems such as 
that developed from the Thrombolysis in Myocardial 
Infarction (TIMI) Trials, which includes seven inde-
pendent risk factors: age ≥65 years, three or more risk 
factors for CAD, documented CAD at catheterization, 
development of UA/NSTEMI while on aspirin, more 
than two episodes of angina within the preceding 24 h, 
ST deviation ≥0.5 mm, and an elevated cardiac marker 
(Fig. 34-2). Other risk factors include diabetes mellitus, 
left ventricular dysfunction, renal dysfunction and ele-
vated levels of brain natriuretic peptides and C-reactive 
protein. Multimarker strategies involving several bio-
markers are now gaining favor, both to define more 
fully the pathophysiologic mechanisms underlying a 
given patient’s presentation and to stratify the patient’s 
 
CHAPTER 34
Unstable Angina and Non-ST-Segment Elevation Myocardial Infarction
409
Figure 34-1 
Algorithm for risk stratification and treatment of patients with 
suspected coronary artery disease. Using the clinical history 
of the type of pain and medical history, the ECG, and cardiac 
markers, one can identify patients who have a low likelihood 
of UA/NSTEMI, for whom a diagnostic “ruleout myocardial 
infarction (MI) or acute coronary syndrome (ACS)” is war-
ranted. If this is negative, the patient may be discharged, but 
if positive, the patient is admitted and treated for UA/NSTEMI. 
On the other end of the spectrum, patients with acute ongo-
ing pain and ST-segment elevation are treated with percutane-
ous coronary intervention (PCI) or fibrinolysis (Chap. 35). For 
those with UA/NSTEMI, risk stratification is used to identify 
patients at medium to high risk, for whom an early invasive 
strategy is warranted. Antithrombotic therapy should include 
aspirin, an anticoagulant, an ADP antagonist (clopidogrel 
or prasugrel), with GP IIb/IIIa inhibition considered for use 
during PCI. For patients at low risk, treatment with aspirin, 
clopidogrel, an anticoagulant such as unfractionated or low 
molecular–weight heparin (LMWH) or fondaparinux and anti-
ischemic therapy with beta blockers and nitrates, and a con-
servative strategy are indicated. ASA, aspirin; DM, diabetes 
mellitus; ECG, electrocardiogram; MI, myocardial infarction; 
Rx, treatment; STEMI, ST-segment elevation myocardial infarc-
tion. (Adapted from CP Cannon, E Braunwald, in Braunwald’s 
Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine, 9th ed, 
R Bonow et al [eds]. Philadelphia, Saunders, 2011.)
Clinical finding
ECG
Cardiac markers
Noncardiac
chest pain
Stable
angina
Negative  
Negative
Exertional
pain
Atypical
pain
Risk
assessment
Low probability
Discharge
Negative
Positive
Diagnostic
rule out MI/ACS
pathway
ASA, clopidogrel,
anticoagulant,
anti-ischemic therapy
Early conservative Rx
STEMI
Unstable
angina
NSTEMI
Rest pain, Post-MI,
DM, Prior ASA
Positive
ST-T wave changes
ST
elevation
Ongoing
pain
High risk
Primary PCI
Thrombolysis
STEMI
Low risk
ASA+ anticoagulant
+ ADP inhibitor
+ IIb/IIIa inhibitor if unstable
anti-ischemic therapy
Early invasive Rx
Age ≥ 65 years
≥ 3 CAD risk factors
Prior stenosis > 50%
ST deviation
≥ 2 anginal events ≤ 24h
ASA in last 7 days
Elev cardiac markers
50
40
0/1
2
3
4
5
6/7
4.7
8.3
13.2
19.9
26.2
40.9
30
20
10
0
D/MI/Urg Revasc, %
Number of Risk Factors
4.3
% Population:
17.3
32.0
29.3
13.0
3.4
Figure 34-2 
The TIMI Risk Score for UA/NSTEMI, a simple but compre-
hensive clinical risk stratification score to identify increasing 
risk of death, myocardial infarction, or urgent revasculariza-
tion to day 14. CAD, coronary artery disease; ASA, aspirin. 
(Adapted from EM Antman et al: JAMA 284:835, 2000.)
risk further. Early risk assessment (especially using tro-
ponin, ST-segment changes, and/or a global risk-
scoring system) is useful both in predicting the risk of 
recurrent cardiac events and in identifying those patients 
who would derive the greatest benefit from antithrom-
botic therapies more potent than unfractionated hepa-
rin, such as low molecular–weight heparin (LMWH) 
and glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors, and from an early 
invasive strategy. For example, in the TACTICS-
TIMI 18 Trial, an early invasive strategy conferred a 
40% reduction in recurrent cardiac events in patients 
with a positive troponin level, whereas no benefit was 
observed in those without detectable troponin.
Treatment	
Unstable Angina and Non-ST-Segment 
Elevation Myocardial Infarction
Medical Treatment  Patients with UA/NSTEMI 
should be placed at bed rest with continuous ECG moni-
toring for ST-segment deviation and cardiac arrhyth-
mias. Ambulation is permitted if the patient shows no 
recurrence of ischemia (discomfort or ECG changes) and 
does not develop a biomarker of necrosis for 12–24 h. 
Medical therapy involves simultaneous anti-ischemic 
treatment and antithrombotic treatment.
SECTION V
Disorders of the Vasculature
410
Anti-Ischemic Treatment  (Table 34-1) To 
provide relief and prevention of recurrence of chest pain, 
initial treatment should include bed rest, nitrates, and 
beta blockers.
Nitrates  Nitrates should first be given sublingually or 
by buccal spray (0.3–0.6 mg) if the patient is experienc-
ing ischemic pain. If pain persists after three doses given 
5 min apart, intravenous nitroglycerin (5–10 μg/min using 
nonabsorbing tubing) is recommended. The rate of the  
infusion may be increased by 10 μg/min every 3–5 min 
until symptoms are relieved or systolic arterial pressure 
falls to <100 mmHg. Topical or oral nitrates (Chap. 33) can 
be used once the pain has resolved or they may replace 
intravenous nitroglycerin when the patient has been pain-
free for 12–24 h. The only absolute contraindications to 
the use of nitrates are hypotension or the use of sildenafil 
or other drugs in that class within the previous 24–48 h.
Table 34-1
Drugs Commonly Used in Intensive Medical Management of Patients With Unstable Angina and 
Non-ST-Segment Elevation MI
Drug Category
Clinical Condition
When to Avoida
Dosage
Nitrates
Administer sublingually, 
and, if symptoms persist, 
intravenously
Hypotension 
Patient receiving sildenafil  
or other PDE-5 inhibitor
Topical, oral, or buccal nitrates are 
acceptable alternatives for patients 
without ongoing or refractory symptoms
5–10 μg/min by continuous infusion titrated 
up to 75–100 μg/min until relief of symp-
toms or limiting side effects (headache or 
hypotension with a systolic blood pressure 
<90 mmHg or more than 30% below start-
ing mean arterial pressure levels if signifi-
cant hypertension is present)
Beta blockersb
Unstable angina
PR interval (ECG) >0.24 s
2° or 3° atrioventricular block
Heart rate <60 beats/min
Systolic pressure <90 mmHg
Shock
Left ventricular failure 
Severe reactive airway  
disease
Metoprolol 25–50 mg by mouth every 6 h
If needed, and no heart failure, 5-mg 
increments by slow (over 1–2 min)
IV administration
Calcium channel 
blockers
Patients whose symptoms 
are not relieved by ade-
quate doses of nitrates and 
beta blockers, or in patients 
unable to tolerate adequate 
doses of one or both of 
these agents, or in patients 
with variant angina
Pulmonary edema
Evidence of left ventricular 
dysfunction (for diltiazem  
or verapamil)
Dependent on specific agent
Morphine sulfate
Patients whose symptoms 
are not relieved after 
three serial sublingual 
nitroglycerin tablets 
or whose symptoms 
recur with adequate 
anti-ischemic therapy
Hypotension
Respiratory depression
Confusion
Obtundation
2–5 mg IV dose
May be repeated every 5–30 min as 
needed to relieve symptoms and  
maintain patient comfort
aAllergy or prior intolerance is a contraindication for all categories of drugs listed in this chart.
bChoice of the specific agent is not as important as ensuring that appropriate candidates receive this therapy. If there are concerns about patient 
intolerance owing to existing pulmonary disease, especially asthma, left ventricular dysfunction, risk of hypotension or severe bradycardia, initial 
selection should favor a short-acting agent, such as propranolol or metoprolol or the ultra-short-acting agent esmolol. Mild wheezing or a history 
of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease should prompt a trial of a short-acting agent at a reduced dose (e.g., 2.5 mg IV metoprolol, 12.5 mg 
oral metoprolol, or 25 μg/kg per min esmolol as initial doses) rather than complete avoidance of beta-blocker therapy.
Note: Some of the recommendations in this guide suggest the use of agents for purposes or in doses other than those specified by the U.S. 
Food and Drug Administration. Such recommendations are made after consideration of concerns regarding nonapproved indications. Where 
made, such recommendations are based on more recent clinical trials or expert consensus. IV, intravenous; ECG, electrocardiogram; 2°, 
second-degree; 3°, third-degree.
Source: Modified from E Braunwald et al: Circulation 90:613, 1994.
 
CHAPTER 34
Unstable Angina and Non-ST-Segment Elevation Myocardial Infarction
411
Beta 
Adrenergic 
Blockers 
and 
Other 
Agents  Beta blockers are the other mainstay of 
anti-ischemic treatment. Oral beta blockade targeted 
to a heart rate of 50–60 beats/min is recommended 
as first-line treatment. A caution has been raised in 
the new ACC/AHA guidelines for use of intravenous 
beta blockade in patients with any evidence of acute 
heart failure, where they could increase the risk of 
cardiogenic shock. Heart rate–slowing calcium chan-
nel blockers, e.g., verapamil or diltiazem, are recom-
mended for patients who have persistent or recurrent 
symptoms after treatment with full-dose nitrates and 
beta blockers and in patients with contraindications 
to beta blockade. Additional medical therapy includes 
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibition and 
HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors (statins) for long-term 
secondary prevention. Early administration of inten-
sive statin therapy (e.g., atorvastatin 80 mg) prior to 
percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) has been 
shown to reduce complications, suggesting that high-
dose statin therapy should be started at the time of 
admission.
Antithrombotic 
Therapy  (Table 34-2) 
This is the other main component of treatment for 
UA/NSTEMI. Initial treatment should begin with the 
platelet cyclooxygenase inhibitor aspirin (Fig. 34-3). 
The typical initial dose is 325 mg/d, with lower doses 
(75–162 mg/d) recommended for long-term therapy. 
The OASIS-7 trial randomized 25,087 ACS patients 
to receive high-dose (300–325 mg/d) vs. low-dose 
(75–100 mg/d) aspirin for 30 days and reported no dif-
ferences in the risk of major bleeding or in efficacy over 
this period of time. “Aspirin resistance” has been noted 
in 5–10% of patients and more frequently in patients 
treated with lower doses of aspirin, but frequently has 
been related to noncompliance.
The thienopyridine, clopidogrel, an inactive prodrug 
that is converted into an active metabolite, which blocks 
the platelet P2Y12 component or the adenosine diphos-
phate receptor, in combination with aspirin, was shown 
in the CURE trial to confer a 20% relative reduction in 
cardiovascular death, MI, or stroke, compared with aspi-
rin alone in both low- and high-risk patients, but to be 
associated with a moderate (absolute 1%) increase in 
major bleeding. Pretreatment with clopidogrel (a 300 or  
600 mg loading dose, followed by 75 mg qd) is recom-
mended prior to PCI. The OASIS-7 trial reported that 1  
week of a higher dose of clopidogrel (600 mg loading  
dose and 150 mg/d for 1 week) did not result in an  
overall improvement in outcomes in ACS patients, but 
did so in patients receiving 325 mg of aspirin, especially 
those who underwent PCI.
Continued benefit of 1 year of treatment with  
the combination of clopidogrel and aspirin has been 
Table 34-2
Clinical Use of Antithrombotic Therapy
Oral Antiplatelet Therapy
Aspirin
Initial dose of 162–325 mg 
nonenteric formulation 
followed by 75–162 mg/d of 
an enteric or a nonenteric 
formulation
Clopidogrel
Loading dose of 300–600 mg 
followed by 75 mg/d
Prasugrel
Pre-PCI: Loading dose 60 mg 
followed by 10 mg/d
Intravenous Antiplatelet Therapy
Abciximab
0.25 mg/kg bolus followed by 
infusion of 0.125 μg/kg per 
min (maximum 10 μg/min) for 
12 to 24 h
Eptifibatide
180 μg/kg bolus followed by 
infusion of 2.0 μg/kg per min 
for 72 to 96 h
Tirofiban
0.4 μg/kg per min for 
30 min followed by infusion 
of 0.1 μg/kg per min for 
48 to 96 h
Heparinsa
Unfractionated Heparin 
(UFH)
Bolus 60–70 U/kg (maximum 
5000 U) IV followed by 
infusion of 12–15 U/kg per h 
(initial maximum 1000 U/h) 
titrated to a PTT 50–70 s
Enoxaparin
1 mg/kg SC every 12 h; the 
first dose may be preceded 
by a 30-mg IV bolus; renal 
adjustment to 1 mg/kg once 
daily if creatine Cl <30 cc/min
Fondaparinux
2.5 mg SC qd
Bivalirudin
Initial bolus intravenous bolus 
of 0.1 mg/kg and an infusion 
of 0.25 mg/kg per hour. Before 
PCI, an additional intravenous 
bolus of 0.5 mg/kg was 
administered, and the infusion 
was increased to 1.75 mg/kg 
per hour.
aOther LMWH exist beyond those listed.
Abbreviations: IV, intravenous; SC, subcutaneously.
Source: Modified from J Anderson et al: JACO 50:e1, 2007.
observed both in patients treated conservatively and 
in those who underwent PCI and should certainly con-
tinue for at least 1 year in patients with a drug-eluting  
stent. Up to one-third of patients have low response to 
clopidogrel, and a substantial proportion of these are 
related to a genetic variant of the cytochrome P450 
SECTION V
Disorders of the Vasculature
412
A recently approved thienopyridine, prasugrel, has 
been shown to achieve a more rapid onset, and higher 
level of platelet inhibition than clopidogrel. It has been 
used in ACS patients following angiography in whom 
PCI is planned at a dose of 60 mg load followed by  
10 mg/d for up to 15 months. The TRITON-TIMI 38 trial 
showed that relative to clopidogrel, prasugrel reduced 
the risk of cardiovascular death, MI, or stroke signifi-
cantly by 19%, albeit with an increase in major bleeding. 
Stent thrombosis was also reduced by 52%. This agent 
is contraindicated in patients with prior stroke or tran-
sient ischemic attack. Ticagrelor is a novel, reversible 
ADP inhibitor that has recently been reported to reduce 
the risk of cardiovascular death, MI, or stroke by 16% 
compared with clopidogrel in a broad population of 
ACS patients. This agent also reduced mortality and did 
not increase the risk of total bleeding; it is not yet FDA 
approved at the time of this writing.
Four options are available for anticoagulant therapy 
to be added to aspirin and clopidogrel. Unfraction-
ated heparin (UFH) is the mainstay of therapy. The low-
molecular-weight heparin (LMWH), enoxaparin, has 
been shown in several studies to be superior to UFH 
in reducing recurrent cardiac events, especially in con-
servatively managed patients. The indirect Factor Xa 
inhibitor, fondaparinux, is equivalent for early efficacy 
compared with enoxaparin but appears to have a lower 
risk of major bleeding. Bivalirudin, a direct thrombin 
inhibitor, is similar in efficacy to either UFH or LMWH 
among patients treated with a GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor, but 
use of bivalirudin alone causes less bleeding than the 
combination of heparin and a GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor in 
patients with UA/NSTEMI undergoing catheterization 
and/or PCI.
Prior to the advent of clopidogrel, many trials had 
shown the benefit of intravenous GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors. 
The benefit, however, has been small, i.e., only a 9% 
reduction in death or MI, with a significant increase in 
major bleeding. Two recent studies also failed to show 
a benefit for early initiation compared with use only for 
PCI. The use of these agents may be reserved for unsta-
ble patients with recurrent rest pain and ECG changes 
who undergo PCI.
Excessive bleeding is the most important adverse 
effect of all antithrombotic agents, including antico-
agulants and antiplatelet agents. Therefore, attention 
must be directed to the doses of antithrombotic agents, 
accounting for weight, creatinine clearance, and a previ-
ous history of excessive bleeding, as a means of reducing 
the risk of bleeding.
Invasive Versus Conservative Strat-
egy  Multiple clinical trials have demonstrated the 
benefit of an early invasive strategy in high-risk patients, 
i.e., patients with multiple clinical risk factors, ST-segment 
GB 1b receptor
GP IIb/IIIa receptor
GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor
Fibrinogen
Activated platelet
Platelet
Plaque rupture
1. Platelet adhesion
2. Platelet activation
3. Platelet aggregation
Figure 34-3 
Platelets initiate thrombosis at the site of a ruptured plaque 
with denuded endothelium: platelet adhesion occurs via 
(1)  the GP 1b receptor in conjunction with von Willebrand 
factor. This is followed by platelet activation (2), which leads 
to a shape change of the platelet, degranulation of the alpha 
and dense granules, and expression of glycoprotein IIb/
IIIa receptors on the platelet surface with activation of the 
receptor, such that it can bind fibrinogen. The final step is 
platelet aggregation (3), in which fibrinogen (or von Will-
ebrand factor) binds to the activated GP IIb/IIIa receptors. 
Aspirin (ASA) and clopidogrel act to decrease platelet acti-
vation, whereas the GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors inhibit the final step 
of platelet aggregation. GP, glycoprotein. (Modified from 
CP Cannon, E Braunwald, in Braunwald’s Heart Disease: A 
Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine, 8th ed, R Bonow et al 
[eds]. Philadelphia, Saunders, 2008.)
system. A variant of the 2C19 gene leads to reduced 
conversion of clopidogrel into its active metabolite, 
which, in turn, causes lower platelet inhibition and a 
higher risk of cardiovascular events. Alternate agents, 
such as prasugrel, should be considered for ACS 
patients who are hyporesponsive to clopidogrel as iden-
tified by platelet and/or genetic testing, although such 
testing is not yet widespread.
 
CHAPTER 34
Unstable Angina and Non-ST-Segment Elevation Myocardial Infarction
413
Table 34-3
Class I Recommendations for Use of an 
Early Invasive Strategya
Class I (Level of Evidence: A) Indications
  Recurrent angina at rest/low-level activity despite Rx
  Elevated TnT or TnI
  New ST-segment depression
  Rec. angina/ischemia with CHF symptoms, rales, MR
  Positive stress test
  EF <0.40
  Decreased BP
  Sustained VT
  PCI <6 months, prior CABG
High-risk score
aAny one of the high-risk indicators.
Abbreviations: BP, blood pressure; CABG, coronary artery bypass 
grafting; CHF, congestive heart failure; EF, ejection fraction; MR, 
mitral regurgitation; PCI, percutaneous coronary intervention; Rec, 
recurrent; TnI, troponin I; TnT, troponin T; VT, ventricular tachycardia.
Source: J Anderson et al: JACO 50:e1, 2007.
deviation, and/or positive biomarkers (Table 34-3). In 
this strategy, following treatment with anti-ischemic and 
antithrombotic agents, coronary arteriography is car-
ried out within ∼48 h of admission, followed by coronary 
revascularization (PCI or coronary artery bypass grafting), 
depending on the coronary anatomy.
In low-risk patients, the outcomes from an invasive 
strategy are similar to those obtained from a conserva-
tive strategy, which consists of anti-ischemic and anti-
thrombotic therapy followed by “watchful waiting,” and 
in which coronary arteriography is carried out only if 
rest pain or ST-segment changes recur or there is evi-
dence of ischemia on a stress test.
Long-Term Management
The time of hospital discharge is a “teachable 
moment” for the patient with UA/NSTEMI, when 
the physician can review and optimize the medi-
cal regimen. Risk-factor modification is key, and 
the caregiver should discuss with the patient the 
importance of smoking cessation, achieving optimal 
weight, daily exercise following an appropriate diet, 
blood-pressure control, tight control of hyperglyce-
mia (for diabetic patients), and lipid management, as 
recommended for patients with chronic stable angina 
(Chap. 33).
There is evidence of benefit with long-term ther-
apy with five classes of drugs that are directed at dif-
ferent components of the atherothrombotic process. 
Beta blockers, statins (at a high dose, e.g., atorvastatin 
80 mg/d), and ACE inhibitors or angiotensin receptor 
blockers are recommended for long-term plaque sta-
bilization. Antiplatelet therapy, now recommended to 
be the combination of aspirin and clopidogrel (or pra-
sugrel in post PCS patients) for 1 year, with aspirin 
continued thereafter, prevents or reduces the severity 
of any thrombosis that would occur if a plaque were to 
rupture.
Observational registries have shown that patients 
with UA/NSTEMI at high risk, including women and 
the elderly as well as racial minorities, are less likely to 
receive evidence-based pharmacologic and interven-
tional therapies with resultant poorer clinical outcomes 
and quality of life.
Prinzmetal’s Variant Angina
In 1959, Prinzmetal et al. described a syndrome of severe 
ischemic pain that occurs at rest but not usually with 
exertion and is associated with transient ST-segment 
elevation. This syndrome is due to focal spasm of an 
epicardial coronary artery, leading to severe myocardial 
ischemia. The cause of the spasm is not well defined, 
but it may be related to hypercontractility of vascular 
smooth muscle due to vasoconstrictor mitogens, leuko-
trienes, or serotonin.
Clinical and angiographic manifestations
Patients with Prinzmetal’s variant angina (PVA) are 
generally younger and have fewer coronary risk fac-
tors (with the exception of cigarette smoking) than 
patients with UA secondary to coronary atheroscle-
rosis. Cardiac examination is usually unremarkable 
in the absence of ischemia. The clinical diagnosis of 
variant angina is made with the detection of transient 
ST-segment elevation with rest pain. Many patients also 
exhibit multiple episodes of asymptomatic ST-segment 
elevation (silent ischemia). Small elevations of troponin 
may occur in patients with prolonged attacks of vari-
ant angina.
Coronary angiography demonstrates transient coro-
nary spasm as the diagnostic hallmark of PVA. Athero-
sclerotic plaques, which do not usually cause critical 
obstruction, in at least one proximal coronary artery 
occur in the majority of patients, and in them spasm 
usually occurs within 1 cm of the plaque. Focal spasm 
is most common in the right coronary artery, and it 
may occur at one or more sites in one artery or in 
multiple arteries simultaneously. Ergonovine, acetyl-
choline, other vasoconstrictor medications, and hyper-
ventilation have been used to provoke focal coronary 
stenosis on angiography to establish the diagnosis. 
Hyperventilation has also been used to provoke rest 
angina, ST-segment elevation, and spasm on coronary 
arteriography.
SECTION V
Disorders of the Vasculature
414
Treatment	
Prinzmetal’s Variant Angina
Nitrates and calcium channel blockers are the main 
agents used to treat acute episodes and to abolish 
recurrent episodes of PVA. Aspirin may actually increase 
the severity of ischemic episodes, possibly as a result 
of the exquisite sensitivity of coronary tone to modest 
changes in the synthesis of prostacyclin. The response 
to beta blockers is variable. Coronary revascularization 
may be helpful in patients who also have discrete, proxi-
mal fixed obstructive lesions.
Prognosis
Many patients with PVA pass through an acute, active 
phase, with frequent episodes of angina and cardiac events 
during the first 6 months after presentation. Long-term 
survival at 5 years is excellent (∼90–95%). Patients with 
no or mild fixed coronary obstruction tend to experi-
ence a more benign course than do patients with asso-
ciated severe obstructive lesions. Nonfatal MI occurs in 
up to 20% of patients by 5 years. Patients with PVA who 
develop serious arrhythmias during spontaneous episodes 
of pain are at a higher risk for sudden cardiac death. In 
most patients who survive an infarction or the initial 3- to 
6-month period of frequent episodes, the condition sta-
bilizes, and there is a tendency for symptoms and cardiac 
events to diminish over time.
 Elliott M. Antman 
I  Joseph Loscalzo 
415
 Acute myocardial infarction (AMI) is one of the most 
common diagnoses in hospitalized patients in industri-
alized countries. In the United States, approximately 
650,000 patients experience a new AMI and 450,000 
experience a recurrent AMI each year. The early 
(30-day) mortality rate from AMI is ∼30%, with more 
than half of these deaths occurring before the stricken 
individual reaches the hospital. Although the mortal-
ity rate after admission for AMI has declined by ∼30% 
over the past two decades, approximately 1 of every 
25 patients who survives the initial hospitalization dies 
in the ﬁ rst year after AMI. Mortality is approximately 
fourfold higher in elderly patients (over age 75) as com-
pared with younger patients. 
 When patients with prolonged ischemic discom-
fort at rest are ﬁ rst seen, the working clinical diagnosis 
is that they are suffering from an acute coronary syn-
drome  ( Fig. 35-1 ) . The 12-lead electrocardiogram 
(ECG) is a pivotal diagnostic and triage tool because 
it is at the center of the decision pathway for manage-
ment; it permits distinction of those patients presenting 
with ST-segment elevation from those presenting with-
out ST-segment elevation. Serum cardiac biomarkers 
are obtained to distinguish unstable angina (UA) from 
non-ST-segment MI (NSTEMI) and to assess the mag-
nitude of an ST-segment elevation MI (STEMI). This 
chapter focuses on the evaluation and management of 
patients with STEMI, while  Chap. 34 discusses UA/
NSTEMI. 
 PATHOPHYSIOLOGY: ROLE OF ACUTE 
PLAQUE RUPTURE 
 STEMI usually occurs when coronary blood ﬂ ow 
decreases abruptly after a thrombotic occlusion of a 
coronary artery previously affected by atherosclerosis. 
 ST-SEGMENT ELEVATION MYOCARDIAL 
INFARCTION 
 CHAPTER 35 
Acute coronary syndrome
Presentation
Working Dx
ECG
Biochem.
marker
Final Dx
Myocardial infarction
Unstable angina
NQMI
Qw MI
No ST elevation
NSTEMI
ST elevation
Ischemic Discomfort
 FIGURE 35-1  
Acute coronary syndromes. Following disruption of a vul-
nerable plaque, patients experience ischemic discomfort 
resulting from a reduction of ﬂ ow through the affected epi-
cardial coronary artery. The ﬂ ow reduction may be caused 
by a completely occlusive thrombus ( right ) or subtotally 
occlusive thrombus ( left ). Patients with ischemic discom-
fort may present with or without ST-segment elevation. Of 
patients with ST-segment elevation, the majority ( wide red 
arrow ) ultimately develop a Q wave on the ECG (QwMI), 
while a minority ( thin red arrow ) do not develop Q wave and, 
in older literature, were said to have sustained a non-Q-wave 
MI (NQMI). Patients who present without ST-segment eleva-
tion are suffering from either unstable angina or a non-ST-
segment elevation MI (NSTEMI) ( wide green arrows ), a dis-
tinction that is ultimately made on the presence or absence 
of a serum cardiac marker such as CKMB or a cardiac tro-
ponin detected in the blood. The majority of patients pre-
senting with NSTEMI do not develop a Q wave on the ECG; 
a minority develop a QwMI ( thin green arrow ). ( Adapted 
from CW Hamm et al: Lancet 358:1533, 2001, and MJ 
Davies: Heart 83:361, 2000; with permission from the BMJ 
Publishing Group .) 
416
Disorders of the Vasculature
SECTION V
Slowly developing, high-grade coronary artery steno-
ses do not typically precipitate STEMI because of the 
development of a rich collateral network over time. 
Instead, STEMI occurs when a coronary artery throm-
bus develops rapidly at a site of vascular injury. This 
injury is produced or facilitated by factors such as ciga-
rette smoking, hypertension, and lipid accumulation. 
In most cases, STEMI occurs when the surface of an 
atherosclerotic plaque becomes disrupted (exposing 
its contents to the blood) and conditions (local or sys-
temic) favor thrombogenesis. A mural thrombus forms 
at the site of plaque disruption, and the involved coro-
nary artery becomes occluded. Histologic studies indi-
cate that the coronary plaques prone to disruption 
are those with a rich lipid core and a thin fibrous cap 
(Chap. 30). After an initial platelet monolayer forms at 
the site of the disrupted plaque, various agonists (col-
lagen, ADP, epinephrine, serotonin) promote platelet 
activation. After agonist stimulation of platelets, throm-
boxane A2 (a potent local vasoconstrictor) is released, 
further platelet activation occurs, and potential resis-
tance to fibrinolysis develops.
In addition to the generation of thromboxane A2, 
activation of platelets by agonists promotes a confor-
mational change in the glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptor. 
Once converted to its functional state, this receptor 
develops a high affinity for soluble adhesive proteins 
(i.e., integrins) such as fibrinogen. Since fibrinogen is a 
multivalent molecule, it can bind to two different plate-
lets simultaneously, resulting in platelet cross-linking 
and aggregation.
The coagulation cascade is activated on exposure of 
tissue factor in damaged endothelial cells at the site of 
the disrupted plaque. Factors VII and X are activated, 
ultimately leading to the conversion of prothrombin 
to thrombin, which then converts fibrinogen to fibrin. 
Fluid-phase and clot-bound thrombin participate in an 
autoamplification reaction leading to further activation of 
the coagulation cascade. The culprit coronary artery 
eventually becomes occluded by a thrombus contain-
ing platelet aggregates and fibrin strands.
In rare cases, STEMI may be due to coronary 
artery occlusion caused by coronary emboli, congeni-
tal abnormalities, coronary spasm, and a wide vari-
ety of systemic—particularly inflammatory—diseases. 
The amount of myocardial damage caused by coronary 
occlusion depends on (1) the territory supplied by the 
affected vessel, (2) whether or not the vessel becomes 
totally occluded, (3) the duration of coronary occlusion, 
(4) the quantity of blood supplied by collateral vessels 
to the affected tissue, (5) the demand for oxygen of the 
myocardium whose blood supply has been suddenly 
limited, (6) endogenous factors that can produce early 
spontaneous lysis of the occlusive thrombus, and (7) 
the adequacy of myocardial perfusion in the infarct zone 
when flow is restored in the occluded epicardial coro-
nary artery.
Patients at increased risk for developing STEMI 
include those with multiple coronary risk factors 
(Chap. 30) and those with unstable angina (Chap. 34). 
Less common underlying medical conditions predispos-
ing patients to STEMI include hypercoagulability, col-
lagen vascular disease, cocaine abuse, and intracardiac 
thrombi or masses that can produce coronary emboli.
There have been major advances in the management 
of STEMI with recognition that the “chain of survival” 
involves a highly integrated system starting with prehos-
pital care and extending to early hospital management 
so as to provide expeditious implementation of a reper-
fusion strategy.
Clinical Presentation
In up to one-half of cases, a precipitating factor appears 
to be present before STEMI, such as vigorous physical 
exercise, emotional stress, or a medical or surgical ill-
ness. Although STEMI may commence at any time 
of the day or night, circadian variations have been 
reported such that clusters are seen in the morning 
within a few hours of awakening.
Pain is the most common presenting complaint in 
patients with STEMI. The pain is deep and visceral; 
adjectives commonly used to describe it are heavy, squeez-
ing, and crushing, although, occasionally, it is described as 
stabbing or burning (Chap. 4). It is similar in character 
to the discomfort of angina pectoris (Chap. 33) but com-
monly occurs at rest, is usually more severe, and lasts 
longer. Typically, the pain involves the central portion 
of the chest and/or the epigastrium, and, on occasion, 
it radiates to the arms. Less common sites of radiation 
include the abdomen, back, lower jaw, and neck. The 
frequent location of the pain beneath the xiphoid and 
epigastrium and the patients’ denial that they may be suf-
fering a heart attack are chiefly responsible for the com-
mon mistaken impression of indigestion. The pain of 
STEMI may radiate as high as the occipital area but not 
below the umbilicus. It is often accompanied by weak-
ness, sweating, nausea, vomiting, anxiety, and a sense of 
impending doom. The pain may commence when the 
patient is at rest, but when it begins during a period of 
exertion, it does not usually subside with cessation 
of activity, in contrast to angina pectoris.
The pain of STEMI can simulate pain from acute 
pericarditis (Chap. 22), pulmonary embolism, acute aor-
tic dissection (Chap. 38), costochondritis, and gastro-
intestinal disorders. These conditions should therefore 
be considered in the differential diagnosis. Radiation of 
discomfort to the trapezius is not seen in patients with 
STEMI and may be a useful distinguishing feature that 
suggests pericarditis is the correct diagnosis. However, 
 
CHAPTER 35
ST-Segment Elevation Myocardial Infarction
417
pain is not uniformly present in patients with STEMI. The 
proportion of painless STEMIs is greater in patients 
with diabetes mellitus, and it increases with age. In the 
elderly, STEMI may present as sudden-onset breathless-
ness, which may progress to pulmonary edema. Other 
less common presentations, with or without pain, include 
sudden loss of consciousness, a confusional state, a sensa-
tion of profound weakness, the appearance of an arrhyth-
mia, evidence of peripheral embolism, or merely an 
unexplained drop in arterial pressure.
Physical Findings
Most patients are anxious and restless, attempting unsuc-
cessfully to relieve the pain by moving about in bed, 
altering their position, and stretching. Pallor associated 
with perspiration and coolness of the extremities occurs 
commonly. The combination of substernal chest pain 
persisting for >30 min and diaphoresis strongly suggests 
STEMI. Although many patients have a normal pulse 
rate and blood pressure within the first hour of STEMI, 
about one-fourth of patients with anterior infarction have 
manifestations of sympathetic nervous system hyperactiv-
ity (tachycardia and/or hypertension), and up to one-half 
with inferior infarction show evidence of parasympathetic 
hyperactivity (bradycardia and/or hypotension).
The precordium is usually quiet, and the apical 
impulse may be difficult to palpate. In patients with 
anterior wall infarction, an abnormal systolic pulsa-
tion caused by dyskinetic bulging of infarcted myocar-
dium may develop in the periapical area within the first 
days of the illness and then may resolve. Other physi-
cal signs of ventricular dysfunction include fourth and 
third heart sounds, decreased intensity of the first heart 
sound, and paradoxical splitting of the second heart 
sound (Chap. 9). A transient mid-systolic or late sys-
tolic apical systolic murmur due to dysfunction of the 
mitral valve apparatus may be present. A pericardial 
friction rub is heard in many patients with transmural 
STEMI at some time in the course of the disease, if the 
patients are examined frequently. The carotid pulse is 
often decreased in volume, reflecting reduced stroke 
volume. Temperature elevations up to 38°C may be 
observed during the first week after STEMI. The arte-
rial pressure is variable; in most patients with transmural 
infarction, systolic pressure declines by approximately 
10–15 mmHg from the preinfarction state.
Laboratory Findings
Myocardial infarction (MI) progresses through the fol-
lowing temporal stages: (1) acute (first few hours– 
7 days), (2) healing (7–28 days), and (3) healed (29 days). 
When evaluating the results of diagnostic tests for STEMI, 
the temporal phase of the infarction must be considered. 
The laboratory tests of value in confirming the diagnosis 
may be divided into four groups: (1) ECG, (2) serum car-
diac biomarkers, (3) cardiac imaging, and (4) nonspecific 
indices of tissue necrosis and inflammation.
Electrocardiogram
The electrocardiographic manifestations of STEMI are 
described in Chap. 11. During the initial stage, total 
occlusion of an epicardial coronary artery produces ST-
segment elevation. Most patients initially presenting 
with ST-segment elevation ultimately evolve Q waves 
on the ECG. However, Q waves in the leads overlying 
the infarct zone may vary in magnitude and even appear 
only transiently, depending on the reperfusion status 
of the ischemic myocardium and restoration of trans-
membrane potentials over time. A small proportion of 
patients initially presenting with ST-segment elevation 
will not develop Q waves when the obstructing throm-
bus is not totally occlusive, obstruction is transient, or if 
a rich collateral network is present. Among patients pre-
senting with ischemic discomfort but without ST-segment 
elevation, if a serum cardiac biomarker of necrosis (see 
later) is detected, the diagnosis of NSTEMI is ulti-
mately made (Fig. 35-1). A minority of patients who 
present initially without ST-segment elevation may 
develop a Q-wave MI. Previously, it was believed 
that transmural MI is present if the ECG demonstrates 
Q waves or loss of R waves, and nontransmural MI may 
be present if the ECG shows only transient ST-segment 
and T-wave changes. However, electrocardiographic-
pathologic correlations are far from perfect and terms 
such as Q-wave MI, non-Q-wave MI, transmural MI, and 
nontransmural MI, have been replaced by STEMI and 
NSTEMI (Fig. 35-1). Contemporary studies using MRI 
suggest that the development of a Q wave on the ECG 
is more dependent on the volume of infarcted tissue 
rather than the transmurality of infarction.
Serum Cardiac Biomarkers
Certain proteins, called serum cardiac biomarkers, are 
released from necrotic heart muscle after STEMI. The 
rate of liberation of specific proteins differs depending 
on their intracellular location, their molecular weight, 
and the local blood and lymphatic flow. Cardiac bio-
markers become detectable in the peripheral blood once 
the capacity of the cardiac lymphatics to clear the inter-
stitium of the infarct zone is exceeded and spillover into 
the venous circulation occurs. The temporal pattern of 
protein release is of diagnostic importance, but contem-
porary urgent reperfusion strategies necessitate making 
a decision (based largely on a combination of clinical 
and ECG findings) before the results of blood tests have 
returned from the laboratory. Rapid whole-blood bed-
side assays for serum cardiac markers are now available 
418
Disorders of the Vasculature
SECTION V
Necrosing zone
of myocardium
Troponin free
in cytoplasm
Cardiomyocyte
Myosin
Actin
Troponin complex
bound to actin filament
Lymphatic system
Venous system
0
0
1
2
5
10
20
50
1
2
3
Myoglobin and
CK isoforms
Troponin
(large MI)
Troponin
(small MI)
10% CV/99th percentile
CKMB
Days after onset of AMI
Multiples of the AMI cutoff limit
4
5
6
7
8
9
Figure 35-2 
The zone of necrosing myocardium is shown at the top of the 
figure, followed in the middle portion of the figure by a diagram 
of a cardiomyocyte that is in the process of releasing biomark-
ers. The biomarkers that are released into the interstitium are 
first cleared by lymphatics followed subsequently by spillover 
into the venous system. After disruption of the sarcolemmal 
membrane of the cardiomyocyte, the cytoplasmic pool of bio-
markers is released first (left-most arrow in bottom portion of 
figure). Markers such as myoglobin and CK isoforms are rapidly 
released, and blood levels rise quickly above the cutoff limit; 
this is then followed by a more protracted release of biomarkers 
from the disintegrating myofilaments that may continue for sev-
eral days. Cardiac troponin levels rise to about 20 to 50 times 
the upper reference limit (the 99th percentile of values in a refer-
ence control group) in patients who have a “classic” acute myo-
cardial infarction (MI) and sustain sufficient myocardial necrosis 
to result in abnormally elevated levels of the MB fraction of cre-
atine kinase (CKMB). Clinicians can now diagnose episodes of 
microinfarction by sensitive assays that detect cardiac troponin 
elevations above the upper reference limit, even though CKMB 
levels may still be in the normal reference range (not shown). 
CV = coefficient of variation. (Modified from EM Antman: Deci-
sion making with cardiac troponin tests. N Engl J Med 346:2079, 
2002 and AS Jaffe et al: Biomarkers in acute cardiac disease: 
The present and the future. J Am Coll Cardiol 48:1, 2006.)
and may facilitate management decisions, particularly in 
patients with nondiagnostic ECGs.
Cardiac-specific troponin T (cTnT) and cardiac-specific 
troponin I (cTnI) have amino-acid sequences different 
from those of the skeletal muscle forms of these pro-
teins. These differences permitted the development of 
quantitative assays for cTnT and cTnI with highly spe-
cific monoclonal antibodies. Since cTnT and cTnI are 
not normally detectable in the blood of healthy individ-
uals but may increase after STEMI to levels >20 times 
higher than the upper reference limit (the highest 
value seen in 99% of a reference population not suffer-
ing from MI), the measurement of cTnT or cTnI is of 
considerable diagnostic usefulness, and they are now the 
preferred biochemical markers for MI (Fig. 35-2). The 
cardiac troponins are particularly valuable when there 
is clinical suspicion of either skeletal muscle injury or 
a small MI that may be below the detection limit for 
creatine phosphokinase (CK) and its MB isoenzyme 
(CKMB) measurements, and they are, therefore, of 
particular value in distinguishing UA from NSTEMI. 
Levels of cTnI and cTnT may remain elevated for 
7–10 days after STEMI.
CK rises within 4–8 h and generally returns to nor-
mal by 48–72 h (Fig. 35-2). An important drawback 
of total CK measurement is its lack of specificity for 
STEMI, as CK may be elevated with skeletal muscle 
disease or trauma, including intramuscular injection. 
 
CHAPTER 35
ST-Segment Elevation Myocardial Infarction
419
The MB isoenzyme of CK has the advantage over total 
CK that it is not present in significant concentrations in 
extracardiac tissue and, therefore, is considerably more 
specific. However, cardiac surgery, myocarditis, and 
electrical cardioversion often result in elevated serum 
levels of the MB isoenzyme. A ratio (relative index) 
of CKMB mass: CK activity ≥2.5 suggests but is not 
diagnostic of a myocardial rather than a skeletal muscle 
source for the CKMB elevation.
Many hospitals are using cTnT or cTnI rather than 
CKMB as the routine serum cardiac marker for diag-
nosis of STEMI, although any of these analytes remain 
clinically acceptable. It is not cost-effective to measure 
both a cardiac-specific troponin and CKMB at all time 
points in every patient.
While it has long been recognized that the total 
quantity of protein released correlates with the size 
of the infarct, the peak protein concentration corre-
lates only weakly with infarct size. Recanalization of a 
coronary artery occlusion (either spontaneously or by 
mechanical or pharmacologic means) in the early hours 
of STEMI causes earlier peaking of biomarker measure-
ments (Fig. 35-2) because of a rapid washout from the 
interstitium of the infarct zone, quickly overwhelming 
lymphatic clearance of the proteins.
The nonspecific reaction to myocardial injury is asso-
ciated with polymorphonuclear leukocytosis, which 
appears within a few hours after the onset of pain and 
persists for 3–7 days; the white blood cell count often 
reaches levels of 12,000–15,000/μL. The erythrocyte 
sedimentation rate rises more slowly than the white 
blood cell count, peaking during the first week and 
sometimes remaining elevated for 1 or 2 weeks.
Cardiac Imaging
Abnormalities of wall motion on two-dimensional echo-
cardiography (Chap. 12) are almost universally present. 
Although acute STEMI cannot be distinguished from 
an old myocardial scar or from acute severe ischemia 
by echocardiography, the ease and safety of the proce-
dure make its use appealing as a screening tool in the 
emergency department setting. When the ECG is not 
diagnostic of STEMI, early detection of the presence or 
absence of wall motion abnormalities by echocardiogra-
phy can aid in management decisions, such as whether 
the patient should receive reperfusion therapy (e.g., 
fibrinolysis or a percutaneous coronary intervention 
[PCI]). Echocardiographic estimation of left ventricu-
lar (LV) function is useful prognostically; detection of 
reduced function serves as an indication for therapy with 
an inhibitor of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system. 
Echocardiography may also identify the presence of right 
ventricular (RV) infarction, ventricular aneurysm, peri-
cardial effusion, and LV thrombus. In addition, Doppler 
echocardiography is useful in the detection and quantita-
tion of a ventricular septal defect and mitral regurgita-
tion, two serious complications of STEMI.
Several radionuclide imaging techniques (Chap. 12) are 
available for evaluating patients with suspected STEMI. 
However, these imaging modalities are used less often 
than echocardiography because they are more cumber-
some and lack sensitivity and specificity in many clinical 
circumstances. Myocardial perfusion imaging with [201Tl] 
or [99mTc]-sestamibi, which are distributed in propor-
tion to myocardial blood flow and concentrated by viable 
myocardium (Chap. 33), reveal a defect (“cold spot”) 
in most patients during the first few hours after develop-
ment of a transmural infarct. Although perfusion scanning 
is extremely sensitive, it cannot distinguish acute infarcts 
from chronic scars and, thus, is not specific for the diag-
nosis of acute MI. Radionuclide ventriculography, carried 
out with [99mTc]-labeled red blood cells, frequently dem-
onstrates wall motion disorders and reduction in the ven-
tricular ejection fraction in patients with STEMI. While 
of value in assessing the hemodynamic consequences of 
infarction and in aiding in the diagnosis of RV infarction 
when the RV ejection fraction is depressed, this tech-
nique is nonspecific, as many cardiac abnormalities other 
than MI alter the radionuclide ventriculogram.
Myocardial infarction can be detected accurately 
with high-resolution cardiac MRI (Chap. 12) using a 
technique referred to as late enhancement. A standard 
imaging agent (gadolinium) is administered and images 
are obtained after a 10-min delay. Since little gadolin-
ium enters normal myocardium, where there are tightly 
packed myocytes, but does percolate into the expanded 
intercellular region of the infarct zone, there is a bright 
signal in areas of infarction that appears in stark contrast 
to the dark areas of normal myocardium.
Initial Management
Prehospital Care
The prognosis in STEMI is largely related to the occur-
rence of two general classes of complications: (1) elec-
trical complications (arrhythmias) and (2) mechanical 
complications (“pump failure”). Most out-of-hospital 
deaths from STEMI are due to the sudden development 
of ventricular fibrillation. The vast majority of deaths 
due to ventricular fibrillation occur within the first 24 h 
of the onset of symptoms, and of these, over half occur 
in the first hour. Therefore, the major elements of pre-
hospital care of patients with suspected STEMI include 
(1) recognition of symptoms by the patient and prompt 
seeking of medical attention; (2) rapid deployment 
of an emergency medical team capable of perform-
ing resuscitative maneuvers, including defibrillation; 
420
Disorders of the Vasculature
SECTION V
(3) expeditious transportation of the patient to a hospital 
facility that is continuously staffed by physicians and 
nurses skilled in managing arrhythmias and provid-
ing advanced cardiac life support; and (4) expeditious 
implementation of reperfusion therapy (Fig. 35-3). The 
greatest delay usually occurs not during transportation to 
the hospital but, rather, between the onset of pain and 
the patient’s decision to call for help. This delay can best 
be reduced by health care professionals educating the 
public concerning the significance of chest discomfort 
and the importance of seeking early medical attention. 
Regular office visits with patients having a history of or 
who are at risk for ischemic heart disease are important 
“teachable moments” for clinicians to review the symp-
toms of STEMI and the appropriate action plan.
Increasingly, monitoring and treatment are carried out 
by trained personnel in the ambulance, further short-
ening the time between the onset of the infarction and 
appropriate treatment. General guidelines for initiation 
of fibrinolysis in the prehospital setting include the abil-
ity to transmit 12-lead ECGs to confirm the diagnosis, the 
presence of paramedics in the ambulance, training of para-
medics in the interpretation of ECGs and management of 
STEMI, and online medical command and control that 
can authorize the initiation of treatment in the field.
Patient
Fibrinolysis
Primary PCI
Transport
In-hospital
Reperfusion
Onset
of MI
Methods of
Speeding Time
to Reperfusion
CURRENT
GOAL
Patient
Response
Media campaign
Patient education
MI protocol
Prehospital ECG
911 expansion
Prehospital Rx
Bolus lytics
Dedicated PCI team
Drug
Started
Flow
Restored
Cath PCI
Door
Data
Decision
5 min
30 min
D-N ≤ 30 min
D-B ≤ 90 min
Figure 35-3 
Major components of time delay between onset of symp-
toms from STEMI and restoration of flow in the infarct-
related artery. Plotted sequentially from left to right are the 
times for patients to recognize symptoms and seek medical 
attention, transportation to the hospital, in-hospital decision 
making, implementation of reperfusion strategy, and restora-
tion of flow once the reperfusion strategy has been initiated. 
The time to initiate fibrinolytic therapy is the “door-to-needle” 
(D-N) time; this is followed by the period of time required for 
pharmacologic restoration of flow. More time is required to 
move the patient to the catheterization laboratory for a per-
cutaneous coronary interventional (PCI) procedure, referred 
to as the “door-to-balloon” (D-B) time, but restoration of flow 
in the epicardial infarct–related artery occurs promptly after 
PCI. At the bottom is a variety of methods for speeding the 
time to reperfusion along with the goals for the time intervals 
for the various components of the time delay. (Adapted from 
CP Cannon et al: J Thromb Thrombol 1:27, 1994.)
Management in the Emergency 
Department
In the emergency department, the goals for the man-
agement of patients with suspected STEMI include 
control of cardiac discomfort, rapid identification of 
patients who are candidates for urgent reperfusion 
therapy, triage of lower-risk patients to the appropriate 
location in the hospital, and avoidance of inappropri-
ate discharge of patients with STEMI. Many aspects of 
the treatment of STEMI are initiated in the emergency 
department and then continued during the in-hospital 
phase of management.
Aspirin is essential in the management of patients with 
suspected STEMI and is effective across the entire spec-
trum of acute coronary syndromes (Fig. 35-1). Rapid 
inhibition of cyclooxygenase-1 in platelets followed by a 
reduction of thromboxane A2 levels is achieved by buccal 
absorption of a chewed 160–325-mg tablet in the emer-
gency department. This measure should be followed by 
daily oral administration of aspirin in a dose of 75–162 mg.
In patients whose arterial O2 saturation is normal, 
supplemental O2 is of limited if any clinical benefit and 
therefore is not cost-effective. However, when hypox-
emia is present, O2 should be administered by nasal 
 
CHAPTER 35
ST-Segment Elevation Myocardial Infarction
421
prongs or face mask (2–4 L/min) for the first 6–12 h after 
infarction; the patient should then be reassessed to deter-
mine if there is a continued need for such treatment.
Control of Discomfort
Sublingual nitroglycerin can be given safely to most patients 
with STEMI. Up to three doses of 0.4 mg should be 
administered at about 5-min intervals. In addition to 
diminishing or abolishing chest discomfort, nitroglycerin 
may be capable of both decreasing myocardial oxygen 
demand (by lowering preload) and increasing myocar-
dial oxygen supply (by dilating infarct-related coronary 
vessels or collateral vessels). In patients whose initially 
favorable response to sublingual nitroglycerin is followed 
by the return of chest discomfort, particularly if accom-
panied by other evidence of ongoing ischemia such as 
further ST-segment or T-wave shifts, the use of intrave-
nous nitroglycerin should be considered. Therapy with 
nitrates should be avoided in patients who present with 
low systolic arterial pressure (<90 mmHg) or in whom 
there is clinical suspicion of right ventricular infarction 
(inferior infarction on ECG, elevated jugular venous 
pressure, clear lungs, and hypotension). Nitrates should 
not be administered to patients who have taken the phos-
phodiesterase-5 inhibitor sildenafil for erectile dysfunc-
tion within the preceding 24 h, because it may potentiate 
the hypotensive effects of nitrates. An idiosyncratic reac-
tion to nitrates, consisting of sudden marked hypotension, 
sometimes occurs but can usually be reversed promptly 
by the rapid administration of intravenous atropine.
Morphine is a very effective analgesic for the pain 
associated with STEMI. However, it may reduce sym-
pathetically mediated arteriolar and venous constriction, 
and the resulting venous pooling may reduce cardiac 
output and arterial pressure. These hemodynamic dis-
turbances usually respond promptly to elevation of the 
legs, but in some patients volume expansion with intra-
venous saline is required. The patient may experience 
diaphoresis and nausea, but these events usually pass and 
are replaced by a feeling of well-being associated with 
the relief of pain. Morphine also has a vagotonic effect 
and may cause bradycardia or advanced degrees of heart 
block, particularly in patients with inferior infarction. 
These side effects usually respond to atropine (0.5 mg 
intravenously). Morphine is routinely administered by 
repetitive (every 5 min) intravenous injection of small 
doses (2–4 mg), rather than by the subcutaneous admin-
istration of a larger quantity, because absorption may be 
unpredictable by the latter route.
Intravenous beta blockers are also useful in the con-
trol of the pain of STEMI. These drugs control pain 
effectively in some patients, presumably by diminish-
ing myocardial O2 demand and hence ischemia. More 
important, there is evidence that intravenous beta 
blockers reduce the risks of reinfarction and ventricular 
fibrillation (see “Beta-Adrenoceptor Blockers,” later). 
However, patient selection is important when consider-
ing beta blockers for STEMI. Oral beta-blocker therapy 
should be initiated in the first 24 h for patients who do 
not have any of the following: (1) signs of heart failure, 
(2) evidence of a low-output state, (3) increased risk for 
cardiogenic shock, or (4) other relative contraindica-
tions to beta blockade (PR interval greater than 0.24 s, 
second- or third-degree heart block, active asthma, or 
reactive airway disease). A commonly employed regi-
men is metoprolol, 5 mg every 2–5 min for a total of 
3 doses, provided the patient has a heart rate >60 beats 
per minute (bpm), systolic pressure >100 mmHg, a PR 
interval <0.24 s, and rales that are no higher than 10 cm 
up from the diaphragm. Fifteen min after the last intra-
venous dose, an oral regimen is initiated of 50 mg every 
6 h for 48 h, followed by 100 mg every 12 h.
Unlike beta blockers, calcium antagonists are of lit-
tle value in the acute setting, and there is evidence that 
short-acting dihydropyridines may be associated with an 
increased mortality risk.
Management Strategies
The primary tool for screening patients and making triage 
decisions is the initial 12-lead ECG. When ST-segment 
elevation of at least 2 mm in two contiguous precordial 
leads and 1 mm in two adjacent limb leads is present, a 
patient should be considered a candidate for reperfusion 
therapy (Fig. 35-4). The process of selecting patients for 
fibrinolysis versus primary PCI (angioplasty, or stenting; 
Chap. 36) is discussed later. In the absence of ST-segment 
elevation, fibrinolysis is not helpful, and evidence exists 
suggesting that it may be harmful.
Limitation of Infarct Size
The quantity of myocardium that becomes necrotic as 
a consequence of a coronary artery occlusion is deter-
mined by factors other than just the site of occlusion. 
While the central zone of the infarct contains necrotic 
tissue that is irretrievably lost, the fate of the surround-
ing ischemic myocardium (ischemic penumbra) may be 
improved by timely restoration of coronary perfusion, 
reduction of myocardial O2 demands, prevention of 
the accumulation of noxious metabolites, and blunting 
of the impact of mediators of reperfusion injury (e.g., 
calcium overload and oxygen-derived free radicals). 
Up to one-third of patients with STEMI may achieve 
spontaneous reperfusion of the infarct-related coronary 
artery within 24 h and experience improved healing of 
infarcted tissue. Reperfusion, either pharmacologically 
(by fibrinolysis) or by PCI, accelerates the opening of 
infarct-related arteries in those patients in whom spon-
taneous fibrinolysis ultimately would have occurred and 
also greatly increases the number of patients in whom 
422
Disorders of the Vasculature
SECTION V
restoration of flow in the infarct-related artery is accom-
plished. Timely restoration of flow in the epicardial 
infarct–related artery combined with improved perfu-
sion of the downstream zone of infarcted myocardium 
results in a limitation of infarct size. Protection of the 
ischemic myocardium by the maintenance of an opti-
mal balance between myocardial O2 supply and demand 
through pain control, treatment of congestive heart 
failure (CHF), and minimization of tachycardia and 
­hypertension extends the “window” of time for the 
­salvage of myocardium by reperfusion strategies.
Glucocorticoids and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory 
agents, with the exception of aspirin, should be avoided 
in patients with STEMI. They can impair infarct heal-
ing and increase the risk of myocardial rupture, and 
their use may result in a larger infarct scar. In addition, 
they can increase coronary vascular resistance, thereby 
potentially reducing flow to ischemic myocardium.
Call 9-1-1
Call fast
Golden hour = first 60 min.
Total ischemic time: within 120 min.
Onset of
symptoms of
STEMI
9-1-1
EMS
dispatch
8
min.
EMS
Patient
Dispatch
1 min.
5
min.
EMS transport
EMS on scene
• Encourage 12-lead ECGs.
• Consider prehospital fibrinolytic if
capable and EMS-to-needle within
30 min.
EMS transport
EMS-to-balloon within 90 min.
Patient self-transport
Hospital door-to-balloon
within 90 min.
Prehospital fibrinolysis
EMS-to-needle
within 30 min.
GOALS
EMS
triage
plan
PCI
capable
Inter-
hospital
transfer
Not PCI
capable
Hospital fibrinolysis:
Door-to-needle
within 30 min.
Figure 35-4 
Options for transportation of patients with STEMI and initial 
reperfusion treatment. Patient transported by EMS after call-
ing 911: Reperfusion in patients with STEMI can be accom-
plished by the pharmacologic (fibrinolysis) or catheter-based 
(primary PCI) approaches. Implementation of these strat-
egies varies based on the mode of transportation of the 
patient and capabilities at the receiving hospital. Transport 
time to the hospital is variable from case to case, but the 
goal is to keep total ischemic time within 120 min. There are 
three possible scenarios: (1) If EMS has fibrinolytic capabil-
ity and the patient qualifies for therapy, prehospital fibrinoly-
sis should be started within 30 min of EMS arrival on scene. 
(2) If EMS is not capable of administering prehospital fibri-
nolysis and the patient is transported to a non-PCI-capable 
hospital, the hospital door-to-needle time should be within 
30 min for patients in whom fibrinolysis is indicated. (3) If 
EMS is not capable of administering prehospital fibrinoly-
sis and the patient is transported to a PCI-capable hospital, 
the hospital door-to-balloon time should be within 90 min. 
Interhospital transfer: It is also appropriate to consider emer-
gency interhospital transfer of the patient to a PCI-capable 
hospital for mechanical revascularization if: (1) there is a con-
traindication to fibrinolysis, (2) PCI can be initiated promptly 
(within 90 min after the patient presented to the initial 
receiving hospital or within 60 min compared to when fibri-
nolysis with a fibrin-specific agent could be initiated at the 
initial receiving hospital), (3) fibrinolysis is administered and 
is unsuccessful (i.e., “rescue PCI”). Secondary nonemer-
gency interhospital transfer can be considered for recurrent 
ischemia. Patient self-transport: Patient self-transportation is 
discouraged. If the patient arrives at a non-PCI-capable hos-
pital, the door-to-needle time should be within 30 min. If the 
patient arrives at a PCI-capable hospital, the door-to-balloon 
time should be within 90 min. The treatment options and 
time recommended after first hospital arrival are the same. 
(Adapted with permission from Antman et al: ACC/AHA 
guidelines for the management of patients with ST-elevation 
myocardial infarction: A report of the American College of 
Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Prac-
tice Guidelines [Committee to Revise the 1999 Guidelines for 
the Management of Patients with Acute Myocardial Infarc-
tion]. Circulation 110:e82, 2004.)
 
CHAPTER 35
ST-Segment Elevation Myocardial Infarction
423
Primary percutaneous coronary intervention
(See also Chap. 36) PCI, usually angioplasty and/or 
stenting without preceding fibrinolysis, referred to as pri-
mary PCI, is effective in restoring perfusion in STEMI 
when carried out on an emergency basis in the first few 
hours of MI. It has the advantage of being applicable 
to patients who have contraindications to fibrinolytic 
therapy (see later) but otherwise are considered appro-
priate candidates for reperfusion. It appears to be more 
effective than fibrinolysis in opening occluded coronary 
arteries and, when performed by experienced operators [  ≥75 
PCI cases (not necessarily primary) per year] in dedicated med-
ical centers (  ≥36 primary PCI cases per year), is associated 
with better short-term and long-term clinical outcomes. 
Compared with fibrinolysis, primary PCI is generally 
preferred when the diagnosis is in doubt, cardiogenic 
shock is present, bleeding risk is increased, or symptoms 
have been present for at least 2–3 h when the clot is 
more mature and less easily lysed by fibrinolytic drugs. 
However, PCI is expensive in terms of personnel and 
facilities, and its applicability is limited by its availability, 
around the clock, in only a minority of hospitals.
Fibrinolysis
If no contraindications are present (see later), fibrino-
lytic therapy should ideally be initiated within 30 min 
of presentation (i.e., door-to-needle time ≤30 min). 
The principal goal of fibrinolysis is prompt restora-
tion of full coronary arterial patency. The fibrinolytic 
agents tissue plasminogen activator (tPA), streptokinase, 
tenecteplase (TNK), and reteplase (rPA) have been 
approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
for intravenous use in patients with STEMI. These 
drugs all act by promoting the conversion of plas-
minogen to plasmin, which subsequently lyses fibrin 
thrombi. Although considerable emphasis was first 
placed on a distinction between more fibrin-specific 
agents, such as tPA, and non-fibrin-specific agents, such 
as streptokinase, it is now recognized that these differ-
ences are only relative, as some degree of systemic fibri-
nolysis occurs with the former agents. TNK and rPA 
are referred to as bolus fibrinolytics since their administra-
tion does not require a prolonged intravenous infusion.
When assessed angiographically, flow in the culprit 
coronary artery is described by a simple qualitative scale 
called the thrombolysis in myocardial infarction (TIMI) grad-
ing system: grade 0 indicates complete occlusion of the 
infarct-related artery; grade 1 indicates some penetration 
of the contrast material beyond the point of obstruction 
but without perfusion of the distal coronary bed; grade 2 
indicates perfusion of the entire infarct vessel into the 
distal bed, but with flow that is delayed compared with 
that of a normal artery; and grade 3 indicates full perfu-
sion of the infarct vessel with normal flow. The latter is 
the goal of reperfusion therapy, because full perfusion of 
the infarct-related coronary artery yields far better results 
in terms of limiting infarct size, maintenance of LV func-
tion, and reduction of both short- and long-term mortal-
ity rates. Additional methods of angiographic assessment 
of the efficacy of fibrinolysis include counting the num-
ber of frames on the cine film required for dye to flow 
from the origin of the infarct-related artery to a landmark 
in the distal vascular bed (TIMI frame count) and deter-
mining the rate of entry and exit of contrast dye from the 
microvasculature in the myocardial infarct zone (TIMI 
myocardial perfusion grade). These methods have an even 
tighter correlation with outcomes after STEMI than the 
more commonly employed TIMI flow grade.
Fibrinolytic therapy can reduce the relative risk 
of in-hospital death by up to 50% when adminis-
tered within the first hour of the onset of symptoms 
of STEMI, and much of this benefit is maintained for 
at least 10 years. When appropriately used, fibrinolytic 
therapy appears to reduce infarct size, limit LV dys-
function, and reduce the incidence of serious compli-
cations such as septal rupture, cardiogenic shock, and 
malignant ventricular arrhythmias. Since myocardium 
can be salvaged only before it has been irreversibly 
injured, the timing of reperfusion therapy, by fibrino-
lysis or a catheter-based approach, is of extreme impor-
tance in achieving maximum benefit. While the upper 
time limit depends on specific factors in individual 
patients, it is clear that every minute counts and that 
patients treated within 1–3 h of the onset of symp-
toms generally benefit most. Although reduction of 
the mortality rate is more modest, the therapy remains 
of benefit for many patients seen 3–6 h after the onset 
of infarction, and some benefit appears to be possible 
up to 12 h, especially if chest discomfort is still pres-
ent and ST segments remain elevated. Compared with 
PCI for STEMI (primary PCI), fibrinolysis is generally 
the preferred reperfusion strategy for patients present-
ing in the first hour of symptoms, if there are logistical 
concerns about transportation of the patient to a suit-
able PCI center (experienced operator and team with 
a track record for a “door-to-balloon” time of <2 h), 
or there is an anticipated delay of at least 1 h between 
the time that fibrinolysis could be started versus imple-
mentation of PCI. Although patients <75 years achieve 
a greater relative reduction in the mortality rate with 
fibrinolytic therapy than do older patients, the higher 
absolute mortality rate (15–25%) in the latter results in 
similar absolute reductions in the mortality rates for 
both age groups.
tPA and the other relatively fibrin-specific plas-
minogen activators, rPA and TNK, are more effec-
tive than streptokinase at restoring full perfusion—i.e., 
TIMI grade 3 coronary flow—and have a small edge in 
improving survival as well. The current recommended 
regimen of tPA consists of a 15-mg bolus followed by 
50 mg intravenously over the first 30 min, followed by 
424
Disorders of the Vasculature
SECTION V
35 mg over the next 60 min. Streptokinase is adminis-
tered as 1.5 million units (MU) intravenously over 1 h. 
rPA is administered in a double-bolus regimen consist-
ing of a 10-MU bolus given over 2–3 min, followed by 
a second 10-MU bolus 30 min later. TNK is given as 
a single weight-based intravenous bolus of 0.53 mg/kg 
over 10 s. In addition to the fibrinolytic agents discussed 
earlier, pharmacologic reperfusion typically involves 
adjunctive antiplatelet and antithrombotic drugs, as dis-
cussed later.
Alternative pharmacologic regimens for reperfusion 
combine an intravenous glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitor 
with a reduced dose of a fibrinolytic agent. Compared 
with fibrinolytic agents that involve a prolonged infu-
sion (e.g., tPA), such combination reperfusion regimens 
facilitate the rate and extent of fibrinolysis by inhibit-
ing platelet aggregation, weakening the clot struc-
ture, and allowing penetration of the fibrinolytic agent 
deeper into the clot. However, combination reperfu-
sion regimens have similar efficacy as compared with 
bolus fibrinolytics and are associated with an increased 
risk of bleeding, especially in patients >75 years. There-
fore, combination reperfusion regimens are not recom-
mended for routine use. Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors, 
given alone or in combination with a reduced dose of a 
fibrinolytic agent as part of a preparatory regimen before 
planned immediate PCI (facilitated PCI), have not been 
shown to reduce infarct size or improve outcomes and, 
furthermore, are associated with increased bleeding. 
Facilitated PCI is, therefore, also not a strategy that is 
recommended for routine use.
Integrated reperfusion strategy
Evidence has emerged that suggests PCI plays an 
increasingly important role in the management of 
STEMI. Prior approaches that segregated the pharma-
cologic and catheter-based approaches to reperfusion 
have now been replaced with an integrated approach 
to triage and transfer of STEMI patients to receive PCI 
(Fig. 35-5).
Contraindications and complications
Clear contraindications to the use of fibrinolytic agents 
include a history of cerebrovascular hemorrhage at any 
time, a nonhemorrhagic stroke or other cerebrovascular 
event within the past year, marked hypertension (a reli-
ably determined systolic arterial pressure >180 mmHg 
and/or a diastolic pressure >110 mmHg) at any time 
during the acute presentation, suspicion of aortic dis-
section, and active internal bleeding (excluding men-
ses). While advanced age is associated with an increase 
in hemorrhagic complications, the benefit of fibrino-
lytic therapy in the elderly appears to justify its use if no 
other contraindications are present and the amount of 
myocardium in jeopardy appears to be substantial.
Relative contraindications to fibrinolytic therapy, which 
require assessment of the risk:benefit ratio, include cur-
rent use of anticoagulants (international normalized ratio 
≥2), a recent (<2 weeks) invasive or surgical procedure 
or prolonged (>10 min) cardiopulmonary resuscita-
tion, known bleeding diathesis, pregnancy, a hemor-
rhagic ophthalmic condition (e.g., hemorrhagic diabetic 
retinopathy), active peptic ulcer disease, and a his-
tory of severe hypertension that is currently adequately 
controlled. Because of the risk of an allergic reaction, 
patients should not receive streptokinase if that agent 
had been received within the preceding 5 days to 2 
years.
Allergic reactions to streptokinase occur in ∼2% of 
patients who receive it. While a minor degree of hypo-
tension occurs in 4–10% of patients given this agent, 
marked hypotension occurs, although rarely, in associa-
tion with severe allergic reactions.
Hemorrhage is the most frequent and potentially 
the most serious complication. Because bleeding epi-
sodes that require transfusion are more common when 
patients require invasive procedures, unnecessary venous 
or arterial interventions should be avoided in patients 
receiving fibrinolytic agents. Hemorrhagic stroke is the 
most serious complication and occurs in ∼0.5–0.9% 
of patients being treated with these agents. This rate 
increases with advancing age, with patients >70 years 
experiencing roughly twice the rate of intracranial hem-
orrhage as those <65 years. Large-scale trials have sug-
gested that the rate of intracranial hemorrhage with tPA 
or rPA is slightly higher than with streptokinase.
Cardiac catheterization and coronary angiography 
should be carried out after fibrinolytic therapy if there 
is evidence of either (1) failure of reperfusion (persis-
tent chest pain and ST-segment elevation >90 min), 
in which case a rescue PCI should be considered; or 
(2) coronary artery reocclusion (re-elevation of ST 
segments and/or recurrent chest pain) or the develop-
ment of recurrent ischemia (such as recurrent angina 
in the early hospital course or a positive exercise stress 
test before discharge), in which case an urgent PCI 
should be considered. The potential benefits of rou-
tine angiography and elective PCI even in asymptom-
atic patients following administration of fibrinolytic 
therapy are controversial, but such an approach may 
have merit given the numerous technological advances 
that have occurred in the catheterization laboratory 
and the increasing number of skilled interventionalists. 
Coronary artery bypass surgery should be reserved for 
patients whose coronary anatomy is unsuited to PCI 
but in whom revascularization appears to be advisable 
because of extensive jeopardized myocardium or recur-
rent ischemia.
 
CHAPTER 35
ST-Segment Elevation Myocardial Infarction
425
Hospital Phase Management
Coronary Care Units
These units are routinely equipped with a system that 
permits continuous monitoring of the cardiac rhythm of 
each patient and hemodynamic monitoring in selected 
patients. Defibrillators, respirators, noninvasive trans-
thoracic pacemakers, and facilities for introducing 
­pacing catheters and flow-directed balloon-tipped cath-
eters are also usually available. Equally important is the 
organization of a highly trained team of nurses who 
STEMI patient who
is a candidate for
reperfusion
Initially seen at a
PCI-capable
facility
Initially seen at a
non-PCI-capable
facility
Send to cath lab
for primary PCI
Transfer for
primary PCI
Initial treatment
with
fibrinolytic
NOT HIGH RISK
Transfer to a PCI
facility may be
considered
especially if
ischemic
symptoms
persist and failure
to reperfuse is
suspected
HIGH RISK
Transfer to a PCI
facility is reasonable
for early diagnostic
angio and possible
PCI or CABG
High-risk patients as
defined by 2007
STEMI focused
update should
undergo cath
Preparatory antithrombotic (anticoagulant
plus antiplatelet) regimen
Medical
therapy only
PCI with
stent
CABG
Diagnostic angiography
At PCI
facility,
evaluate
for timing
of
diagnostic
angio
*• Time since onset of symptoms
 • Risk of STEMI
 • Risk of fibrinolysis
 • Time required for transport to
  a skilled PCI lab
Selection of reperfusion strategy*
Figure 35-5 
Each community and each facility in that community should 
have an agreed-upon plan for how STEMI patients are to 
be treated that includes which hospitals should receive 
STEMI patients from EMS units capable of obtaining diag-
nostic ECGs, management at the initial receiving hospital, 
and written criteria and agreements for expeditious transfer 
of patients from non-PCI-capable facilities. Patients initially 
seen at a PCI-capable facility (left side of diagram) should be 
sent promptly to the cardiac catheterization laboratory with 
the intent to perform primary PCI. Patients initially seen at a 
non-PCI-capable facility (right side of diagram) should rap-
idly be assessed for the optimum reperfusion therapy (see 
box in top right corner for assessment criteria). This may 
include transfer for primary PCI or initial treatment with a 
fibrinolytic. Following administration of a fibrinolytic, man-
agement is dictated by the patient’s overall risk for death/
serious complications of STEMI, and whether or not they 
experience recurrent ischemic symptoms or left-ventricular 
failure (see the two boxes at the bottom right of diagram). 
(Adapted from FG Kushner et al: 2009 focused update of the 
ACC/AHA Guidelines for the Management of Patients with 
ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction [updating the 2004 guide-
line and 2007 focused update]: a report of the American Col-
lege of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association 
Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation 120:2271, 
2009.)
can recognize arrhythmias; adjust the dosage of antiar-
rhythmic, vasoactive, and anticoagulant drugs; and per-
form cardiac resuscitation, including electroshock, when 
necessary.
Patients should be admitted to a coronary care unit 
early in their illness when it is expected that they will 
derive benefit from the sophisticated and expensive care 
provided. The availability of electrocardiographic moni-
toring and trained personnel outside the coronary care 
unit has made it possible to admit lower-risk patients 
(e.g., those not hemodynamically compromised and 
without active arrhythmias) to “intermediate care units.”
426
Disorders of the Vasculature
SECTION V
The duration of stay in the coronary care unit is dic-
tated by the ongoing need for intensive care. If symp-
toms are controlled with oral therapy, patients may be 
transferred out of the coronary care unit. Also, patients 
who have a confirmed STEMI but who are considered 
to be at low risk (no prior infarction and no persistent 
chest discomfort, congestive heart failure [CHF], hypo-
tension, or cardiac arrhythmias) may be safely trans-
ferred out of the coronary care unit within 24 h.
Activity
Factors that increase the work of the heart during the 
initial hours of infarction may increase the size of the 
infarct. Therefore, patients with STEMI should be kept 
at bed rest for the first 12 h. However, in the absence 
of complications, patients should be encouraged, under 
supervision, to resume an upright posture by dan-
gling their feet over the side of the bed and sitting in 
a chair within the first 24 h. This practice is psycho-
logically beneficial and usually results in a reduction in 
the pulmonary capillary wedge pressure. In the absence 
of hypotension and other complications, by the second 
or third day, patients typically are ambulating in their 
room with increasing duration and frequency, and they 
may shower or stand at the sink to bathe. By day 3 after 
infarction, patients should be increasing their ambula-
tion progressively to a goal of 185 m (600 ft) at least 
three times a day.
Diet
Because of the risk of emesis and aspiration soon after 
STEMI, patients should receive either nothing or only 
clear liquids by mouth for the first 4–12 h. The typical 
coronary care unit diet should provide ≤30% of total cal-
ories as fat and have a cholesterol content of ≤300 mg/d. 
Complex carbohydrates should make up 50–55% of total 
calories. Portions should not be unusually large, and 
the menu should be enriched with foods that are high 
in potassium, magnesium, and fiber, but low in sodium. 
Diabetes mellitus and hypertriglyceridemia are managed 
by restriction of concentrated sweets in the diet.
Bowel management
Bed rest and the effect of the narcotics used for the 
relief of pain often lead to constipation. A bedside com-
mode rather than a bedpan, a diet rich in bulk, and the 
routine use of a stool softener such as dioctyl sodium 
sulfosuccinate (200 mg/d) are recommended. If the 
patient remains constipated despite these measures, a 
laxative can be prescribed. Contrary to prior belief, it is 
safe to perform a gentle rectal examination on patients 
with STEMI.
Sedation
Many patients require sedation during hospitalization to 
withstand the period of enforced inactivity with tran-
quillity. Diazepam (5 mg), oxazepam (15–30 mg), or 
lorazepam (0.5–2 mg), given 3–4 times daily, is usually 
effective. An additional dose of any of the above medi-
cations may be given at night to ensure adequate sleep. 
Attention to this problem is especially important dur-
ing the first few days in the coronary care unit, where 
the atmosphere of 24-h vigilance may interfere with 
the patient’s sleep. However, sedation is no substitute 
for reassuring, quiet surroundings. Many drugs used in 
the coronary care unit, such as atropine, H2 blockers, 
and narcotics, can produce delirium, particularly in the 
elderly. This effect should not be confused with agita-
tion, and it is wise to conduct a thorough review of the 
patient’s medications before arbitrarily prescribing addi-
tional doses of anxiolytics.
Pharmacotherapy
Antithrombotic Agents
The use of antiplatelet and anticoagulant therapy dur-
ing the initial phase of STEMI is based on extensive 
laboratory and clinical evidence that thrombosis plays 
an important role in the pathogenesis of this condi-
tion. The primary goal of treatment with antiplatelet 
and anticoagulant agents is to maintain patency of the 
infarct-related artery, in conjunction with reperfusion 
strategies. A secondary goal is to reduce the patient’s 
tendency to thrombosis and, thus, the likelihood of 
mural thrombus formation or deep venous thrombosis, 
either of which could result in pulmonary emboliza-
tion. The degree to which antiplatelet and anticoagu-
lant therapy achieves these goals partly determines how 
effectively it reduces the risk of mortality from STEMI.
As noted previously (see “Management in the 
Emergency Department” above), aspirin is the stan-
dard antiplatelet agent for patients with STEMI. The 
most compelling evidence for the benefits of antiplate-
let therapy (mainly with aspirin) in STEMI is found in 
the comprehensive overview by the Antiplatelet Trial-
ists’ Collaboration. Data from nearly 20,000 patients 
with MI enrolled in 15 randomized trials were pooled 
and revealed a relative reduction of 27% in the mortality 
rate, from 14.2% in control patients to 10.4% in patients 
receiving antiplatelet agents.
Inhibitors of the P2Y12 ADP receptor prevent acti-
vation and aggregation of platelets. The addition of the 
P2Y12 inhibitor clopidogrel to background treatment 
with aspirin to STEMI patients reduces the risk of clini-
cal events (death, reinfarction, stroke) and, in patients 
receiving fibrinolytic therapy, has been shown to 
 
CHAPTER 35
ST-Segment Elevation Myocardial Infarction
427
prevent reocclusion of a successfully reperfused infarct 
artery. New P2Y12 ADP receptor antagonists, such as 
prasugrel and ticagrelor, are more effective than clopi-
dogrel in preventing ischemic complications in STEMI 
patients undergoing PCI, but are associated with an 
increased risk of bleeding. Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa recep-
tor inhibitors appear useful for preventing thrombotic 
complications in patients with STEMI undergoing PCI.
The standard anticoagulant agent used in clinical 
practice is unfractionated heparin (UFH). The avail-
able data suggest that when UFH is added to a regi-
men of aspirin and a non-fibrin-specific thrombolytic 
agent such as streptokinase, additional mortality benefit 
occurs (about 5 lives saved per 1000 patients treated). 
It appears that the immediate administration of intrave-
nous UFH, in addition to a regimen of aspirin and rel-
atively fibrin-specific fibrinolytic agents (tPA, rPA, or 
TNK), helps to maintain patency of the infarct-related 
artery. This effect is achieved at the cost of a small 
increased risk of bleeding. The recommended dose of 
UFH is an initial bolus of 60 U/kg (maximum 4000 U) 
followed by an initial infusion of 12 U/kg per hour 
(maximum 1000 U/h). The activated partial throm-
boplastin time during maintenance therapy should be 
1.5–2 times the control value.
Alternatives to UFH for anticoagulation of patients 
with STEMI are the low-molecular-weight heparin 
(LMWH) preparations, a synthetic version of the criti-
cal pentasaccharide sequence (fondaparinux), and the 
direct antithrombin bivalirudin. Advantages of LMWHs 
include high bioavailability permitting administra-
tion subcutaneously, reliable anticoagulation without 
monitoring, and greater antiXa:IIa activity. Enoxaparin 
has been shown to reduce significantly the compos-
ite endpoints of death/nonfatal reinfarction and death/
nonfatal reinfarction/urgent revascularization compared 
with UFH in STEMI patients who receive fibrinolysis. 
Treatment with enoxaparin is associated with higher 
rates of serious bleeding, but net clinical benefit—a 
composite endpoint that combines efficacy and safety—
still favors enoxaparin over UFH. Interpretation of the 
data on fondaparinux is difficult because of the com-
plex nature of the pivotal clinical trial evaluating it in 
STEMI (OASIS-6). Fondaparinux appears superior to 
placebo in STEMI patients not receiving reperfusion 
therapy, but its relative efficacy and safety compared 
with UFH is less certain. Owing to the risk of catheter 
thrombosis, fondaparinux should not be used alone at 
the time of coronary angiography and PCI but should 
be combined with another anticoagulant with anti-
thrombin activity such as UFH or bivalirudin. Contem-
porary trials of bivalirudin used an open-label design to 
evaluate its efficacy and safety compared with UFH plus 
a glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitor. Bivalirudin was asso-
ciated with a lower rate of bleeding, largely driven by 
reductions in vascular access site hematomas ≥5 cm or 
the administration of blood transfusions.
Patients with an anterior location of the infarction, 
severe LV dysfunction, heart failure, a history of embo-
lism, two-dimensional echocardiographic evidence of 
mural thrombus, or atrial fibrillation are at increased 
risk of systemic or pulmonary thromboembolism. Such 
individuals should receive full therapeutic levels of anti-
coagulant therapy (LMWH or UFH) while hospitalized, 
followed by at least 3 months of warfarin therapy.
Beta-Adrenoceptor Blockers
The benefits of beta blockers in patients with STEMI 
can be divided into those that occur immediately when 
the drug is given acutely and those that accrue over the 
long term when the drug is given for secondary preven-
tion after an infarction. Acute intravenous beta blockade 
improves the myocardial O2 supply-demand relation-
ship, decreases pain, reduces infarct size, and decreases 
the incidence of serious ventricular arrhythmias. In 
patients who undergo fibrinolysis soon after the onset 
of chest pain, no incremental reduction in mortality rate 
is seen with beta blockers, but recurrent ischemia and 
reinfarction are reduced.
Thus, beta-blocker therapy after STEMI is useful for 
most patients (including those treated with an angioten-
sin-converting enzyme [ACE] inhibitor) except those 
in whom it is specifically contraindicated (patients with 
heart failure or severely compromised LV function, heart 
block, orthostatic hypotension, or a history of asthma) 
and perhaps those whose excellent long-term prognosis 
(defined as an expected mortality rate of <1% per year, 
patients <55 years, no previous MI, with normal ven-
tricular function, no complex ventricular ectopy, and no 
angina) markedly diminishes any potential benefit.
Inhibition of the Renin-Angiotensin-
Aldosterone System
ACE inhibitors reduce the mortality rate after STEMI, 
and the mortality benefits are additive to those achieved 
with aspirin and beta blockers. The maximum benefit 
is seen in high-risk patients (those who are elderly or 
who have an anterior infarction, a prior infarction, and/
or globally depressed LV function), but evidence sug-
gests that a short-term benefit occurs when ACE inhibi-
tors are prescribed unselectively to all hemodynamically 
stable patients with STEMI (i.e., those with a systolic 
pressure >100 mmHg). The mechanism involves a 
reduction in ventricular remodeling after infarction (see 
“Ventricular Dysfunction,” later) with a subsequent 
reduction in the risk of CHF. The rate of recurrent 
infarction may also be lower in patients treated chroni-
cally with ACE inhibitors after infarction.
428
Disorders of the Vasculature
SECTION V
Before hospital discharge, LV function should be 
assessed with an imaging study. ACE inhibitors should 
be continued indefinitely in patients who have clini-
cally evident CHF, in patients in whom an imaging 
study shows a reduction in global LV function or a large 
regional wall motion abnormality, or in those who are 
hypertensive.
Angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) should be 
administered to STEMI patients who are intolerant of 
ACE inhibitors and who have either clinical or radio-
logical signs of heart failure. Long-term aldosterone 
blockade should be prescribed for STEMI patients with-
out significant renal dysfunction (creatinine ≥2.5 mg/
dL in men and ≥2.0 mg/dL in women) or hyperkalemia 
(potassium ≥5.0 mEq/L) who are already receiving ther-
apeutic doses of an ACE inhibitor, an LV ejection frac-
tion ≤40 percent, and either symptomatic heart failure or 
diabetes mellitus. A multidrug regimen for inhibiting the 
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system has been shown 
to reduce both heart failure–related and sudden cardiac 
death–related cardiovascular mortality after STEMI, but 
has not been as thoroughly explored as ACE inhibitors 
in STEMI patients.
Other Agents
Favorable effects on the ischemic process and ventricular 
remodeling (see later) previously led many physicians 
to routinely use intravenous nitroglycerin (5–10 μg/min ini-
tial dose and up to 200 μg/min as long as hemodynamic 
stability is maintained) for the first 24–48 h after the 
onset of infarction. However, the benefits of routine use 
of intravenous nitroglycerin are less in the contemporary 
era where beta-adrenoceptor blockers and ACE inhibi-
tors are routinely prescribed for patients with STEMI.
Results of multiple trials of different calcium antag-
onists have failed to establish a role for these agents in 
the treatment of most patients with STEMI. Therefore, 
the routine use of calcium antagonists cannot be rec-
ommended. Strict control of blood glucose in diabetic 
patients with STEMI has been shown to reduce the 
mortality rate. Serum magnesium should be measured in 
all patients on admission, and any demonstrated deficits 
should be corrected to minimize the risk of arrhythmias.
Complications and their 
Management
Ventricular Dysfunction
After STEMI, the left ventricle undergoes a series 
of changes in shape, size, and thickness in both the 
infarcted and noninfarcted segments. This process is 
referred to as ventricular remodeling and generally pre-
cedes the development of clinically evident CHF in 
the months to years after infarction. Soon after STEMI, 
the left ventricle begins to dilate. Acutely, this results 
from expansion of the infarct, i.e., slippage of muscle 
bundles, disruption of normal myocardial cells, and tis-
sue loss within the necrotic zone, resulting in dispro-
portionate thinning and elongation of the infarct zone. 
Later, lengthening of the noninfarcted segments occurs 
as well. The overall chamber enlargement that occurs 
is related to the size and location of the infarct, with 
greater dilation following infarction of the anterior 
wall and apex of the left ventricle and causing more 
marked hemodynamic impairment, more frequent 
heart failure, and a poorer prognosis. Progressive dila-
tion and its clinical consequences may be ameliorated 
by therapy with ACE inhibitors and other vasodila-
tors (e.g., nitrates). In patients with an ejection frac-
tion <40%, regardless of whether or not heart failure is 
present, ACE inhibitors or ARBs should be prescribed 
(see “Inhibition of the Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone 
System,” earlier).
Hemodynamic Assessment
Pump failure is now the primary cause of in-hospital 
death from STEMI. The extent of infarction correlates 
well with the degree of pump failure and with mortality, 
both early (within 10 days of infarction) and later. The 
most common clinical signs are pulmonary rales and S3 
and S4 gallop sounds. Pulmonary congestion is also fre-
quently seen on the chest roentgenogram. Elevated LV 
filling pressure and elevated pulmonary artery pressure 
are the characteristic hemodynamic findings, but these 
findings may result from a reduction of ventricular com-
pliance (diastolic failure) and/or a reduction of stroke 
volume with secondary cardiac dilation (systolic failure) 
(Chap. 17).
A classification originally proposed by Killip divides 
patients into four groups: class I, no signs of pulmonary 
or venous congestion; class II, moderate heart failure as 
evidenced by rales at the lung bases, S3 gallop, tachy-
pnea, or signs of failure of the right side of the heart, 
including venous and hepatic congestion; class III, 
severe heart failure, pulmonary edema; and class IV, 
shock with systolic pressure <90 mmHg and evidence 
of peripheral vasoconstriction, peripheral cyanosis, men-
tal confusion, and oliguria. When this classification was 
established in 1967, the expected hospital mortality 
rate of patients in these classes was as follows: class I, 
0–5%; class II, 10–20%; class III, 35–45%; and class IV, 
85–95%. With advances in management, the mortality 
rate in each class has fallen, perhaps by as much as one-
third to one-half.
Hemodynamic evidence of abnormal global LV 
function appears when contraction is seriously impaired 
in 20–25% of the left ventricle. Infarction of ≥40% of 
the left ventricle usually results in cardiogenic shock 
 
CHAPTER 35
ST-Segment Elevation Myocardial Infarction
429
(Chap. 28). Positioning of a balloon flotation (Swan-
Ganz) catheter in the pulmonary artery permits moni-
toring of LV filling pressure; this technique is useful in 
patients who exhibit hypotension and/or clinical evi-
dence of CHF. Cardiac output can also be determined 
with a pulmonary artery catheter. With the addition 
of intraarterial pressure monitoring, systemic vascu-
lar resistance can be calculated as a guide to adjusting 
vasopressor and vasodilator therapy. Some patients with 
STEMI have markedly elevated LV filling pressures 
(>22 mmHg) and normal cardiac indices (2.6–3.6 L/
[min/m2]), while others have relatively low LV filling 
pressures (<15 mmHg) and reduced cardiac indices. 
The former patients usually benefit from diuresis, while 
the latter may respond to volume expansion.
Hypovolemia
This is an easily corrected condition that may contrib-
ute to the hypotension and vascular collapse associated 
with STEMI in some patients. It may be secondary to 
previous diuretic use, to reduced fluid intake during the 
early stages of the illness, and/or to vomiting associated 
with pain or medications. Consequently, hypovole-
mia should be identified and corrected in patients with 
STEMI and hypotension before more vigorous forms 
of therapy are begun. Central venous pressure reflects 
RV rather than LV filling pressure and is an inadequate 
guide for adjustment of blood volume, because LV 
function is almost always affected much more adversely 
than RV function in patients with STEMI. The opti-
mal LV filling or pulmonary artery wedge pressure may 
vary considerably among patients. Each patient’s ideal 
level (generally ∼20 mmHg) is reached by cautious fluid 
administration during careful monitoring of oxygen-
ation and cardiac output. Eventually, the cardiac output 
level plateaus, and further increases in LV filling pres-
sure only increase congestive symptoms and decrease 
systemic oxygenation without raising arterial pressure.
Treatment	
Congestive Heart Failure
The management of CHF in association with STEMI is 
similar to that of acute heart failure secondary to other  
forms of heart disease (avoidance of hypoxemia, diure-
sis, afterload reduction, inotropic support) (Chap. 17), 
except that the benefits of digitalis administration to  
patients with STEMI are unimpressive. By contrast, 
diuretic agents are extremely effective, as they diminish 
pulmonary congestion in the presence of systolic and/or 
diastolic heart failure. LV filling pressure falls and orthop-
nea and dyspnea improve after the intravenous admin-
istration of furosemide or other loop diuretics. These 
drugs should be used with caution, however, as they can 
result in a massive diuresis with associated decreases 
in plasma volume, cardiac output, systemic blood pres-
sure, and, hence, coronary perfusion. Nitrates in various 
forms may be used to decrease preload and congestive 
symptoms. Oral isosorbide dinitrate, topical nitroglyc-
erin ointment, or intravenous nitroglycerin all have the 
advantage over a diuretic of lowering preload through 
venodilation without decreasing the total plasma vol-
ume. In addition, nitrates may improve ventricular com-
pliance if ischemia is present, as ischemia causes an 
elevation of LV filling pressure. Vasodilators must be 
used with caution to prevent serious hypotension. As 
noted earlier, ACE inhibitors are an ideal class of drugs 
for management of ventricular dysfunction after STEMI, 
especially for the long term. (See “Inhibition of the Renin-
Angiotensin-Aldosterone System,” earlier.)
Cardiogenic Shock
Prompt reperfusion, efforts to reduce infarct size and 
treatment of ongoing ischemia and other complica-
tions of MI appear to have reduced the incidence of 
cardiogenic shock from 20% to about 7%. Only 10% of 
patients with this condition present with it on admission, 
while 90% develop it during hospitalization. Typically, 
patients who develop cardiogenic shock have severe 
multivessel coronary artery disease with evidence of 
“piecemeal” necrosis extending outward from the origi-
nal infarct zone. The evaluation and management of car-
diogenic shock and severe power failure after STEMI 
are discussed in detail in Chap. 28.
Right Ventricular Infarction
Approximately one-third of patients with inferior 
infarction demonstrate at least a minor degree of RV 
necrosis. An occasional patient with inferoposterior LV 
infarction also has extensive RV infarction, and rare 
patients present with infarction limited primarily to the 
RV. Clinically significant RV infarction causes signs of 
severe RV failure (jugular venous distention, Kussmaul’s 
sign, hepatomegaly [Chap. 9]) with or without hypo-
tension. ST-segment elevations of right-sided precordial 
ECG leads, particularly lead V4R, are frequently present 
in the first 24 h in patients with RV infarction. Two-
dimensional echocardiography is helpful in determining 
the degree of RV dysfunction. Catheterization of the 
right side of the heart often reveals a distinctive hemo-
dynamic pattern resembling constrictive pericarditis 
(steep right atrial “y” descent and an early diastolic dip 
and plateau in RV waveforms) (Chap. 22). Therapy 
consists of volume expansion to maintain adequate RV 
preload and efforts to improve LV performance with 
attendant reduction in pulmonary capillary wedge and 
pulmonary arterial pressures.
430
Disorders of the Vasculature
SECTION V
Arrhythmias
(See also Chaps. 15 and 16) The incidence of arrhyth-
mias after STEMI is higher in patients seen early after 
the onset of symptoms. The mechanisms responsible for 
infarction-related arrhythmias include autonomic nervous 
system imbalance, electrolyte disturbances, ischemia, and 
slowed conduction in zones of ischemic myocardium. An 
arrhythmia can usually be managed successfully if trained 
personnel and appropriate equipment are available when 
it develops. Since most deaths from arrhythmia occur 
during the first few hours after infarction, the effective-
ness of treatment relates directly to the speed with which 
patients come under medical observation. The prompt 
management of arrhythmias constitutes a significant 
advance in the treatment of STEMI.
Ventricular premature beats
Infrequent, sporadic ventricular premature depolariza-
tions occur in almost all patients with STEMI and do 
not require therapy. Whereas in the past, frequent, mul-
tifocal, or early diastolic ventricular extrasystoles (so-
called warning arrhythmias) were routinely treated with 
antiarrhythmic drugs to reduce the risk of development 
of ventricular tachycardia and ventricular fibrillation, 
pharmacologic therapy is now reserved for patients with 
sustained ventricular arrhythmias. Prophylactic antiar-
rhythmic therapy (either intravenous lidocaine early or 
oral agents later) is contraindicated for ventricular pre-
mature beats in the absence of clinically important ven-
tricular tachyarrhythmias, as such therapy may actually 
increase the mortality rate. Beta-adrenoceptor block-
ing agents are effective in abolishing ventricular ectopic 
activity in patients with STEMI and in the prevention 
of ventricular fibrillation. As described earlier (see “Beta-
Adrenoceptor Blockers”), they should be used routinely 
in patients without contraindications. In addition, hypo-
kalemia and hypomagnesemia are risk factors for ven-
tricular fibrillation in patients with STEMI; to reduce 
the risk, the serum potassium concentration should be 
adjusted to approximately 4.5 mmol/L and magnesium 
to about 2.0 mmol/L.
Ventricular tachycardia and fibrillation
Within the first 24 h of STEMI, ventricular tachycar-
dia and fibrillation can occur without prior warning 
arrhythmias. The occurrence of ventricular fibrillation 
can be reduced by prophylactic administration of intra-
venous lidocaine. However, prophylactic use of lido-
caine has not been shown to reduce overall mortality 
from STEMI. In fact, in addition to causing possible 
noncardiac complications, lidocaine may predispose 
to an excess risk of bradycardia and asystole. For these 
reasons, and with earlier treatment of active ischemia, 
more frequent use of beta-blocking agents, and the 
nearly universal success of electrical cardioversion or 
defibrillation, routine prophylactic antiarrhythmic drug 
therapy is no longer recommended.
Sustained ventricular tachycardia that is well tolerated 
hemodynamically should be treated with an intravenous 
regimen of amiodarone (bolus of 150 mg over 10 min, 
followed by infusion of 1.0 mg/min for 6 h and then 
0.5 mg/min) or procainamide (bolus of 15 mg/kg over 
20–30 min; infusion of 1–4 mg/min); if it does not stop 
promptly, electroversion should be used (Chap. 16). 
An unsynchronized discharge of 200–300 J (mono-
phasic waveform; approximately 50% of these ener-
gies with biphasic waveforms) is used immediately in 
patients with ventricular fibrillation or when ventricular 
tachycardia causes hemodynamic deterioration. Ven-
tricular tachycardia or fibrillation that is refractory to 
electroshock may be more responsive after the patient 
is treated with epinephrine (1 mg intravenously or 
10 mL of a 1:10,000 solution via the intracardiac route) 
or amiodarone (a 75–150-mg bolus).
Ventricular arrhythmias, including the unusual form 
of ventricular tachycardia known as torsades des pointes 
(Chap. 16), may occur in patients with STEMI as a 
consequence of other concurrent problems (such as 
hypoxia, hypokalemia, or other electrolyte disturbances) 
or of the toxic effects of an agent being administered to 
the patient (such as digoxin or quinidine). A search for 
such secondary causes should always be undertaken.
Although the in-hospital mortality rate is increased, 
the long-term survival is excellent in patients who sur-
vive to hospital discharge after primary ventricular fibril-
lation; i.e., ventricular fibrillation that is a primary 
response to acute ischemia that occurs during the first 
48 h and is not associated with predisposing factors 
such as CHF, shock, bundle branch block, or ventricu-
lar aneurysm. This result is in sharp contrast to the poor 
prognosis for patients who develop ventricular fibrilla-
tion secondary to severe pump failure. For patients who 
develop ventricular tachycardia or ventricular fibrillation 
late in their hospital course (i.e., after the first 48 h), the 
mortality rate is increased both in-hospital and during 
long-term follow-up. Such patients should be consid-
ered for electrophysiologic study and implantation of a 
cardioverter/defibrillator (ICD) (Chap. 16). A more 
challenging issue is the prevention of sudden cardiac 
death from ventricular fibrillation late after STEMI in 
patients who have not exhibited sustained ventricular 
tachyarrhythmias during their index hospitalization. An 
algorithm for selection of patients who warrant prophy-
lactic implantation of an ICD is shown in Fig. 35-6.
Accelerated idioventricular rhythm
Accelerated idioventricular rhythm (AIVR, “slow ven-
tricular tachycardia”), a ventricular rhythm with a rate of 
60–100 bpm, often occurs transiently during fibrinolytic 
therapy at the time of reperfusion. For the most part, 
AIVR, whether it occurs in association with fibrinolytic 
 
CHAPTER 35
ST-Segment Elevation Myocardial Infarction
431
therapy or spontaneously, is benign and does not presage 
the development of classic ventricular tachycardia. Most 
episodes of AIVR do not require treatment if the patient 
is monitored carefully, as degeneration into a more seri-
ous arrhythmia is rare.
Supraventricular arrhythmias
Sinus tachycardia is the most common supraventricu-
lar arrhythmia. If it occurs secondary to another cause 
(such as anemia, fever, heart failure, or a metabolic 
derangement), the primary problem should be treated 
first. However, if it appears to be due to sympathetic 
overstimulation (e.g., as part of a hyperdynamic state), 
then treatment with a beta blocker is indicated. Other 
common arrhythmias in this group are atrial flutter 
and atrial fibrillation, which are often secondary to LV 
failure. Digoxin is usually the treatment of choice for 
supraventricular arrhythmias if heart failure is present. If 
heart failure is absent, beta blockers, verapamil, or dilti-
azem are suitable alternatives for controlling the ventric-
ular rate, as they may also help to control ischemia. If 
the abnormal rhythm persists for >2 h with a ventricular 
rate >120 bpm, or if tachycardia induces heart failure, 
shock, or ischemia (as manifested by recurrent pain or 
ECG changes), a synchronized electroshock (100–200 J 
monophasic waveform) should be used.
Accelerated junctional rhythms have diverse causes 
but may occur in patients with inferoposterior infarction. 
Digitalis excess must be ruled out. In some patients with 
severely compromised LV function, the loss of appropri-
ately timed atrial systole results in a marked reduction of 
cardiac output. Right atrial or coronary sinus pacing is 
indicated in such instances.
Sinus bradycardia
Treatment of sinus bradycardia is indicated if hemo-
dynamic compromise results from the slow heart rate. 
Atropine is the most useful drug for increasing heart 
rate and should be given intravenously in doses of 
0.5 mg initially. If the rate remains <50–60 bpm, addi-
tional doses of 0.2 mg, up to a total of 2.0 mg, may 
be given. Persistent bradycardia (<40 bpm) despite 
atropine may be treated with electrical pacing. Isopro-
terenol should be avoided.
Atrioventricular and intraventricular 
conduction disturbances
(See also Chap. 15) Both the in-hospital mortality rate 
and the post-discharge mortality rate of patients who 
have complete atrioventricular (AV) block in associa-
tion with anterior infarction are markedly higher than 
those of patients who develop AV block with inferior 
infarction. This difference is related to the fact that 
heart block in inferior infarction is commonly a result 
of increased vagal tone and/or the release of adenosine 
and therefore is transient. In anterior wall infarction, 
however, heart block is usually related to ischemic mal-
function of the conduction system, which is commonly 
associated with extensive myocardial necrosis.
Temporary electrical pacing provides an effective 
means of increasing the heart rate of patients with bra-
dycardia due to AV block. However, acceleration of 
the heart rate may have only a limited impact on prog-
nosis in patients with anterior wall infarction and com-
plete heart block in whom the large size of the infarct 
is the major factor determining outcome. It should be 
carried out if it improves hemodynamics. Pacing does 
appear to be beneficial in patients with inferoposterior 
infarction who have complete heart block associated 
with heart failure, hypotension, marked bradycardia, 
or significant ventricular ectopic activity. A subgroup 
of these patients, those with RV infarction, often 
respond poorly to ventricular pacing because of the loss 
of the atrial contribution to ventricular filling. In such 
patients, dual-chamber AV sequential pacing may be 
required.
ALGORITHM FOR CARDIOVERTER/
DEFIBRILLATOR IMPLANTATION
ICD Implantation After STEMI
At Least 40 Days After STEMI; 
No Spontaneous VT or VF 48 h Post-STEMI
LVEF < 30-40%
NHYA Class II-III
LVEF < 30-35%
NHYA Class I
LVEF > 40%
ICD
No ICD
Assess LVEF and NYHA Functional Status
Figure 35-6 
Algorithm for assessment of need for implantation of a 
cardioverter/defibrillator. The appropriate management is 
selected based upon measurement of left ventricular ejec-
tion fraction and assessment of the NYHA functional class. 
Patients with depressed left ventricular function at least 
40 days post-STEMI are referred for insertion of an implant-
able cardioverter/defibrillator (ICD) if the LVEF is <30–40% and 
they are in NYHA class II–III or if the LVEF is <30–35% and they 
are in NYHA class I functional status. Patients with preserved 
left ventricular function (LVEF >40%) do not receive an ICD 
regardless of NYHA functional class. All patients are treated 
with medical therapy post-STEMI. (Adapted from data con-
tained in DP Zipes et al: ACC/AHA/ESC 2006 guidelines for 
management of patients with ventricular arrhythmias and the 
prevention of sudden cardiac death; a report of the Ameri-
can College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task 
Force and the European Society of Cardiology Committee for 
Practice Guidelines [Writing Committee to Develop Guide-
lines for Management of Patients with Ventricular Arrhyth-
mias and the Prevention of Sudden Cardiac Death]. J Am 
Coll Cardiol 48:1064, 2006.)
432
Disorders of the Vasculature
SECTION V
External noninvasive pacing electrodes should be 
positioned in a “demand” mode for patients with sinus 
bradycardia (rate <50 bpm) that is unresponsive to drug 
therapy, Mobitz II second-degree AV block, third-
degree heart block, or bilateral bundle branch block 
(e.g., right bundle branch block plus left anterior fas-
cicular block). Retrospective studies suggest that perma-
nent pacing may reduce the long-term risk of sudden 
death due to bradyarrhythmias in the rare patient who 
develops combined persistent bifascicular and transient 
third-degree heart block during the acute phase of MI.
Other Complications
Recurrent chest discomfort
Recurrent angina develops in ∼25% of patients hospital-
ized for STEMI. This percentage is even higher in patients 
who undergo successful fibrinolysis. Because recurrent or 
persistent ischemia often heralds extension of the origi-
nal infarct or reinfarction in a new myocardial zone and 
is associated with a near tripling of mortality after STEMI, 
patients with these symptoms should be referred for 
prompt coronary arteriography and mechanical revascular-
ization. Repeat administration of a fibrinolytic agent is an 
alternative to early mechanical revascularization.
Pericarditis
(See also Chap. 22) Pericardial friction rubs and/or 
pericardial pain are frequently encountered in patients 
with STEMI involving the epicardium. This compli-
cation can usually be managed with aspirin (650 mg 
4 times daily). It is important to diagnose the chest pain 
of pericarditis accurately, because failure to recognize it 
may lead to the erroneous diagnosis of recurrent isch-
emic pain and/or infarct extension, with resulting inap-
propriate use of anticoagulants, nitrates, beta blockers, 
or coronary arteriography. When it occurs, complaints 
of pain radiating to either trapezius muscle is helpful, 
because such a pattern of discomfort is typical of peri-
carditis but rarely occurs with ischemic discomfort. 
Anticoagulants potentially could cause tamponade in the 
presence of acute pericarditis (as manifested by either 
pain or persistent rub) and therefore should not be used 
unless there is a compelling indication.
Thromboembolism
Clinically apparent thromboembolism complicates STEMI 
in ∼10% of cases, but embolic lesions are found in 20% of 
patients in necropsy series, suggesting that thromboembo-
lism is often clinically silent. Thromboembolism is consid-
ered to be an important contributing cause of death in 25% 
of patients with STEMI who die after admission to the 
hospital. Arterial emboli originate from LV mural thrombi, 
while most pulmonary emboli arise in the leg veins.
Thromboembolism typically occurs in associa-
tion with large infarcts (especially anterior), CHF, and 
a LV thrombus detected by echocardiography. The 
incidence of arterial embolism from a clot originat-
ing in the ventricle at the site of an infarction is small 
but real. Two-dimensional echocardiography reveals 
LV thrombi in about one-third of patients with ante-
rior wall infarction but in few patients with inferior or 
posterior infarction. Arterial embolism often presents 
as a major complication, such as hemiparesis when the 
cerebral circulation is involved or hypertension if the 
renal circulation is compromised. When a thrombus 
has been clearly demonstrated by echocardiographic 
or other techniques or when a large area of regional 
wall motion abnormality is seen even in the absence 
of a detectable mural thrombus, systemic anticoagula-
tion should be undertaken (in the absence of contra-
indications), as the incidence of embolic complications 
appears to be markedly lowered by such therapy. The 
appropriate duration of therapy is unknown, but 
3–6 months is probably prudent.
Left ventricular aneurysm
The term ventricular aneurysm is usually used to describe 
dyskinesis or local expansile paradoxical wall motion. 
Normally functioning myocardial fibers must shorten 
more if stroke volume and cardiac output are to be 
maintained in patients with ventricular aneurysm; if 
they cannot, overall ventricular function is impaired. 
True aneurysms are composed of scar tissue and neither 
predispose to nor are associated with cardiac rupture.
The complications of LV aneurysm do not usually 
occur for weeks to months after STEMI; they include 
CHF, arterial embolism, and ventricular arrhythmias. 
Apical aneurysms are the most common and the most 
easily detected by clinical examination. The physi-
cal finding of greatest value is a double, diffuse, or dis-
placed apical impulse. Ventricular aneurysms are readily 
detected by two-dimensional echocardiography, which 
may also reveal a mural thrombus in an aneurysm.
Rarely, myocardial rupture may be contained by a 
local area of pericardium, along with organizing throm-
bus and hematoma. Over time, this pseudoaneurysm 
enlarges, maintaining communication with the LV cav-
ity through a narrow neck. Because a pseudoaneurysm 
often ruptures spontaneously, it should be surgically 
repaired if recognized.
Postinfarction Risk 
Stratification and Management
Many clinical and laboratory factors have been identi-
fied that are associated with an increase in cardiovascu-
lar risk after initial recovery from STEMI. Some of the 
 
CHAPTER 35
ST-Segment Elevation Myocardial Infarction
433
most important factors include persistent ischemia (spon-
taneous or provoked), depressed LV ejection fraction 
(<40%), rales above the lung bases on physical examina-
tion or congestion on chest radiograph, and symptom-
atic ventricular arrhythmias. Other features associated 
with increased risk include a history of previous MI, 
age >75, diabetes mellitus, prolonged sinus tachycar-
dia, hypotension, ST-segment changes at rest without 
angina (“silent ischemia”), an abnormal signal-averaged 
ECG, nonpatency of the infarct-related coronary artery 
(if angiography is undertaken), and persistent advanced 
heart block or a new intraventricular conduction abnor-
mality on the ECG. Therapy must be individualized on 
the basis of the relative importance of the risk(s) present.
The goal of preventing reinfarction and death after 
recovery from STEMI has led to strategies to evaluate 
risk after infarction. In stable patients, submaximal exer-
cise stress testing may be carried out before hospital dis-
charge to detect residual ischemia and ventricular ectopy 
and to provide the patient with a guideline for exercise 
in the early recovery period. Alternatively, or in addi-
tion, a maximal (symptom-limited) exercise stress test 
may be carried out 4–6 weeks after infarction. Evalu-
ation of LV function is usually warranted as well. Rec-
ognition of a depressed LV ejection fraction by echo-
cardiography or radionuclide ventriculography identifies 
patients who should receive medications to inhibit the 
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system. Patients in whom 
angina is induced at relatively low workloads, those who 
have a large reversible defect on perfusion imaging or a 
depressed ejection fraction, those with demonstrable isch-
emia, and those in whom exercise provokes symptomatic 
ventricular arrhythmias should be considered at high risk 
for recurrent MI or death from arrhythmia (Fig. 35-6). 
Cardiac catheterization with coronary angiography and/
or invasive electrophysiologic evaluation is advised.
Exercise tests also aid in formulating an individual-
ized exercise prescription, which can be much more 
vigorous in patients who tolerate exercise without any 
of the above-mentioned adverse signs. In addition, pre-
discharge stress testing may provide an important psy-
chological benefit, building the patient’s confidence by 
demonstrating a reasonable exercise tolerance.
In many hospitals, a cardiac rehabilitation program 
with progressive exercise is initiated in the hospital and 
continued after discharge. Ideally, such programs should 
include an educational component that informs patients 
about their disease and its risk factors.
The usual duration of hospitalization for an uncom-
plicated STEMI is about 5 days. The remainder of the 
convalescent phase may be accomplished at home. Dur-
ing the first 1–2 weeks, the patient should be encour-
aged to increase activity by walking about the house 
and outdoors in good weather. Normal sexual activ-
ity may be resumed during this period. After 2 weeks, 
the physician must regulate the patient’s activity on the 
basis of exercise tolerance. Most patients will be able to 
return to work within 2–4 weeks.
Secondary Prevention
Various secondary preventive measures are at least partly 
responsible for the improvement in the long-term mor-
tality and morbidity rates after STEMI. Long-term treat-
ment with an antiplatelet agent (usually aspirin) after 
STEMI is associated with a 25% reduction in the risk 
of recurrent infarction, stroke, or cardiovascular mortal-
ity (36 fewer events for every 1000 patients treated). An 
alternative antiplatelet agent that may be used for second-
ary prevention in patients intolerant of aspirin is clopido-
grel (75 mg orally daily). ACE inhibitors or ARBs and, 
in appropriate patients, aldosterone antagonists should be 
used indefinitely by patients with clinically evident heart 
failure, a moderate decrease in global ejection fraction, or 
a large regional wall motion abnormality to prevent late 
ventricular remodeling and recurrent ischemic events.
The chronic routine use of oral beta-adrenoceptor 
blockers for at least 2 years after STEMI is supported 
by well-conducted, placebo-controlled trials.
Evidence suggests that warfarin lowers the risk of 
late mortality and the incidence of reinfarction after 
STEMI. Most physicians prescribe aspirin routinely for 
all patients without contraindications and add warfarin 
for patients at increased risk of embolism (see “Throm-
boembolism,” earlier). Several studies suggest that in 
patients <75 years a low dose of aspirin (75–81 mg/d) 
in combination with warfarin administered to achieve 
an INR >2.0 is more effective than aspirin alone for 
preventing recurrent MI and embolic cerebrovascular 
accident. However, there is an increased risk of bleed-
ing and a high rate of discontinuation of warfarin that 
has limited clinical acceptance of combination anti-
thrombotic therapy. There is increased risk of bleed-
ing when warfarin is added to dual antiplatelet therapy 
(aspirin and clopidogrel). However, patients who have 
had a stent implanted and have an indication for anti-
coagulation should receive dual antiplatelet therapies in 
combination with warfarin. Such patients should also 
receive a proton pump inhibitor to minimize the risk of 
gastrointestinal bleeding and should have regular moni-
toring of their hemoglobin levels and stool hematest 
while on combination antithrombotic therapy.
Finally, risk factors for atherosclerosis (Chap. 1) should be 
discussed with the patient, and, when possible, favorably 
modified.
 David P. Faxon 
I  Deepak L. Bhatt 
434
 Percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA) 
was fi rst introduced by Andreas Gruentzig in 1977 as 
an alternative to coronary bypass surgery. The con-
cept of percutaneous dilatation of the atherosclerotic 
peripheral vessels was initially demonstrated by Charles 
Dotter in 1964 in peripheral vessels where rigid cath-
eters of graduated diameter were used to progressively 
enlarge the vessel lumen. The development of a small 
inelastic balloon catheter by Gruentzig allowed expan-
sion of the technique into smaller peripheral and coro-
nary vessels. Initial coronary experience was limited to 
the small percentage of patients who had single-vessel 
coronary disease and discrete proximal lesions due to 
the technical limitations of the equipment. Advances 
in technology and greater operator experience allowed 
the procedure to grow rapidly with expanded use in 
patients with more complex lesions and multivessel 
disease; by 1990, it was being performed in more than 
300,000 patients annually. The addition of atherectomy 
devices that removed plaques aided in the growth of 
the procedure, but the introduction of coronary stents 
in 1994 was one of the major advances in the fi eld. 
These devices reduced acute complications and reduced 
by half the signifi cant problem of restenosis (or recur-
rence of the stenosis). Further reductions in resteno-
sis were achieved by the introduction of drug-eluting 
stents in 2003. These stents have a polymer coating over 
the metal stent that is impregnated with antiproliferative 
agents that slowly release drugs directly into the plaque 
over a few months. Today, more than 1 million stents 
are placed in the United States per year and more than 
4 million worldwide. Percutaneous coronary interven-
tion (PCI) is the most common revascularization proce-
dure in the United States and is performed nearly twice 
as often as coronary artery bypass surgery. 
 The fi eld of interventional cardiology has matured 
to be recognized as a separate discipline in cardiology 
that requires specialized training. A dedicated 1-year 
interventional cardiology fellowship following a 3-year 
general cardiology fellowship and a separate board cer-
tifi cation examination are now required to be certifi ed 
in interventional cardiology. The discipline has also 
expanded to include interventions for structural heart 
disease including treatment of congenital heart disease, 
and valvular heart disease; it also includes interventions 
to treat peripheral vascular disease, including atheroscle-
rotic and nonatherosclerotic lesions in the carotid, renal, 
aortic, and peripheral circulations. 
 tecHniQue 
 The initial procedure is performed in a similar man-
ner as a diagnostic cardiac catheterization ( Chap. 13 ). 
As is done with diagnostic catheterization, arterial access 
is obtained by percutaneous needle puncture into a 
peripheral artery. Most commonly, the arterial access 
site is the femoral artery, but radial artery access is gain-
ing favor. To prevent thrombotic complications dur-
ing the procedure, patients who are anticipated to need 
an angioplasty are given aspirin (325 mg) and clopido-
grel (loading dose of 300–600 mg) before the proce-
dure. During the procedure, anticoagulation is achieved 
by administration of unfractionated heparin, enoxaparin 
(a low-molecular-weight heparin), or bivalirudin (a direct 
thrombin inhibitor). In patients with ST-elevation myo-
cardial infarction, high-risk acute coronary syndrome, 
or those with a large thrombus in the coronary artery, a 
glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitor (abciximab, tirofi ban, or 
eptifi batide) may also be given. 
 Following placement of an introducing sheath, pre-
formed guiding catheters are used to cannulate selec-
tively the origins of the coronary arteries. These catheters 
have larger internal diameters than diagnostic catheters in 
 PERCUTANEOUS CORONARY INTERVENTIONS 
AND OTHER INTERVENTIONAL PROCEDURES 
 cHapteR 36 
 
CHAPTER 36
Percutaneous Coronary Interventions and Other Interventional Procedures
435
order to allow passage of the balloon catheter and wires. 
Through the guiding catheter, a flexible, steerable guide-
wire (diameter 0.4 mm) is negotiated down the coro-
nary artery lumen using fluoroscopic guidance; it is then 
advanced through the stenosis and into the vessel beyond. 
This guidewire then serves as a “rail” over which angio-
plasty balloons, stents, or other therapeutic devices can be 
advanced to enlarge the narrowed segment of coronary 
artery. The artery is usually dilated with a balloon cath-
eter and most often a stent is then placed with assessment 
of the final result by repeat angiography through the 
guiding catheter. The catheters and introducing sheath 
are removed and the artery manually held or closed using 
one of several arterial closure devices to achieve hemosta-
sis. Because PCI is performed under local anesthesia and 
mild sedation, it requires only a short (1-day) hospitaliza-
tion that decreases recovery time and hospital expense, as 
compared to coronary bypass surgery.
The inflated diameter of the angioplasty balloons 
range in size from 1.5 to 4.0 mm, and balloons are chosen 
to approximate the “normal” less diseased proximal or 
distal vessel without stenosis. The major advance 
introduced by Dr. Gruentzig was the use of inelastic 
balloons that do not overexpand the vessel beyond their 
predetermined size despite high pressures up to 10–20 
atmospheres.
Angioplasty works by stretching the artery and com-
pressing the plaque into the vessel wall, away from the 
lumen, enlarging the entire vessel (Figs. 36-1 and 
36-2). The procedure rarely results in embolization of 
atherosclerotic material. Owing to inelastic elements 
A
B
C
D
Figure 36-1 
Schematic diagram of the primary mechanisms of balloon 
angioplasty and stenting. A. A balloon angioplasty catheter 
is positioned into the stenosis over a guidewire under 
fluoroscopic guidance. B. The balloon is inflated temporarily 
occluding the vessel. C. The lumen is enlarged primarily by 
stretching the vessel often resulting in small dissections in 
the neointima. D. A stent mounted on a deflated balloon is 
placed into the lesion and pressed against the vessel wall 
with balloon inflation (not shown). The balloon is deflated and 
removed leaving the stent permanently against the wall acting 
as a scaffold to hold the dissections against the wall and 
prevent vessel recoil. (Adapted from EJ Topol: Textbook of 
Cardiovascular Medicine, 2nd ed. Philadelphia, Lippincott 
Williams & Wilkins, 2002.)
A
B
Figure 36-2 
Pathology of acute effects of balloon angioplasty with 
intimal dissection and vessel stretching (panel A) (From M 
Ueda et al: Eur Heart J 12:937, 1991; with permission) and 
an example of neointimal hyperplasia and restenosis show-
ing renarrowing of the vessel (panel B). (From CE Essed et al: 
Br Heart J 49:393, 1983; with permission.)
436
SECTION V
Disorders of the Vasculature
in the plaque, the stretching of the vessel by the bal-
loon results in small localized dissections that can pro-
trude into the lumen and be a nidus for acute thrombus 
formation. If the dissections are severe, then they can 
obstruct the lumen or induce a thrombotic occlusion of 
the artery (acute closure). Stents have largely prevented 
this complication by holding the dissection flaps up 
against the vessel wall (Fig. 36-1).
Stents are currently used in more than 90% of coro-
nary angioplasty procedures. Stents are wire meshes 
(usually made of stainless steel) that are compressed over a 
deflated angioplasty balloon. When the balloon is inflated, 
the stent is enlarged to approximate the “normal” vessel 
lumen. The balloon is then deflated and removed, leaving 
the stent behind to provide a permanent scaffold in the 
artery. Owing to the design of the struts, these devices are 
flexible, allowing their passage through diseased and tortu-
ous coronary vessels. Stents are rigid enough to prevent 
elastic recoil of the vessel and have dramatically improved 
the success and safety of the procedure as a result.
Drug-eluting stents were first introduced in 2003. 
Using a metal stent, an antiproliferative agent is attached 
to the stent by use of a thin polymer coating. The anti-
proliferative drug elutes from the stent over a 1- to 
3-month period after implantation. Drug-eluting stents 
have been shown to reduce clinical restenosis by 50% 
so that in uncomplicated lesions symptomatic restenosis 
occurs in 5–12% of patients. Not surprisingly, this led to 
the rapid acceptance of these devices; currently 50–90% 
of all stents implanted are drug-eluting. The first-
generation devices were coated with either sirolimus or 
paclitaxel. Sirolimus is an immunosuppressive agent that 
arrests cell proliferation in the G1 phase. Paclitaxel is an 
inhibitor of microtubules that can arrest cell division at 
the M phase in high concentrations, but can have cyto-
static G1, antimigratory, and antiinflammatory effects on 
smooth-muscle cells at lower concentrations. Second-
generation drug-eluting stents use newer agents such as 
everolimus, biolimus, and zotarolimus. These second-
generation drug-eluting stents appear to be more effec-
tive with fewer complications than the first-generation 
devices. Preliminary data from long-term follow-up 
suggests that the second-generation drug-eluting stents 
have lower rates of stent thrombosis and myocardial 
infarction than the first-generation drug-eluting stents.
Other interventional devices include atherectomy 
devices, laser catheters, and thrombectomy catheters. 
These devices are designed to remove atherosclerotic 
plaque or thrombus and are used in conjunction with 
balloon dilatation and stent placement. Rotational 
atherectomy is the most commonly used adjunctive 
device for heavily calcified lesions and is modeled after 
a dentist’s drill, with small round burrs of 1.5–2.5 mm 
at the tip of a flexible wire shaft. They are passed over 
the guidewire up to the stenosis and activated to rotate 
at 180,000 rpm in order to drill away atherosclerotic 
material. Because the atherosclerotic particles are 
<25 μm, they pass through the coronary microcircula-
tion and rarely cause problems. The device is particu-
larly useful in heavily calcified plaques that are resistant 
to balloon dilatation. Another available device is the 
directional atherectomy catheter. This catheter has a 
rigid housing at its tip that is open on one side, expos-
ing a sliding rotating cutter. The catheter is placed 
in the stenosis, and a balloon on the noncutting side 
of the housing is inflated to push the housing up 
against the wall of the artery. When the cutter is 
rotated at 2500 rpm and advanced down the housing, 
it slices off atherosclerotic plaques into a distal col-
lection chamber, allowing the plaque to be removed 
from the patient. Given the current advances in stents, 
neither rotational nor directional atherectomy is as 
frequently used today as in the past. Other devices 
include fiberoptic laser catheters that can vaporize 
atherosclerotic plaques. These are infrequently used 
today, as well. In acute myocardial infarction, spe-
cialized catheters without a balloon are used to aspi-
rate thrombus in order to prevent embolization down 
the coronary vessel and to improve blood flow before 
angioplasty and stent placement. Data suggest that 
manual catheter thrombus aspiration may even reduce 
mortality rate in primary PCI.
PCI of degenerated saphenous vein graft lesions 
has been associated with a significant incidence of dis-
tal embolization of atherosclerotic material, unlike PCI 
of native vessel disease. A number of distal protection 
devices have been shown to significantly reduce embo-
lization and myocardial infarction in this setting. Most 
devices work by using a collapsible wire mesh at the 
end of a guidewire that is expanded in the distal vessel 
before angioplasty. If atherosclerotic debris is dislodged, 
the basket captures the material, and at the end of the 
PCI, the basket is pulled into a delivery catheter and the 
debris safely removed from the patient.
Success and Complications
The advances in the technology have greatly improved 
the success and reduced the complications of the pro-
cedure. Currently, a successful procedure (angiographic 
success), defined as a reduction of the stenosis to less 
than a 20% diameter narrowing, occurs in 95–99% of 
patients. The success is dependent upon the coronary 
anatomy, with lower success rates in patients with tor-
tuous, small, or calcified vessels or chronic total occlu-
sions. Chronic total occlusions have the lowest success 
rates and their recanalization is usually not attempted 
unless the occlusion is recent (within 3 months) or 
there are favorable anatomic features. Improvements 
 
CHAPTER 36
Percutaneous Coronary Interventions and Other Interventional Procedures
437
in equipment and technique have increased the success 
rates of recanalization of chronic total occlusions.
Serious complications are rare but include a mortality 
rate of 0.1–0.3% for elective cases, a large myocardial 
infarction occurs in less than 3%, and stroke in less than 
0.1%. Patients who are elderly (>65 years), undergoing 
an emergent or urgent procedure, have chronic kidney 
disease, present with an ST-segment elevation myocar-
dial infarction (STEMI), or are in shock have a signifi-
cantly higher risk. Scoring systems can help to estimate 
the risk of the procedure, although no perfect scoring 
system has yet been developed.
Myocardial infarction during PCI can occur for mul-
tiple reasons including an acute occluding thrombus, 
severe coronary dissection, embolization of thrombus 
or atherosclerotic material, or closure of a side branch 
vessel at the site of angioplasty. Most myocardial infarc-
tions are small and only detected by a rise in the cre-
atinine phosphokinase (CPK) or troponin level after 
the procedure. Only those with significant enzyme 
elevations (more than three times the upper limit of 
normal) are associated with a less favorable long-term 
outcome. Coronary stents have largely prevented coro-
nary dissections due to the scaffolding effect of the stent. 
Metallic stents are also prone to thrombotic occlusion 
(1–3%), either acute (<24 h) or subacute (1–30 days), 
which can be ameliorated by greater attention to full 
initial stent deployment and the use of dual antiplatelet 
therapy (aspirin, plus a platelet P2Y12-receptor blocker 
[clopidogrel or prasugrel]). Late (30 days–1 year) and 
very late stent thromboses (>1 year) occur very infre-
quently with stents but are slightly more common 
with drug-eluting stents, necessitating dual antiplatelet 
therapy with these stents for up to 1 year or longer. 
Premature discontinuation of dual antiplatelet therapy 
particularly in the first month after implantation is 
associated with a significantly increased risk for stent 
thrombosis (three- to ninefold greater). Stent throm-
bosis results in death in 10–20% and a myocardial 
infarction in 30–70% of patients. Elective surgery that 
requires discontinuation of antiplatelet therapy after 
drug-eluting stent implantation should be postponed 
until after 6 months and preferably after 1 year, if at all 
possible.
Restenosis, or renarrowing of the dilated coronary 
stenosis, is the most common complication of angio-
plasty and occurs in 20–50% of patients with balloon 
angioplasty alone, 10–30% of patients with bare metal 
stents, and in 5–15% of patients with drug-eluting 
stents. The fact that stent placement provides a larger 
acute luminal area than balloon angioplasty alone 
reduces the incidence of subsequent restenosis. Drug-
eluting stents further reduce restenosis through a reduc-
tion in excessive neointimal growth over the stent. If 
restenosis does not occur, the long-term outcome is 
excellent (Fig. 36-3). Clinical restenosis is recognized 
by recurrence of angina or symptoms within 9 months 
of the procedure. Most commonly, patients with clini-
cal restenosis present with worsening angina (60–
70%), but patients can present with non-ST-elevation 
Figure 36-3 
Long-term results from one of the first patients to receive 
a sirolimus-eluting stent from early Sao Paulo experience. 
(From: GW Stone, in D Baim [ed]: Cardiac Catheterization, 
Angiography and Intervention, 7th ed, Philadelphia, Lippincott 
Williams & Wilkins, 2006; with permission.)
438
SECTION V
Disorders of the Vasculature
myocardial infarction (10%) or ST-elevation myocar-
dial infarction (5%) as well. Clinical restenosis requires 
confirmation of a significant stenosis at the site of the 
prior PCI, with repeat PCI or coronary artery bypass 
grafting (CABG). This is termed target lesion revascular-
ization (TLR) or target vessel revascularization (TVR). By 
angiography, the incidence of restenosis is significantly 
higher than clinical restenosis (TLR or TVR) because 
many patients have mild restenosis that does not result 
in a recurrence of symptoms. The management of clini-
cal restenosis is usually to repeat the PCI with balloon 
dilatation and, placement of a bare metal or a drug-
eluting stent. Rarely, intracoronary brachytherapy using 
beta radiation is used. Once a patient has had resteno-
sis, the risk of a second restenosis is further increased. 
The risk factors for restenosis are diabetes, long lesions, 
small-diameter vessels, and suboptimal initial PCI result.
The mechanism of restenosis is similar to that of 
wound healing, with inflammation and the migration 
and proliferation of smooth-muscle cells that create a 
thick neointima (scar) that narrows the lumen at the site 
of dilatation (Fig. 36-2). The neointima is covered with 
endothelium, but it remains dysfunctional. The primary 
cause of restenosis in balloon angioplasty is adverse ves-
sel remodeling with constriction of the vessel relative to 
the adjacent nondilated vessel. This change in remod-
eling can be appreciated by intravascular ultrasound 
but not by angiography since the latter only shows the 
lumen and not the entire vessel size. In addition to 
remodeling, excessive growth of the neointima further 
narrows the lumen. Stents prevent this unfavorable con-
strictive remodeling, and drug-eluting stents not only 
prevent this constriction but reduce the excessive neo-
intimal growth as well. Common risk factors for ath-
erosclerosis such as hyperlipidemia, hypertension, or 
cigarette smoking do not increase the risk of restenosis, 
although diabetes mellitus does.
Indications
The American College of Cardiology (ACC)/American 
Heart Association (AHA) guidelines extensively review 
the indications for PCI in patients with stable angina, 
unstable angina, non-ST-elevation, and ST-elevation 
myocardial infarction and should be referred to for a 
comprehensive discussion of the indications. Briefly, 
the two principal indications for coronary revascular-
ization in patients with chronic stable angina (Chap. 33) 
are (1) to improve anginal symptoms in patients who 
remain symptomatic despite adequate medical therapy 
and (2) to reduce mortality rates in patients with severe 
coronary disease. In patients with stable angina, who 
are well controlled on medical therapy, older stud-
ies and the more current Clinical Outcomes Utiliz-
ing Revascularization and Aggressive Drug Evaluation 
(COURAGE) and Bypass Angioplasty Revasculariza-
tion Investigation 2 Diabetes (BARI 2D) trials have 
shown that revascularization does not lead to better out-
comes and can be safely delayed until symptoms worsen 
or evidence of severe ischemia on noninvasive testing 
occurs. Randomized trials done in the 1960s and 1970s 
showed that CABG reduced mortality rates in patients 
with severe three-vessel or left main coronary disease 
when compared with medical therapy alone regardless 
of the degree of symptoms. Whether PCI also confers 
the same degree of protection is not known as trials of 
PCI versus medical therapy in patients with three-vessel 
disease have not been conducted, but randomized tri-
als comparing CABG and PCI have shown equal rates 
of death and myocardial infarction (MI) rates over 
5–10 years of follow-up. Consistently these studies have 
also shown that PCI, despite the use of stents, is asso-
ciated with a 10–30% need for repeat PCI during the 
first year after the procedure due largely to restenosis, 
although drug-eluting stents have decreased this rate. 
This contrasts with a need for PCI or repeat CABG in 
bypass patients of 2–5%.
When revascularization is indicated, the choice 
of PCI or CABG depends upon a number of clinical 
and anatomic factors (Fig. 36-4). A subgroup analysis 
from the Bypass Angioplasty Revascularization Inves-
tigation (BARI) randomized trial showed that patients 
with treated diabetes mellitus and multivessel disease 
fared better with CABG; however, registry experi-
ences suggest that PCI can be done in selected diabetic 
patients with less-severe multivessel disease with good 
long-term outcome. The Synergy between Percuta-
neous Coronary Intervention with Taxus and Cardiac 
Surgery (SYNTAX) trial compared PCI with the pacli-
taxel drug-eluting stent to CABG in 1800 patients with 
three-vessel coronary disease or left main disease. The 
study found no difference in death or myocardial infarc-
tion at 1 year, but repeat revascularization was signifi-
cantly higher in the stent-treated group (13.5% vs. 5.9%), 
while stroke was higher in the surgical group (2.2% vs. 
0.6%). The primary endpoint of death, MI, stroke, or 
revascularization was significantly better with CABG 
due to the higher rate of revascularization in the drug-
eluting stent group. Only 1 year of results are currently 
available and longer follow-up is needed to assess fully 
these two revascularization strategies in patients with 
severe coronary disease.
The choice of PCI versus CABG is also related to 
the anticipated procedural success and complications of 
PCI and the risks of CABG. For PCI, the characteris-
tics of the coronary anatomy are critically important. 
The location of the lesion in the vessel (proximal or 
distal), the degree of tortuosity, and size of the ves-
sel are considered. In addition, the lesion characteris-
tics including the degree of the stenosis, the presence 
 
CHAPTER 36
Percutaneous Coronary Interventions and Other Interventional Procedures
439
of calcium, lesion length, and presence of thrombus 
are assessed. The most common reason to decide not 
to do angioplasty is that the lesion felt to be respon-
sible for the patient’s symptoms is not treatable. This 
is most commonly due to the presence of a chronic 
total occlusion (>3 months in duration). In this setting, 
the historical success rate has been low (30–70%) and 
complications are more common. A lesion classifica-
tion to characterize the likelihood of success or fail-
ure of PCI has been developed by the ACC/AHA. 
Lesions with the highest success are called type A 
lesions (such as proximal noncalcified subtotal lesion) 
and those with the lowest success or highest compli-
cation rate are type C lesions (such as chronic total 
occlusions). Intermediate lesions are classified as type 
B1 or B2 depending on the number of unfavorable 
characteristics. Approximately 25–30% of patients will 
not be candidates for PCI due to unfavorable anatomy, 
whereas only 5% of CABG patients will not be can-
didates for surgery due to coronary anatomy. The 
primary reason for being considered inoperable is the 
presence of severe comorbidities such as advanced age, 
frailty, severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD), or poor left ventricular function. Another 
consideration in choosing a revascularization strategy is 
the degree of revascularization. In patients with mul-
tivessel disease, bypass grafts can usually be placed in 
all vessels with significant stenosis, while PCI may be 
able to treat only some of the lesions due to the pres-
ence of unfavorable anatomy. The decision to do PCI 
versus CABG will then depend upon the importance 
of complete revascularization in the patient. Given the 
multiple factors that need to be considered in choos-
ing the best revascularization for an individual patient 
with multivessel disease, it is optimal to have a discus-
sion between the cardiac surgeon and interventional 
cardiologist and the physicians caring for the patient to 
properly weigh the choices.
Patients with acute coronary syndrome are at excess 
risk of short- and long-term mortality. Randomized 
clinical trials have shown that PCI is superior to inten-
sive medical therapy in reducing mortality rate and 
myocardial infarction, with the benefit largely con-
fined to those patients who are high risk. This includes 
patients with refractory ischemia, recurrent angina, 
positive cardiac-specific enzymes, new ST-segment 
depression, low ejection fraction, severe arrhythmias, or 
a recent PCI or CABG. PCI is preferred over surgical 
therapy in most high-risk patients with acute coronary 
syndromes unless they have severe multivessel disease or 
the culprit lesion responsible for the unstable presenta-
tion cannot be adequately treated. In STEMI, throm-
bolysis or PCI (primary PCI) are effective methods to 
restore coronary blood flow and salvage myocardium 
within the first 12 h after onset of chest pain. Because 
PCI is more effective than thrombolysis, it is preferred 
if readily available. PCI is also performed following 
thrombolysis to facilitate adequate reperfusion or as a 
rescue procedure in those who do not achieve reper-
fusion from thrombolysis or in those who develop 
cardiogenic shock.
Other Interventional Techniques
Structural heart disease
Interventional treatment for structural heart disease 
(adult congenital heart disease and valvular heart disease) 
is a significant component of the field of interventional 
cardiology.
The most common adult congenital lesion to be 
treated with percutaneous techniques is closure of 
atrial septal defects (Chap. 19). The procedure is 
No
Optimization of DES implantation.
Example: • High-pressure implantation with
 
 noncompliant balloon
 
• Consider IVUS
 
• Dual antiplatelet therapy for
 
 at least 1 year
 
• If no bleeding, consider longer
 
 duration of clopidogrel, pending
 
 further data
Consider
BMS
Yes
Are there relative contraindications to DES?
No
Example: • Medical non-compliance
 
• ACS, especially STEMI
 
• Chronic anti-coagulation
 
• Anticipated surgery
 
• High risk for bleeding
Consider
CABG
Yes
Consider
BMS
Yes
Is there an increased risk for both stent
thrombosis and restenosis?
Is there a low risk for restenosis?
Example: Diabetics with diffuse multivessel
 
disease, bifurcation lesions
Example: Non-diabetics, focal lesions, large
 
vessels
No
Figure 36-4 
In patients requiring revascularization, several factors 
need to be considered in choosing between bare metal 
stents, drug-eluting stents, or coronary artery bypass 
surgery. ACS, acute coronary syndrome; BMS, bare 
metal stent; CABG, coronary artery bypass grafting; DES, 
drug-eluting stent; IVUS, intravascular ultrasound; STEMI, 
ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction. (From AA Bavry, 
DL Bhatt: Circulation 116:696, 2007; with permission.)
440
SECTION V
Disorders of the Vasculature
done as in a diagnostic right heart catheterization with 
the passage of a catheter up the femoral vein into the 
right atrium. With echo and fluoroscopic guidance 
the size and location of the defect can be accurately 
defined, and closure is accomplished using one of sev-
eral approved devices. All devices use a left atrial and 
right atrial wire mesh or covered disk that are pulled 
together to capture the atrial septum around the 
defect and seal it off. The Amplatzer Septal Occluder 
device (AGA Medical, Minneapolis, Minnesota) is the 
most commonly used in the United States. The suc-
cess rate in selected patients is 85–95%, and the device 
complications are rare and include device emboliza-
tion, infection, or erosion. Closure of patent foramen 
ovale (PFO) is done in a similar way. PFO closure 
is an approved procedure in patients who have had 
recurrent paradoxical stroke despite adequate medical 
therapy including anticoagulation. The use in the 
treatment of migraine is under clinical investigation 
and is not an approved indication.
Similar devices can also be used to close patent ductus 
arteriosus and ventricular septal defects. Other congeni-
tal diseases that can be treated percutaneously include 
coarctation of the aorta, pulmonic stenosis, peripheral 
pulmonary stenosis, and other abnormal communica-
tions between the cardiac chambers or vessels.
The treatment of valvular heart disease is the most 
rapidly growing area in interventional cardiology. 
Until recently the only available techniques were bal-
loon valvuoplasty for the treatment of aortic, mitral, or 
pulmonic stenosis (Chap. 20). Mitral valvuloplasty is 
the preferred treatment for symptomatic patients with 
rheumatic mitral stenosis who have favorable anatomy. 
The outcome in these patients is equal to that of surgi-
cal commissurotomy. The success is highly related to 
the echocardiographic appearance of the valve. The 
most favorable setting is commissural fusion without 
calcification or subchordal fusion and the absence of 
significant mitral regurgitation. Access is obtained 
from the femoral vein using a transseptal tech-
nique where a long metal catheter with a needle tip 
is advanced from the femoral vein through the right 
atrium and atrial septum at the level of the foramen 
ovale into the left atrium. A guidewire is advanced 
into the left ventricle, and a balloon-dilatation cath-
eter is negotiated across the mitral valve and inflated 
to a predetermined size to enlarge the valve. The 
most commonly used dilatation catheter is the Inoue 
balloon. The technique splits the commissural fusion 
and commonly results in a doubling of the mitral valve 
area. The success of the procedure in favorable anat-
omy is 95% and severe complications are rare (1–2%). 
The most common complications are tamponade due 
to puncture into the pericardium and the creation of 
severe mitral regurgitation.
Similarly, severe aortic stenosis can be treated with 
balloon valvuloplasty. In this setting, the valvuloplasty 
balloon catheter is placed retrograde across the aor-
tic valve from the femoral artery and briefly inflated to 
stretch open the valve. The success is much less favor-
able with an initial success rate of only 50% and a reste-
nosis rate of 50% after 6 to 12 months. This poor success 
rate has limited its use to patients who are not surgical 
candidates or as a bridge to surgery in patients who are 
expected to improve sufficiently to become surgical 
candidates. In this setting, the mortality rate of the pro-
cedure is high (10%). Repeat aortic valvuloplasty as a 
treatment for aortic valve restenosis has been reported.
Percutaneous aortic valve replacement has been intro-
duced to treat patients who are not suitable candidates 
for surgical aortic valve replacement. Currently, two 
valve models, the Edwards SAPIEN valve (Edwards 
Lifescience, Irvine, California) and the CoreValve 
ReValving system (CoreValve Inc., Irvine, Califor-
nia), have been approved for use in Europe. In more 
than 4000 cases worldwide, follow-up shows no evi-
dence of restenosis or prosthetic valve dysfunction in 
the midterm. Both are placed either retrograde from 
the femoral artery or can be placed via the left ventric-
ular apex following surgical exposure. The CoreValve 
is self-expanding, while the Edwards valve is balloon 
expanded. Following balloon valvuloplasty, the valve 
is positioned across the valve and deployed with post-
deployment balloon inflation to ensure full contact with 
the aortic annulus. The success rate is 80–90% and the 
30-day mortality rate is 10–15%, not unexpectedly as 
only high-risk patients are undergoing the procedure 
currently. Both valves are undergoing clinical testing in 
the United States.
Peripheral Arterial Interventions
The use of percutaneous interventions to treat symp-
tomatic patients with arterial obstruction in the carotid, 
renal, aortic, and peripheral vessels is also part of the 
field of interventional cardiology. Randomized clinical 
trial data already support the use of carotid stenting in 
patients at high risk of complications from carotid end-
arterectomy (Fig. 36-5). Ongoing trials will determine 
whether carotid stenting should be used even more 
broadly. The success rate of peripheral interventional 
procedures has been improving, including for long seg-
ments of occlusive disease historically treated by periph-
eral bypass surgery (Fig. 36-6). Peripheral intervention 
is increasingly part of the training of an interventional 
cardiologist, and most programs now require an addi-
tional year of training after the interventional cardiol-
ogy training year. The techniques and outcomes are 
described in detail in the chapter on peripheral vascular 
disease (Chap. 39).
 
CHAPTER 36
Percutaneous Coronary Interventions and Other Interventional Procedures
441
A
B
Figure 36-5 
An example of a high-risk patient who requires carotid 
revascularization, but who is not a candidate for carotid 
endarterectomy. Carotid artery stenting resulted in an 
excellent angiographic result. (From M Belkin, DL Bhatt: 
Circulation 119:2302, 2009; with permission.)
A
D
E
B
C
Figure 36-6 
Peripheral 
interventional 
procedures 
have 
become 
highly effective at treating anatomic lesions previously 
amenable only to bypass surgery. A. Complete occlusion 
of the left superficial femoral artery. B. Wire and catheter 
advanced into subintimal space. C. Intravascular ultrasound 
positioned in the subintimal space to guide retrograde 
wire placement through the occluded vessel. D. Balloon 
dilation of the occlusion. E. Stent placement with excellent 
angiographic result. (From A Al Mahameed, DL Bhatt: Cleve 
Clin J Med 73:S45, 2006; with permission.)
Circulatory support techniques
The use of circulatory support techniques is occasion-
ally needed in order to safely perform PCI on hemo-
dynamically unstable patients. It also can be useful 
in helping to stabilize patients before surgical inter-
ventions. The most commonly used device is the 
percutaneous intraaortic balloon developed in the 
early 1960s. A 7-10 French 25- to 40-mL balloon 
catheter is placed retrograde from the femoral artery 
into the descending aorta between the aortic arch 
and the abdominal aortic bifurcation. It is connected 
to a helium gas inflation system that synchronizes the 
442
SECTION V
Disorders of the Vasculature
inflation to coincide with early diastole with deflation 
by mid-diastole. As a result, it increases early diastolic 
pressure, lowers systolic pressure, and lowers late dia-
stolic pressure through displacement of blood from 
the descending aorta (counterpulsation). This results 
in an increase in coronary blood flow and a decrease 
in afterload. It is contraindicated in patients with aortic 
regurgitation, aortic dissection, or severe peripheral vas-
cular disease. The major complications are vascular and 
thrombotic. Intravenous heparin is given in order to 
reduce thrombotic complications.
Another useful tool is the Impella device (Abiomed, 
Danvers, Massachusetts). The catheter is placed percu-
taneously from the femoral artery into the left ventri-
cle. The catheter has a small microaxial pump at its tip 
that can pump up to 2.5 liters per minute at a speed of 
50,000 rpm from the left ventricle to the aorta. Other 
support devices include the hemopump and percutane-
ous cardiopulmonary bypass.
Conclusions
Interventional cardiology continues to expand its borders. 
Treatment for coronary artery disease, including complex 
anatomic subsets, continues to advance, encroaching on 
what has traditionally been treated by CABG. Techno-
logical advances such as drug-eluting stents, now already 
in their second generation, and manual aspiration devices 
are improving the results of PCI. In particular, the data 
for PCI preventing future ischemic events in unstable 
ischemic syndromes are substantial. For patients with 
stable coronary disease, PCI has an important role in 
symptom alleviation. Treatment of peripheral and cere-
brovascular disease has also benefited from the applica-
tion of percutaneous techniques. Structural heart disease 
is increasingly being treated with percutaneous options, 
with a high likelihood that interventional approaches will 
supplant open-heart surgery in a significant proportion of 
cases in years to come.
 Theodore A. Kotchen 
443
 Hypertension is one of the leading causes of the global 
burden of disease. Approximately 7.6 million deaths 
(13–15% of the total) and 92 million disability-adjusted 
life years worldwide were attributable to high blood 
pressure in 2001. Hypertension doubles the risk of car-
diovascular diseases, including coronary heart disease 
(CHD), congestive heart failure (CHF), ischemic and 
hemorrhagic stroke, renal failure, and peripheral arterial 
disease. It often is associated with additional cardiovas-
cular disease risk factors, and the risk of cardiovascular 
disease increases with the total burden of risk factors. 
Although antihypertensive therapy clearly reduces the 
risks of cardiovascular and renal disease, large segments 
of the hypertensive population are either untreated or 
inadequately treated. 
 epiDeMiology 
 Blood pressure levels, the rate of age-related increases 
in blood pressure, and the prevalence of hypertension 
vary among countries and among subpopulations within 
a country. Hypertension is present in all populations 
except for a small number of individuals living in primi-
tive, culturally isolated societies. In industrialized societ-
ies, blood pressure increases steadily during the fi rst two 
decades of life. In children and adolescents, blood pres-
sure is associated with growth and maturation. Blood 
pressure “tracks” over time in children and between 
adolescence and young adulthood. In the United 
States, average systolic blood pressure is higher for 
men than for women during early adulthood, although 
among older individuals the age-related rate of rise is 
steeper for women. Consequently, among individu-
als age 60 and older, systolic blood pressures of women 
are higher than those of men. Among adults, diastolic 
blood pressure also increases progressively with age until 
∼55 years, after which it tends to decrease. The conse-
quence is a widening of pulse pressure (the difference 
between systolic and diastolic blood pressure) beyond 
age 60. The probability that a middle-aged or elderly 
individual will develop hypertension in his or her life-
time is 90%. 
 In the United States, based on results of the 
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 
(NHANES), approximately 30% (age-adjusted preva-
lence) of adults, or at least 65 million individuals, have 
hypertension (defi ned as any one of the following: sys-
tolic blood pressure ≥140 mmHg, diastolic blood pres-
sure ≥90 mmHg, taking antihypertensive medications). 
Hypertension prevalence is 33.5% in non-Hispanic 
blacks, 28.9% in non-Hispanic whites, and 20.7% in 
Mexican Americans. The likelihood of hypertension 
increases with age, and among individuals age ≥60, the 
prevalence is 65.4%. Recent evidence suggests that the 
prevalence of hypertension in the United States may 
be increasing, possibly as a consequence of increasing 
obesity. The prevalence of hypertension and stroke 
mortality rates are higher in the southeastern United 
States than in other regions. In African Americans, 
hypertension appears earlier, is generally more severe, 
and results in higher rates of morbidity and mortal-
ity from stroke, left ventricular hypertrophy, CHF, 
and end-stage renal disease (ESRD) than in white 
Americans. 
 Both environmental and genetic factors may con-
tribute to regional and racial variations in blood pres-
sure and hypertension prevalence. Studies of societies 
undergoing “acculturation” and studies of migrants 
from a less to a more urbanized setting indicate a pro-
found environmental contribution to blood pressure. 
Obesity and weight gain are strong, independent risk 
 HYPERTENSIVE VASCULAR DISEASE 
 chapter 37 
SECTION V
Disorders of the Vasculature
444
factors for hypertension. It has been estimated that 
60% of hypertensives are >20% overweight. Among 
populations, hypertension prevalence is related to 
dietary NaCl intake, and the age-related increase in 
blood pressure may be augmented by a high NaCl 
intake. Low dietary intakes of calcium and potassium 
also may contribute to the risk of hypertension. The 
urine sodium-to-potassium ratio is a stronger corre-
late of blood pressure than is either sodium or potas-
sium alone. Alcohol consumption, psychosocial stress, 
and low levels of physical activity also may contribute 
to hypertension.
Adoption, twin, and family studies document a sig-
nificant heritable component to blood pressure levels and 
hypertension. Family studies controlling for a common 
environment indicate that blood pressure heritabilities 
are in the range 15–35%. In twin studies, heritability esti-
mates of blood pressure are ∼60% for males and 30–40% 
for females. High blood pressure before age 55 occurs 
3.8 times more frequently among persons with a positive 
family history of hypertension.
Genetic Considerations
Although specific genetic variants have been iden-
tified in rare Mendelian forms of hypertension 
(Table 37-5), these variants are not applicable to the 
vast majority (>98%) of patients with essential hyperten-
sion. For most individuals, it is likely that hypertension 
represents a polygenic disorder in which a combination 
of genes acts in concert with environmental exposures 
to make only a modest contribution to blood pressure. 
Further, different subsets of genes may lead to different 
phenotypes associated with hypertension, e.g., obesity, 
dyslipidemia, insulin resistance.
Several strategies are being utilized in the search for 
specific hypertension-related genes. Animal models 
(including selectively bred rats and congenic rat strains) 
provide a powerful approach for evaluating genetic loci 
and genes associated with hypertension. Comparative 
mapping strategies allow for the identification of syntenic 
genomic regions between the rat and human genomes 
that may be involved in blood pressure regulation. In 
association studies, different alleles (or combinations 
of alleles at different loci) of specific candidate genes 
or chromosomal regions are compared in hypertensive 
patients and normotensive control subjects. Current evi-
dence suggests that genes that encode components of the 
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, along with angio-
tensinogen and angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) 
polymorphisms, may be related to hypertension and to 
blood pressure sensitivity to dietary NaCl. The alpha-
adducin gene is thought to be associated with increased 
renal tubular absorption of sodium, and variants of this 
gene may be associated with hypertension and salt sen-
sitivity of blood pressure. Other genes possibly related 
to hypertension include genes encoding the AT1 recep-
tor, aldosterone synthase, and the β2 adrenoreceptor. 
Genomewide association studies involve rapidly scanning 
markers across the entire genome to identify loci (not 
specific genes) associated with an observable trait (e.g., 
blood pressure) or a particular disease. This strategy has 
been facilitated by the availability of dense genotyping 
chips and the International HapMap. To date, the results 
of candidate gene studies often have not been replicated, 
and in contrast to several other polygenic disorders, 
genomewide association studies have had limited success 
in identifying genetic determinants of hypertension.
Preliminary evidence suggests that there may also be 
genetic determinants of target organ damage attributed 
to hypertension. Family studies indicate significant her-
itability of left ventricular mass, and there is consider-
able individual variation in the responses of the heart to 
hypertension. Family studies and variations in candidate 
genes associated with renal damage suggest that genetic 
factors also may contribute to hypertensive nephropa-
thy. Specific genetic variants have been linked to CHD 
and stroke.
In the future, it is possible that DNA analysis will 
predict individual risk for hypertension and target organ 
damage and will identify responders to specific classes of 
antihypertensive agents. However, with the exception of 
the rare, monogenic hypertensive diseases, the genetic 
variants associated with hypertension remain to be con-
firmed, and the intermediate steps by which these vari-
ants affect blood pressure remain to be determined.
Mechanisms of Hypertension
To provide a framework for understanding the patho-
genesis of and treatment options for hypertensive dis-
orders, it is useful to understand factors involved in the 
regulation of both normal and elevated arterial pressure. 
Cardiac output and peripheral resistance are the two 
determinants of arterial pressure (Fig. 37-1). Cardiac 
output is determined by stroke volume and heart rate; 
stroke volume is related to myocardial contractility and 
to the size of the vascular compartment. Peripheral resis-
tance is determined by functional and anatomic changes 
in small arteries (lumen diameter 100–400 μm) and 
arterioles.
Intravascular Volume
Vascular volume is a primary determinant of arterial 
pressure over the long term. Sodium is predominantly 
an extracellular ion and is a primary determinant of the 
 
CHAPTER 37
Hypertensive Vascular Disease
445
Arterial pressure
Cardiac output
Peripheral resistance
Stroke volume
Heart rate
Vascular structure
Vascular function
Figure 37-1 
Determinants of arterial pressure.
extracellular fluid volume. When NaCl intake exceeds 
the capacity of the kidney to excrete sodium, vascular 
volume initially expands and cardiac output increases. 
However, many vascular beds (including kidney and 
brain) have the capacity to autoregulate blood flow, and 
if constant blood flow is to be maintained in the face 
of increased arterial pressure, resistance within that bed 
must increase, since
Bloodflow
pressureacrossthevascular bed
vascu
=
lar resi tance
s
.
The initial elevation of blood pressure in response to 
vascular volume expansion may be related to an increase 
of cardiac output; however, over time, peripheral resis-
tance increases and cardiac output reverts toward nor-
mal. The effect of sodium on blood pressure is related 
to the provision of sodium with chloride; nonchloride 
salts of sodium have little or no effect on blood pres-
sure. As arterial pressure increases in response to a 
high NaCl intake, urinary sodium excretion increases 
and sodium balance is maintained at the expense of an 
increase in arterial pressure. The mechanism for this 
“pressure-natriuresis” phenomenon may involve a sub-
tle increase in the glomerular filtration rate, decreased 
absorbing capacity of the renal tubules, and possibly 
hormonal factors such as atrial natriuretic factor. In indi-
viduals with an impaired capacity to excrete sodium, 
greater increases in arterial pressure are required to 
achieve natriuresis and sodium balance.
NaCl-dependent hypertension may be a con-
sequence of a decreased capacity of the kidney to 
excrete sodium, due either to intrinsic renal disease or 
to increased production of a salt-retaining hormone 
(mineralocorticoid) resulting in increased renal tubular 
reabsorption of sodium. Renal tubular sodium reab-
sorption also may be augmented by increased neu-
ral activity to the kidney. In each of these situations, 
a higher arterial pressure may be required to achieve 
sodium balance. Conversely, salt-wasting disorders are 
associated with low blood pressure levels. ESRD is an 
extreme example of volume-dependent hypertension. 
In ∼80% of these patients, vascular volume and hyper-
tension can be controlled with adequate dialysis; in the 
other 20%, the mechanism of hypertension is related to 
increased activity of the renin-angiotensin system and 
is likely to be responsive to pharmacologic blockade of 
renin-angiotensin.
Autonomic Nervous System
The autonomic nervous system maintains cardiovas-
cular homeostasis via pressure, volume, and chemo-
receptor signals. Adrenergic reflexes modulate blood 
pressure over the short term, and adrenergic function, 
in concert with hormonal and volume-related fac-
tors, contributes to the long-term regulation of arterial 
pressure. The three endogenous catecholamines are 
norepinephrine, epinephrine, and dopamine. All three 
play important roles in tonic and phasic cardiovascular 
regulation.
The activities of the adrenergic receptors are medi-
ated by guanosine nucleotide-binding regulatory pro-
teins (G proteins) and by intracellular concentrations of 
downstream second messengers. In addition to recep-
tor affinity and density, physiologic responsiveness to 
catecholamines may be altered by the efficiency of 
receptor-effector coupling at a site “distal” to receptor 
binding. The receptor sites are relatively specific both 
for the transmitter substance and for the response that 
occupancy of the receptor site elicits. Norepinephrine 
and epinephrine are agonists for all adrenergic recep-
tor subtypes, although with varying affinities. Based 
on their physiology and pharmacology, adrenergic 
receptors have been divided into two principal types: 
α and β. These types have been differentiated further 
into α1, α2, β1, and β2 receptors. Recent molecular 
cloning studies have identified several additional sub-
types. α Receptors are occupied and activated more 
avidly by norepinephrine than by epinephrine, and 
the reverse is true for β receptors. α1 Receptors are 
located on postsynaptic cells in smooth muscle and 
elicit vasoconstriction. α2 Receptors are localized on 
presynaptic membranes of postganglionic nerve termi-
nals that synthesize norepinephrine. When activated by 
catecholamines, α2 receptors act as negative feedback 
controllers, inhibiting further norepinephrine release. 
In the kidney, activation of α1-adrenergic receptors 
increases renal tubular reabsorption of sodium. Differ-
ent classes of antihypertensive agents either inhibit α1 
receptors or act as agonists of α2 receptors and reduce 
systemic sympathetic outflow. Activation of myocardial 
β1 receptors stimulates the rate and strength of cardiac 
contraction and consequently increases cardiac output. 
β1 Receptor activation also stimulates renin release 
from the kidney. Another class of antihypertensive 
agents acts by inhibiting β1 receptors. Activation of β2 
receptors by epinephrine relaxes vascular smooth mus-
cle and results in vasodilation.
SECTION V
Disorders of the Vasculature
446
Circulating 
catecholamine 
concentrations 
may 
affect the number of adrenoreceptors in various tissues. 
Downregulation of receptors may be a consequence 
of sustained high levels of catecholamines and pro-
vides an explanation for decreasing responsiveness, or 
tachyphylaxis, to catecholamines. For example, ortho-
static hypotension frequently is observed in patients 
with pheochromocytoma, possibly due to the lack of 
norepinephrine-induced vasoconstriction with assump-
tion of the upright posture. Conversely, with chronic 
reduction of neurotransmitter substances, adrenorecep-
tors may increase in number or be upregulated, result-
ing in increased responsiveness to the neurotransmitter. 
Chronic administration of agents that block adrenergic 
receptors may result in upregulation, and withdrawal 
of those agents may produce a condition of temporary 
hypersensitivity to sympathetic stimuli. For example, 
clonidine is an antihypertensive agent that is a centrally 
acting α2 agonist that inhibits sympathetic outflow. 
Rebound hypertension may occur with the abrupt ces-
sation of clonidine therapy, probably as a consequence 
of upregulation of α1 receptors.
Several reflexes modulate blood pressure on a 
minute-to-minute basis. One arterial baroreflex is medi-
ated by stretch-sensitive sensory nerve endings in the 
carotid sinuses and the aortic arch. The rate of firing 
of these baroreceptors increases with arterial pressure, 
and the net effect is a decrease in sympathetic outflow, 
resulting in decreases in arterial pressure and heart rate. 
This is a primary mechanism for rapid buffering of acute 
fluctuations of arterial pressure that may occur during 
postural changes, behavioral or physiologic stress, and 
changes in blood volume. However, the activity of the 
baroreflex declines or adapts to sustained increases in 
arterial pressure such that the baroreceptors are reset to 
higher pressures. Patients with autonomic neuropathy 
and impaired baroreflex function may have extremely 
labile blood pressures with difficult-to-control episodic 
blood pressure spikes associated with tachycardia.
In both normal-weight and obese individuals, hyper-
tension often is associated with increased sympathetic 
outflow. Based on recordings of postganglionic muscle 
nerve activity (detected by a microelectrode inserted in 
a peroneal nerve in the leg), sympathetic outflow tends 
to be higher in hypertensive than in normotensive indi-
viduals. Sympathetic outflow is increased in obesity-
related hypertension and in hypertension associated 
with obstructive sleep apnea. Baroreceptor activation 
via electrical stimulation of carotid sinus afferent nerves 
has been shown to lower blood pressure in patients with 
“resistant” hypertension. Drugs that block the sym-
pathetic nervous system are potent antihypertensive 
agents, indicating that the sympathetic nervous system 
plays a permissive, although not necessarily a causative, 
role in the maintenance of increased arterial pressure.
Pheochromocytoma is the most blatant example of 
hypertension related to increased catecholamine pro-
duction, in this instance by a tumor. Blood pressure 
can be reduced by surgical excision of the tumor or by 
pharmacologic treatment with an α1 receptor antagonist 
or with an inhibitor of tyrosine hydroxylase, the rate-
limiting step in catecholamine biosynthesis.
Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone
The renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system contrib-
utes to the regulation of arterial pressure primarily via 
the vasoconstrictor properties of angiotensin II and the 
sodium-retaining properties of aldosterone. Renin is an 
aspartyl protease that is synthesized as an enzymatically 
inactive precursor, prorenin. Most renin in the circula-
tion is synthesized in the renal afferent renal arteriole. 
Prorenin may be secreted directly into the circulation 
or may be activated within secretory cells and released 
as active renin. Although human plasma contains two 
to five times more prorenin than renin, there is no 
evidence that prorenin contributes to the physiologic 
activity of this system. There are three primary stimuli 
for renin secretion: (1) decreased NaCl transport in the 
distal portion of the thick ascending limb of the loop 
of Henle that abuts the corresponding afferent arteriole 
(macula densa), (2) decreased pressure or stretch within 
the renal afferent arteriole (baroreceptor mechanism), 
and (3) sympathetic nervous system stimulation of 
renin-secreting cells via β1 adrenoreceptors. Conversely, 
renin secretion is inhibited by increased NaCl trans-
port in the thick ascending limb of the loop of Henle, 
by increased stretch within the renal afferent arteriole, 
and by β1 receptor blockade. In addition, angiotensin II 
directly inhibits renin secretion due to angiotensin II 
type 1 receptors on juxtaglomerular cells, and renin 
secretion increases in response to pharmacologic block-
ade of either ACE or angiotensin II receptors.
Once released into the circulation, active renin 
cleaves a substrate, angiotensinogen, to form an inac-
tive decapeptide, angiotensin I (Fig. 37-2). A con-
verting enzyme, located primarily but not exclusively 
in the pulmonary circulation, converts angiotensin I to 
the active octapeptide, angiotensin II, by releasing the 
C-terminal histidyl-leucine dipeptide. The same con-
verting enzyme cleaves a number of other peptides, 
including and thereby inactivating the vasodilator bra-
dykinin. Acting primarily through angiotensin II type 1 
(AT1) receptors on cell membranes, angiotensin II is a 
potent pressor substance, the primary tropic factor for 
the secretion of aldosterone by the adrenal zona glo-
merulosa, and a potent mitogen that stimulates vascular 
smooth-muscle cell and myocyte growth. Independent 
of its hemodynamic effects, angiotensin II may play 
a role in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis through 
 
CHAPTER 37
Hypertensive Vascular Disease
447
Angiotensinogen
Angiotensin I
Angiotensin II
AT1 receptor
AT2 receptor
Renin
Aldosterone
Bradykinin
Inactive
peptides
ACE-kininase II
Figure 37-2 
Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone axis.
a  direct cellular action on the vessel wall. An angio-
tensin II type 2 (AT2) receptor has been character-
ized. It is widely distributed in the kidney and has the 
opposite functional effects of the AT1 receptor. The 
AT2 receptor induces vasodilation, sodium excretion, 
and inhibition of cell growth and matrix formation. 
Experimental evidence suggests that the AT2 receptor 
improves vascular remodeling by stimulating smooth-
muscle cell apoptosis and contributes to the regulation 
of glomerular filtration rate. AT1 receptor blockade 
induces an increase in AT2 receptor activity.
Renin-secreting tumors are clear examples of renin-
dependent hypertension. In the kidney, these tumors 
include benign hemangiopericytomas of the juxtaglo-
merular apparatus and, infrequently, renal carcinomas, 
including Wilms’ tumors. Renin-producing carcino-
mas also have been described in the lung, liver, pan-
creas, colon, and adrenals. In these instances, in addition 
to excision and/or ablation of the tumor, treatment of 
hypertension includes pharmacologic therapies targeted 
to inhibit angiotensin II production or action. Reno-
vascular hypertension is another renin-mediated form 
of hypertension. Obstruction of the renal artery leads 
to decreased renal perfusion pressure, thereby stimu-
lating renin secretion. Over time, as a consequence of 
secondary renal damage, this form of hypertension may 
become less renin dependent.
Angiotensinogen, renin, and angiotensin II are also 
synthesized locally in many tissues, including the brain, 
pituitary, aorta, arteries, heart, adrenal glands, kidneys, 
adipocytes, leukocytes, ovaries, testes, uterus, spleen, 
and skin. Angiotensin II in tissues may be formed by 
the enzymatic activity of renin or by other prote-
ases, e.g., tonin, chymase, and cathepsins. In addition 
to regulating local blood flow, tissue angiotensin II 
is a mitogen that stimulates growth and contributes 
to modeling and repair. Excess tissue angiotensin II 
may contribute to atherosclerosis, cardiac hypertro-
phy, and renal failure and consequently may be a tar-
get for pharmacologic therapy to prevent target organ 
damage.
Angiotensin II is the primary tropic factor regulating 
the synthesis and secretion of aldosterone by the zona 
glomerulosa of the adrenal cortex. Aldosterone synthesis 
is also dependent on potassium, and aldosterone secre-
tion may be decreased in potassium-depleted individuals. 
Although acute elevations of adrenocorticotropic hor-
mone (ACTH) levels also increase aldosterone secretion, 
ACTH is not an important tropic factor for the chronic 
regulation of aldosterone.
Aldosterone is a potent mineralocorticoid that 
increases sodium reabsorption by amiloride-sensitive 
epithelial sodium channels (ENaC) on the apical surface 
of the principal cells of the renal cortical collecting duct. 
Electric neutrality is maintained by exchanging sodium 
for potassium and hydrogen ions. Consequently, 
increased aldosterone secretion may result in hypoka-
lemia and alkalosis. Because potassium depletion may 
inhibit aldosterone synthesis, clinically, hypokalemia 
should be corrected before a patient is evaluated for 
hyperaldosteronism.
Mineralocorticoid receptors also are expressed in the 
colon, salivary glands, and sweat glands. Cortisol also 
binds to these receptors but normally functions as a 
less potent mineralocorticoid than aldosterone because 
cortisol is converted to cortisone by the enzyme 11 
β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2. Cortisone has 
no affinity for the mineralocorticoid receptor. Primary 
aldosteronism is a compelling example of mineralocor-
ticoid-mediated hypertension. In this disorder, adrenal 
aldosterone synthesis and release are independent of 
renin-angiotensin, and renin release is suppressed by the 
resulting volume expansion.
Aldosterone also has effects on nonepithelial targets. 
Aldosterone and/or mineralocorticoid receptor activa-
tion induces structural and functional alterations in the 
heart, kidney, and blood vessels, leading to myocardial 
fibrosis, nephrosclerosis, and vascular inflammation and 
remodeling, perhaps as a consequence of oxidative stress. 
These effects are amplified by a high salt intake. In ani-
mal models, high circulating aldosterone levels stimu-
late cardiac fibrosis and left ventricular hypertrophy, 
and spironolactone (an aldosterone antagonist) prevents 
aldosterone-induced myocardial fibrosis. Pathologic 
patterns of left ventricular geometry also have been 
SECTION V
Disorders of the Vasculature
448
associated with elevations of plasma aldosterone con-
centration in patients with essential hypertension as well 
as in patients with primary aldosteronism. In patients 
with CHF, low-dose spironolactone reduces the risk of 
progressive heart failure and sudden death from cardiac 
causes by 30%. Owing to a renal hemodynamic effect, 
in patients with primary aldosteronism, high circulating 
levels of aldosterone also may cause glomerular hyper-
filtration and albuminuria. These renal effects are revers-
ible after removal of the effects of excess aldosterone by 
adrenalectomy or spironolactone.
Increased activity of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone 
axis is not invariably associated with hypertension. In 
response to a low-NaCl diet or to volume contraction, 
arterial pressure and volume homeostasis may be main-
tained by increased activity of the renin-angiotensin-
aldosterone axis. Secondary aldosteronism (i.e., increased 
aldosterone secondary to increased renin-angiotensin), 
but not hypertension, also is observed in edematous states 
such as CHF and liver disease.
Vascular Mechanisms
Vascular radius and compliance of resistance arteries 
are also important determinants of arterial pressure. 
Resistance to flow varies inversely with the fourth 
power of the radius, and consequently, small decreases 
in lumen size significantly increase resistance. In 
hypertensive patients, structural, mechanical, or func-
tional changes may reduce the lumen diameter of small 
arteries and arterioles. Remodeling refers to geomet-
ric alterations in the vessel wall without a change in 
vessel volume. Hypertrophic (increased cell size, and 
increased deposition of intercellular matrix) or eutro-
phic vascular remodeling results in decreased lumen 
size and hence contributes to increased peripheral 
resistance. Apoptosis, low-grade inflammation, and 
vascular fibrosis also contribute to remodeling. Lumen 
diameter also is related to elasticity of the vessel. Ves-
sels with a high degree of elasticity can accommodate 
an increase of volume with relatively little change in 
pressure, whereas in a semirigid vascular system, a 
small increment in volume induces a relatively large 
increment of pressure.
Hypertensive patients have stiffer arteries, and arterio-
sclerotic patients may have particularly high systolic blood 
pressures and wide pulse pressures as a consequence of 
decreased vascular compliance due to structural changes 
in the vascular wall. Recent evidence suggests that arterial 
stiffness has independent predictive value for cardiovascu-
lar events. Clinically, a number of devices are available to 
evaluate arterial stiffness or compliance, including ultra-
sound and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
Ion transport by vascular smooth-muscle cells may 
contribute to hypertension-associated abnormalities of 
vascular tone and vascular growth, both of which are 
modulated by intracellular pH (pHi). Three ion trans-
port mechanisms participate in the regulation of pHi: 
(1) Na+-H+ exchange, (2) Na+-dependent HCO3
−-Cl− 
exchange, and (3) cation-independent HCO3
−-Cl− 
exchange. Based on measurements in cell types that 
are more accessible than vascular smooth muscle 
(e.g., leukocytes, erythrocytes, platelets, skeletal mus-
cle), activity of the Na+-H+ exchanger is increased in 
hypertension, and this may result in increased vascu-
lar tone by two mechanisms. First, increased sodium 
entry may lead to increased vascular tone by activating 
Na+-Ca2+ exchange and thereby increasing intracellu-
lar calcium. Second, increased pHi enhances calcium 
sensitivity of the contractile apparatus, leading to an 
increase in contractility for a given intracellular cal-
cium concentration. Additionally, increased Na+-H+ 
exchange may stimulate growth of vascular smooth 
muscle cells by enhancing sensitivity to mitogens.
Vascular endothelial function also modulates vascular 
tone. The vascular endothelium synthesizes and releases 
a spectrum of vasoactive substances, including nitric 
oxide, a potent vasodilator. Endothelium-dependent 
vasodilation is impaired in hypertensive patients. This 
impairment often is assessed with high-resolution ultra-
sonography before and after the hyperemic phase of 
reperfusion that follows 5 min of forearm ischemia. 
Alternatively, endothelium-dependent vasodilation may 
be assessed in response to an intraarterially infused 
endothelium-dependent vasodilator, e.g., acetylcholine. 
Endothelin is a vasoconstrictor peptide produced by 
the endothelium, and orally active endothelin antago-
nists may lower blood pressure in patients with resistant 
hypertension.
Currently, it is not known if the hypertension-
related vascular abnormalities of ion transport and 
endothelial function are primary alterations or sec-
ondary consequences of elevated arterial pressure. 
Limited evidence suggests that vascular compliance 
and endothelium-dependent vasodilation may be 
improved by aerobic exercise, weight loss, and anti-
hypertensive agents. It remains to be determined 
whether these interventions affect arterial structure 
and stiffness via a blood pressure–independent mecha-
nism and whether different classes of antihyperten-
sive agents preferentially affect vascular structure and 
function.
Pathologic Consequences of 
Hypertension
Hypertension is an independent predisposing factor for 
heart failure, coronary artery disease, stroke, renal dis-
ease, and peripheral arterial disease (PAD).
 
CHAPTER 37
Hypertensive Vascular Disease
449
Heart
Heart disease is the most common cause of death in 
hypertensive patients. Hypertensive heart disease is the 
result of structural and functional adaptations leading 
to left ventricular hypertrophy, CHF, abnormalities of 
blood flow due to atherosclerotic coronary artery dis-
ease and microvascular disease, and cardiac arrhythmias.
Both genetic and hemodynamic factors contribute to 
left ventricular hypertrophy. Clinically, left ventricular 
hypertrophy can be diagnosed by electrocardiography, 
although echocardiography provides a more sensitive 
measure of left ventricular wall thickness. Individuals 
with left ventricular hypertrophy are at increased risk 
for CHD, stroke, CHF, and sudden death. Aggressive 
control of hypertension can regress or reverse left ven-
tricular hypertrophy and reduce the risk of cardiovas-
cular disease. It is not clear whether different classes of 
antihypertensive agents have an added impact on reduc-
ing left ventricular mass, independent of their blood 
pressure–lowering effect.
CHF may be related to systolic dysfunction, diastolic 
dysfunction, or a combination of the two. Abnormalities 
of diastolic function that range from asymptomatic heart 
disease to overt heart failure are common in hyperten-
sive patients. Patients with diastolic heart failure have a 
preserved ejection fraction, which is a measure of systolic 
function. Approximately one-third of patients with CHF 
have normal systolic function but abnormal diastolic 
function. Diastolic dysfunction is an early consequence 
of hypertension-related heart disease and is exacerbated 
by left ventricular hypertrophy and ischemia. Cardiac 
catheterization provides the most accurate assessment of 
diastolic function. Alternatively, diastolic function can 
be evaluated by several noninvasive methods, including 
echocardiography and radionuclide angiography.
Brain
Stroke is the second most frequent cause of death in 
the world; it accounts for 5 million deaths each year, 
with an additional 15 million persons having nonfatal 
strokes. Elevated blood pressure is the strongest risk fac-
tor for stroke. Approximately 85% of strokes are due to 
infarction, and the remainder are due to either intrace-
rebral or subarachnoid hemorrhage. The incidence of 
stroke rises progressively with increasing blood pressure 
levels, particularly systolic blood pressure in individu-
als >65 years. Treatment of hypertension convincingly 
decreases the incidence of both ischemic and hemor-
rhagic strokes.
Hypertension also is associated with impaired cog-
nition in an aging population, and longitudinal studies 
support an association between midlife hypertension and 
late-life cognitive decline. Hypertension-related cogni-
tive impairment and dementia may be a consequence of 
a single infarct due to occlusion of a “strategic” larger 
vessel or multiple lacunar infarcts due to occlusive small 
vessel disease resulting in subcortical white matter isch-
emia. Several clinical trials suggest that antihypertensive 
therapy has a beneficial effect on cognitive function, 
although this remains an active area of investigation.
Cerebral blood flow remains unchanged over a wide 
range of arterial pressures (mean arterial pressure of 
50–150 mmHg) through a process termed autoregulation 
of blood flow. In patients with the clinical syndrome 
of malignant hypertension, encephalopathy is related 
to failure of autoregulation of cerebral blood flow at 
the upper pressure limit, resulting in vasodilation and 
hyperperfusion. Signs and symptoms of hypertensive 
encephalopathy may include severe headache, nausea 
and vomiting (often of a projectile nature), focal neuro-
logic signs, and alterations in mental status. Untreated, 
hypertensive encephalopathy may progress to stupor, 
coma, seizures, and death within hours. It is impor-
tant to distinguish hypertensive encephalopathy from 
other neurologic syndromes that may be associated with 
hypertension, e.g., cerebral ischemia, hemorrhagic or 
thrombotic stroke, seizure disorder, mass lesions, pseu-
dotumor cerebri, delirium tremens, meningitis, acute 
intermittent porphyria, traumatic or chemical injury to 
the brain, and uremic encephalopathy.
Kidney
The kidney is both a target and a cause of hyperten-
sion. Primary renal disease is the most common eti-
ology of secondary hypertension. Mechanisms of 
kidney-related hypertension include a diminished 
capacity to excrete sodium, excessive renin secretion 
in relation to volume status, and sympathetic ner-
vous system overactivity. Conversely, hypertension is 
a risk factor for renal injury and end-stage renal dis-
ease. The increased risk associated with high blood 
pressure is graded, continuous, and present through-
out the distribution of blood pressure above opti-
mal pressure. Renal risk appears to be more closely 
related to systolic than to diastolic blood pressure, 
and black men are at greater risk than white men 
for developing ESRD at every level of blood pres-
sure. Proteinuria is a reliable marker of the severity 
of chronic kidney disease and is a predictor of its pro-
gression. Patients with high urine protein excretion 
(>3 g/24 h) have a more rapid rate of progression than 
do those with lower protein excretion rates.
Atherosclerotic, hypertension-related vascular lesions 
in the kidney primarily affect preglomerular arterioles, 
resulting in ischemic changes in the glomeruli and 
postglomerular structures. Glomerular injury also may 
be a consequence of direct damage to the glomerular 
capillaries due to glomerular hyperperfusion. Stud-
ies of hypertension-related renal damage, primarily in 
SECTION V
Disorders of the Vasculature
450
experimental animals, suggest that loss of autoregula-
tion of renal blood flow at the afferent arteriole results 
in transmission of elevated pressures to an unprotected 
glomerulus with ensuing hyperfiltration, hypertrophy, 
and eventual focal segmental glomerular sclerosis. With 
progressive renal injury there is a loss of autoregula-
tion of renal blood flow and glomerular filtration rate, 
resulting in a lower blood pressure threshold for renal 
damage and a steeper slope between blood pressure 
and renal damage. The result may be a vicious cycle of 
renal damage and nephron loss leading to more severe 
hypertension, glomerular hyperfiltration, and further 
renal damage. Glomerular pathology progresses to glo-
merulosclerosis, and eventually the renal tubules may 
also become ischemic and gradually atrophic. The renal 
lesion associated with malignant hypertension consists 
of fibrinoid necrosis of the afferent arterioles, some-
times extending into the glomerulus, and may result in 
focal necrosis of the glomerular tuft.
Clinically, macroalbuminuria (a random urine albu-
min/creatinine ratio >300 mg/g) or microalbuminuria 
(a random urine albumin/creatinine ratio 30–300 mg/g) 
are early markers of renal injury. These are also risk 
factors for renal disease progression and cardiovascular 
disease.
Peripheral Arteries
In addition to contributing to the pathogenesis of 
hypertension, blood vessels may be a target organ for 
atherosclerotic disease secondary to long-standing ele-
vated blood pressure. Hypertensive patients with arte-
rial disease of the lower extremities are at increased risk 
for future cardiovascular disease. Although patients with 
stenotic lesions of the lower extremities may be asymp-
tomatic, intermittent claudication is the classic symp-
tom of PAD. This is characterized by aching pain in the 
calves or buttocks while walking that is relieved by rest. 
The ankle-brachial index is a useful approach for evalu-
ating PAD and is defined as the ratio of noninvasively 
assessed ankle to brachial (arm) systolic blood pressure. 
An ankle-brachial index <0.90 is considered diagnostic 
of PAD and is associated with >50% stenosis in at least 
one major lower limb vessel. Several studies suggest that 
an ankle-brachial index <0.80 is associated with elevated 
blood pressure, particularly systolic blood pressure.
Defining Hypertension
From an epidemiologic perspective, there is no obvi-
ous level of blood pressure that defines hypertension. 
In adults, there is a continuous, incremental risk of 
cardiovascular disease, stroke, and renal disease across 
levels of both systolic and diastolic blood pressure. 
Table 37-1
Blood Pressure Classification
Blood Pressure 
Classification
Systolic, 
mmHg
Diastolic, 
mmHg
Normal
<120
and <80
Prehypertension
120–139
or 80–89
Stage 1 hypertension
140–159
or 90–99
Stage 2 hypertension
≥160
or ≥100
Isolated systolic hypertension
≥140
and <90
Source: Adapted from AV Chobanian et al: JAMA 289:2560, 2003.
The Multiple Risk Factor Intervention Trial (MRFIT), 
which included >350,000 male participants, dem-
onstrated a continuous and graded influence of both 
systolic and diastolic blood pressure on CHD mor-
tality, extending down to systolic blood pressures of 
120 mmHg. Similarly, results of a meta-analysis involv-
ing almost 1 million participants indicate that ischemic 
heart disease mortality, stroke mortality, and mortal-
ity from other vascular causes are directly related to 
the height of the blood pressure, beginning at 115/ 
75 mmHg, without evidence of a threshold. Cardiovas-
cular disease risk doubles for every 20-mmHg increase 
in systolic and 10-mmHg increase in diastolic pressure. 
Among older individuals, systolic blood pressure and 
pulse pressure are more powerful predictors of cardio-
vascular disease than is diastolic blood pressure.
Clinically, hypertension may be defined as that level 
of blood pressure at which the institution of therapy 
reduces blood pressure–related morbidity and mortality. 
Current clinical criteria for defining hypertension gen-
erally are based on the average of two or more seated 
blood pressure readings during each of two or more 
outpatient visits. A recent classification recommends 
blood pressure criteria for defining normal blood pres-
sure, prehypertension, hypertension (stages I and II), 
and isolated systolic hypertension, which is a common 
occurrence among the elderly (Table 37-1). In chil-
dren and adolescents, hypertension generally is defined 
as systolic and/or diastolic blood pressure consistently 
>95th percentile for age, sex, and height. Blood pres-
sures between the 90th and 95th percentiles are consid-
ered prehypertensive and are an indication for lifestyle 
interventions.
Home blood pressure and average 24-h ambulatory 
blood pressure measurements are generally lower than 
clinic blood pressures. Because ambulatory blood pres-
sure recordings yield multiple readings throughout the 
day and night, they provide a more comprehensive 
assessment of the vascular burden of hypertension than 
do a limited number of office readings. Increasing evi-
dence suggests that home blood pressures, including 
 
CHAPTER 37
Hypertensive Vascular Disease
451
Table 37-2
Systolic Hypertension With Wide Pulse 
Pressure
1. Decreased vascular compliance (arteriosclerosis)
2. Increased cardiac output
a. Aortic regurgitation
b. Thyrotoxicosis
c. Hyperkinetic heart syndrome
d. Fever
e. Arteriovenous fistula
f. Patent ductus arteriosus
24-h blood pressure recordings, more reliably predict 
target organ damage than do office blood pressures. 
Blood pressure tends to be higher in the early morn-
ing hours, soon after waking, than at other times of day. 
Myocardial infarction and stroke are more common in 
the early morning hours. Nighttime blood pressures 
are generally 10–20% lower than daytime blood pres-
sures, and an attenuated nighttime blood pressure “dip” 
is associated with increased cardiovascular disease risk. 
Recommended criteria for a diagnosis of hypertension 
are average awake blood pressure ≥135/85 mmHg and 
asleep blood pressure ≥120/75 mmHg. These levels 
approximate a clinic blood pressure of 140/90 mmHg.
Approximately 15–20% of patients with stage 1 
hypertension (as defined in Table 37-1) based on 
office blood pressures have average ambulatory read-
ings <135/85 mmHg. This phenomenon, so-called 
white coat hypertension, also may be associated with 
an increased risk of target organ damage (e.g., left ven-
tricular hypertrophy, carotid atherosclerosis, overall car-
diovascular morbidity), although to a lesser extent than 
in individuals with elevated office and ambulatory read-
ings. Individuals with white coat hypertension are also 
at increased risk for developing sustained hypertension.
Clinical Disorders of 
Hypertension
Depending on methods of patient ascertainment, 
∼80–95% of hypertensive patients are diagnosed as hav-
ing “essential” hypertension (also referred to as primary 
or idiopathic hypertension). In the remaining 5–20% 
of hypertensive patients, a specific underlying disorder 
Table 37-3
Secondary Causes of Systolic and Diastolic Hypertension
Renal
Parenchymal diseases, renal cysts (including polycystic kidney disease), renal tumors 
(including renin-secreting tumors), obstructive uropathy
Renovascular
Arteriosclerotic, fibromuscular dysplasia
Adrenal
Primary aldosteronism, Cushing’s syndrome, 17α-hydroxylase deficiency, 11β-hydroxylase 
deficiency, 11-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency (licorice), pheochromocytoma
Aortic coarctation
Obstructive sleep apnea
Preeclampsia/eclampsia
Neurogenic
Psychogenic, diencephalic syndrome, familial dysautonomia, polyneuritis (acute porphyria, 
lead poisoning), acute increased intracranial pressure, acute spinal cord section
Miscellaneous endocrine
Hypothyroidism, hyperthyroidism, hypercalcemia, acromegaly
Medications
High-dose estrogens, adrenal steroids, decongestants, appetite suppressants,  
cyclosporine, tricyclic antidepressants, monamine oxidase inhibitors, erythropoietin,  
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents, cocaine
Mendelian forms of hypertension
See Table 37-4
causing the elevation of blood pressure can be identified 
(Tables 37-2 and 37-3). In individuals with “second-
ary” hypertension, a specific mechanism for the blood 
pressure elevation is often more apparent.
Essential Hypertension
Essential hypertension tends to be familial and is likely 
to be the consequence of an interaction between envi-
ronmental and genetic factors. The prevalence of essen-
tial hypertension increases with age, and individuals 
with relatively high blood pressures at younger ages 
are at increased risk for the subsequent development 
of hypertension. It is likely that essential hypertension 
represents a spectrum of disorders with different under-
lying pathophysiologies. In the majority of patients 
with established hypertension, peripheral resistance is 
increased and cardiac output is normal or decreased; 
however, in younger patients with mild or labile 
SECTION V
Disorders of the Vasculature
452
hypertension, cardiac output may be increased and 
peripheral resistance may be normal.
When plasma renin activity (PRA) is plotted 
against 24-h sodium excretion, ∼10–15% of hyperten-
sive patients have high PRA and 25% have low PRA. 
High-renin patients may have a vasoconstrictor form 
of hypertension, whereas low-renin patients may have 
volume-dependent 
hypertension. 
Inconsistent 
asso-
ciations between plasma aldosterone and blood pressure 
have been described in patients with essential hyperten-
sion. The association between aldosterone and blood 
pressure is more striking in African Americans, and PRA 
tends to be low in hypertensive African Americans. This 
raises the possibility that subtle increases in aldosterone 
may contribute to hypertension in at least some groups 
of patients who do not have overt primary aldosteronism. 
Furthermore, spironolactone, an aldosterone antagonist, 
may be a particularly effective antihypertensive agent for 
some patients with essential hypertension, including some 
patients with “drug-resistant” hypertension.
Obesity and the Metabolic Syndrome
(See also Chap. 32) There is a well-documented asso-
ciation between obesity (body mass index >30 kg/m2) 
and hypertension. Further, cross-sectional studies indi-
cate a direct linear correlation between body weight 
(or body mass index) and blood pressure. Centrally 
located body fat is a more important determinant of 
blood pressure elevation than is peripheral body fat. In 
longitudinal studies, a direct correlation exists between 
change in weight and change in blood pressure over 
time. Sixty percent of hypertensive adults are more than 
20% overweight. It has been established that 60–70% 
of hypertension in adults may be directly attributable to 
adiposity.
Hypertension and dyslipidemia frequently occur 
together and in association with resistance to insulin-
stimulated glucose uptake. This clustering of risk fac-
tors is often, but not invariably, associated with obesity, 
particularly abdominal obesity. Insulin resistance also is 
associated with an unfavorable imbalance in the endo-
thelial production of mediators that regulate platelet 
aggregation, coagulation, fibrinolysis, and vessel tone. 
When these risk factors cluster, the risks for CHD, 
stroke, diabetes, and cardiovascular disease mortality are 
increased further.
Depending on the populations studied and the meth-
odologies for defining insulin resistance, ∼25–50% of 
nonobese, nondiabetic hypertensive persons are insu-
lin resistant. The constellation of insulin resistance, 
abdominal obesity, hypertension, and dyslipidemia has 
been designated as the metabolic syndrome. As a group, 
first-degree relatives of patients with essential hyper-
tension are also insulin resistant, and hyperinsulinemia 
(a surrogate marker of insulin resistance) may predict 
the eventual development of hypertension and car-
diovascular disease. Although the metabolic syndrome 
may in part be heritable as a polygenic condition, the 
expression of the syndrome is modified by environ-
mental factors, such as degree of physical activity and 
diet. Insulin sensitivity increases and blood pressure 
decreases in response to weight loss. The recognition 
that cardiovascular disease risk factors tend to cluster 
within individuals has important implications for the 
evaluation and treatment of hypertension. Evaluation 
of both hypertensive patients and individuals at risk for 
developing hypertension should include assessment of 
overall cardiovascular disease risk. Similarly, introduc-
tion of lifestyle modification strategies and drug thera-
pies should address overall risk and not simply focus on 
hypertension.
Renal Parenchymal Diseases
Virtually all disorders of the kidney may cause hyperten-
sion (Table 37-3), and renal disease is the most common 
cause of secondary hypertension. Hypertension is present 
in >80% of patients with chronic renal failure. In gen-
eral, hypertension is more severe in glomerular diseases 
than in interstitial diseases such as chronic pyelonephri-
tis. Conversely, hypertension may cause nephrosclerosis, 
and in some instances it may be difficult to determine 
whether hypertension or renal disease was the initial dis-
order. Proteinuria >1000 mg/d and an active urine sedi-
ment are indicative of primary renal disease. In either 
instance, the goals are to control blood pressure and 
retard the rate of progression of renal dysfunction.
Renovascular hypertension
Hypertension due to an occlusive lesion of a renal artery, 
renovascular hypertension, is a potentially curable form 
of hypertension. In the initial stages, the mechanism 
of hypertension generally is related to activation of the 
renin-angiotensin system. However, renin activity and 
other components of the renin-angiotensin system may 
be elevated only transiently; over time, sodium reten-
tion and recruitment of other pressure mechanisms may 
contribute to elevated arterial pressure. Two groups of 
patients are at risk for this disorder: older arterioscle-
rotic patients who have a plaque obstructing the renal 
artery, frequently at its origin, and patients with fibro-
muscular dysplasia. Atherosclerosis accounts for the large 
majority of patients with renovascular hypertension. 
Although fibromuscular dysplasia may occur at any age, 
it has a strong predilection for young white women. The 
prevalence in females is eightfold than in males. There 
are several histologic variants of fibromuscular dyspla-
sia, including medial fibroplasia, perimedial fibroplasia, 
 
CHAPTER 37
Hypertensive Vascular Disease
453
medial hyperplasia, and intimal fibroplasia. Medial 
fibroplasia is the most common variant and accounts 
for approximately two-thirds of patients. The lesions of 
fibromuscular dysplasia are frequently bilateral and, in 
contrast to atherosclerotic renovascular disease, tend to 
affect more distal portions of the renal artery.
In addition to the age and sex of the patient, several 
clues from the history and physical examination suggest 
a diagnosis of renovascular hypertension. The diagno-
sis should be considered in patients with other evidence 
of atherosclerotic vascular disease. Although response 
to antihypertensive therapy does not exclude the diag-
nosis, severe or refractory hypertension, recent loss 
of hypertension control or recent onset of moderately 
severe hypertension, and unexplained deterioration of 
renal function or deterioration of renal function associ-
ated with an ACE inhibitor should raise the possibility 
of renovascular hypertension. Approximately 50% of 
patients with renovascular hypertension have an abdom-
inal or flank bruit, and the bruit is more likely to be 
hemodynamically significant if it lateralizes or extends 
throughout systole into diastole.
If blood pressure is adequately controlled with a 
simple antihypertensive regimen and renal function 
remains stable, there may be little impetus to pursue 
an evaluation for renal artery stenosis, particularly in an 
older patient with atherosclerotic disease and comorbid 
conditions. Patients with long-standing hypertension, 
advanced renal insufficiency, or diabetes mellitus are less 
likely to benefit from renal vascular repair. The most 
effective medical therapies include an ACE inhibitor 
or an angiotensin II receptor blocker; however, these 
agents decrease glomerular filtration rate in a stenotic 
kidney owing to efferent renal arteriolar dilation. In the 
presence of bilateral renal artery stenosis or renal artery 
stenosis to a solitary kidney, progressive renal insuffi-
ciency may result from the use of these agents. Impor-
tantly, the renal insufficiency is generally reversible after 
discontinuation of the offending drug.
If renal artery stenosis is suspected and if the clinical 
condition warrants an intervention such as percutaneous 
transluminal renal angioplasty (PTRA), placement of a 
vascular endoprosthesis (stent), or surgical renal revascu-
larization, imaging studies should be the next step in the 
evaluation. As a screening test, renal blood flow may be 
evaluated with a radionuclide [131I]-orthoiodohippurate 
(OIH) scan or glomerular filtration rate may be evalu-
ated with a [99mTc]-diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid 
(DTPA) scan before and after a single dose of captopril 
(or another ACE inhibitor). The following are consis-
tent with a positive study: (1) decreased relative uptake 
by the involved kidney, which contributes <40% of 
total renal function, (2) delayed uptake on the affected 
side, and (3) delayed washout on the affected side. In 
patients with normal, or nearly normal, renal function, 
a normal captopril renogram essentially excludes func-
tionally significant renal artery stenosis; however, its 
usefulness is limited in patients with renal insufficiency 
(creatinine clearance <20 mL/min) or bilateral renal 
artery stenosis. Additional imaging studies are indicated 
if the scan is positive. Doppler ultrasound of the renal 
arteries produces reliable estimates of renal blood flow 
velocity and offers the opportunity to track a lesion over 
time. Positive studies usually are confirmed at angiog-
raphy, whereas false-negative results occur frequently, 
particularly in obese patients. Gadolinium-contrast mag-
netic resonance angiography offers clear images of the 
proximal renal artery but may miss distal lesions. An 
advantage is the opportunity to image the renal arter-
ies with an agent that is not nephrotoxic. Contrast arte-
riography remains the “gold standard” for evaluation 
and identification of renal artery lesions. Potential risks 
include nephrotoxicity, particularly in patients with dia-
betes mellitus or preexisting renal insufficiency.
Some degree of renal artery obstruction may be 
observed in almost 50% of patients with atherosclerotic 
disease, and there are several approaches for evaluat-
ing the functional significance of such a lesion to pre-
dict the effect of vascular repair on blood pressure 
control and renal function. Each approach has varying 
degrees of sensitivity and specificity, and no single test 
is sufficiently reliable to determine a causal relationship 
between a renal artery lesion and hypertension. Func-
tionally significant lesions generally occlude more than 
70% of the lumen of the affected renal artery. On angi-
ography, the presence of collateral vessels to the isch-
emic kidney suggests a functionally significant lesion. A 
lateralizing renal vein renin ratio (ratio >1.5 of affected 
side/contralateral side) has a 90% predictive value for a 
lesion that would respond to vascular repair; however, 
the false-negative rate for blood pressure control is 
50–60%. Measurement of the pressure gradient across a 
renal artery lesion does not reliably predict the response 
to vascular repair.
In the final analysis, a decision concerning vascular 
repair vs. medical therapy and the type of repair proce-
dure should be individualized for each patient. Patients 
with fibromuscular disease have more favorable out-
comes than do patients with atherosclerotic lesions, 
presumably owing to their younger age, shorter dura-
tion of hypertension, and less systemic disease. Because 
of its low risk-versus-benefit ratio and high success 
rate (improvement or cure of hypertension in 90% of 
patients and restenosis rate of 10%), PTRA is the initial 
treatment of choice for these patients. Surgical revascu-
larization may be undertaken if PTRA is unsuccessful or 
if a branch lesion is present. In atherosclerotic patients, 
vascular repair should be considered if blood pressure 
cannot be controlled adequately despite optimal medical 
therapy or if renal function deteriorates. Surgery may 
SECTION V
Disorders of the Vasculature
454
be the preferred initial approach for younger athero-
sclerotic patients without comorbid conditions; how-
ever, for most atherosclerotic patients, depending on 
the location of the lesion, the initial approach may be 
PTRA and/or stenting. Surgical revascularization may 
be indicated if these approaches are unsuccessful, the 
vascular lesion is not amenable to PTRA or stenting, 
or concomitant aortic surgery is required, e.g., to repair 
an aneurysm. A National Institutes of Health–sponsored 
prospective, randomized clinical trial is in progress com-
paring medical therapy alone with medical therapy plus 
renal revascularization regarding Cardiovascular Out-
comes for Renal Atherosclerotic Lesions (CORAL).
Primary Aldosteronism
Excess aldosterone production due to primary aldoste-
ronism is a potentially curable form of hypertension. In 
patients with primary aldosteronism, increased aldoste-
rone production is independent of the renin-angiotensin 
system, and the consequences are sodium retention, 
hypertension, hypokalemia, and low PRA. The reported 
prevalence of this disorder varies from <2% to ∼15% of 
hypertensive individuals. In part, this variation is related 
to the intensity of screening and the criteria for establish-
ing the diagnosis.
History and physical examination provide little 
information about the diagnosis. The age at the time 
of diagnosis is generally the third through fifth decade. 
Hypertension is usually mild to moderate but occasion-
ally may be severe; primary aldosteronism should be 
considered in all patients with refractory hypertension. 
Hypertension in these patients may be associated with 
glucose intolerance. Most patients are asymptomatic, 
although, infrequently, polyuria, polydipsia, paresthesias, 
or muscle weakness may be present as a consequence 
of hypokalemic alkalosis. In a hypertensive patient with 
unprovoked hypokalemia (i.e., unrelated to diuretics, 
vomiting, or diarrhea), the prevalence of primary aldo-
steronism approaches 40–50%. In patients on diuret-
ics, serum potassium <3.1 mmol/L (<3.1 meq/L) also 
raises the possibility of primary aldosteronism; however, 
serum potassium is an insensitive and nonspecific screen-
ing test. However, serum potassium is normal in ∼25% 
of patients subsequently found to have an aldosterone-
producing adenoma, and higher percentages of patients 
with other etiologies of primary aldosteronism are not 
hypokalemic. Additionally, hypokalemic hypertension 
may be a consequence of secondary aldosteronism, other 
mineralocorticoid- and glucocorticoid-induced hyper-
tensive disorders, and pheochromocytoma.
The ratio of plasma aldosterone to plasma renin 
activity (PA/PRA) is a useful screening test. These 
measurements preferably are obtained in ambulatory 
patients in the morning. A ratio >30:1 in conjunction 
with a plasma aldosterone concentration >555 pmol/L 
(>20 ng/dL) reportedly has a sensitivity of 90% and 
a specificity of 91% for an aldosterone-producing 
adenoma. In a Mayo Clinic series, an aldosterone-
producing adenoma subsequently was confirmed sur-
gically in >90% of hypertensive patients with a PA/
PRA ratio ≥20 and a plasma aldosterone concentration 
≥415 pmol/L (≥15 ng/dL). There are, however, several 
caveats to interpreting the ratio. The cutoff for a “high” 
ratio is laboratory- and assay-dependent. Some anti-
hypertensive agents may affect the ratio (e.g., aldoste-
rone antagonists, angiotensin receptor antagonists, and 
ACE inhibitors may increase renin; aldosterone antago-
nists may increase aldosterone). Current recommenda-
tions are to withdraw aldosterone antagonists for at least 
4 weeks before obtaining these measurements, with 
this caveat. The ratio has been reported to be useful as 
a screening test in measurements obtained with patients 
taking their usual antihypertensive medications. A high 
ratio in the absence of an elevated plasma aldosterone 
level is considerably less specific for primary aldoste-
ronism since many patients with essential hypertension 
have low renin levels in this setting, particularly African 
Americans and elderly patients. In patients with renal 
insufficiency, the ratio may also be elevated because 
of decreased aldosterone clearance. In patients with an 
elevated PA/PRA ratio, the diagnosis of primary aldo-
steronism can be confirmed by demonstrating failure to 
suppress plasma aldosterone to <277 pmol/L (<10 ng/
dL) after IV infusion of 2 L of isotonic saline over 4 h; 
post-saline infusion plasma aldosterone values between 
138 and 277 pmol/L (5–10 ng/dL) are not determinant. 
Alternative confirmatory tests include failure to suppress 
aldosterone (based on test-specific criteria) in response 
to an oral NaCl load, fludrocortisone, or captopril.
Several adrenal abnormalities may culminate in the 
syndrome of primary aldosteronism, and appropri-
ate therapy depends on the specific etiology. Some 
60–70% of patients have an aldosterone-producing 
adrenal adenoma. The tumor is almost always unilat-
eral, and most often measures <3 cm in diameter. Most 
of the remainder of these patients have bilateral adre-
nocortical hyperplasia (idiopathic hyperaldosteron-
ism). Rarely, primary aldosteronism may be caused by 
an adrenal carcinoma or an ectopic malignancy, e.g., 
ovarian arrhenoblastoma. Most aldosterone-producing 
carcinomas, in contrast to adrenal adenomas and hyper-
plasia, produce excessive amounts of other adrenal 
steroids in addition to aldosterone. Functional differ-
ences in hormone secretion may assist in the differential 
diagnosis. Aldosterone biosynthesis is more responsive 
to adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) in patients 
with adenoma and more responsive to angiotensin in 
patients with hyperplasia. Consequently, patients with 
adenoma tend to have higher plasma aldosterone in the 
 
CHAPTER 37
Hypertensive Vascular Disease
455
early morning that decreases during the day, reflect-
ing the diurnal rhythm of ACTH, whereas plasma 
aldosterone tends to increase with upright posture in 
patients with hyperplasia, reflecting the normal postural 
response of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone axis. 
However, there is some overlap in the ability of these 
measurements to discriminate between adenoma and 
hyperplasia.
Adrenal computed tomography (CT) should be carried 
out in all patients diagnosed with primary aldosteronism. 
High-resolution CT may identify tumors as small as 0.3 cm 
and is positive for an adrenal tumor 90% of the time. If 
the CT is not diagnostic, an adenoma may be detected 
by adrenal scintigraphy with 6 β-[I131]iodomethyl-19-
norcholesterol after dexamethasone suppression (0.5 mg 
every 6 h for 7 days); however, this technique has 
decreased sensitivity for adenomas <1.5 cm.
When carried out by an experienced radiologist, bilat-
eral adrenal venous sampling for measurement of plasma 
aldosterone is the most accurate means of differentiating 
unilateral from bilateral forms of primary aldosteronism. 
The sensitivity and specificity of adrenal venous sam-
pling (95% and 100%, respectively) for detecting unilat-
eral aldosterone hypersecretion are superior to those of 
adrenal CT; success rates are 90–96%, and complication 
rates are <2.5%. One frequently used protocol involves 
sampling for aldosterone and cortisol levels in response to 
ACTH stimulation. An ipsilateral/ contralateral aldoste-
rone ratio >4, with symmetric ACTH-stimulated cortisol 
levels, is indicative of unilateral aldosterone production.
Hypertension generally is responsive to surgery in 
patients with adenoma but not in patients with bilat-
eral adrenal hyperplasia. Unilateral adrenalectomy, 
often done via a laparoscopic approach, is curative in 
40–70% of patients with an adenoma. Surgery should 
be undertaken after blood pressure has been controlled 
and hypokalemia corrected. Transient hypoaldosteron-
ism may occur up to 3 months postoperatively, result-
ing in hyperkalemia. Potassium should be monitored 
during this time, and hyperkalemia should be treated 
with potassium-wasting diuretics and with fludrocor-
tisone, if needed. Patients with bilateral hyperplasia 
should be treated medically. The drug regimen for these 
patients, as well as for patients with an adenoma who 
are poor surgical candidates, should include an aldo-
sterone antagonist and, if necessary, other potassium- 
sparing diuretics.
Glucocorticoid-remediable hyperaldosteronism is a 
rare, monogenic autosomal dominant disorder char-
acterized by moderate to severe hypertension, often 
occurring at an early age. These patients may have a 
family history of hemorrhagic stroke at a young age. 
Hypokalemia is usually mild or absent. Normally, 
angiotensin II stimulates aldosterone production by the 
adrenal zona glomerulosa, whereas ACTH stimulates 
cortisol production in the zona fasciculata. Owing to 
a chimeric gene on chromosome 8, ACTH also regu-
lates aldosterone secretion by the zona fasciculata in 
patients with glucocorticoid-remediable hyperaldo-
steronism. The consequence is overproduction in the 
zona fasciculata of both aldosterone and hybrid ste-
roids (18-hydroxycortisol and 18-oxocortisol) due to 
oxidation of cortisol. The diagnosis may be established 
by urine excretion rates of these hybrid steroids that 
are 20 to 30 times normal or by direct genetic test-
ing. Therapeutically, suppression of ACTH with low-
dose glucocorticoids corrects the hyperaldosteronism, 
hypertension, and hypokalemia. Spironolactone is also a 
therapeutic option.
Cushing’s Syndrome
Cushing’s syndrome is related to excess cortisol pro-
duction due either to excess ACTH secretion (from 
a pituitary tumor or an ectopic tumor) or to ACTH-
independent adrenal production of cortisol. Hypertension 
occurs in 75–80% of patients with Cushing’s syndrome. 
The mechanism of hypertension may be related to stim-
ulation of mineralocorticoid receptors by cortisol and 
increased secretion of other adrenal steroids. If clini-
cally suspected based on phenotypic characteristics, in 
patients not taking exogenous glucocorticoids, labora-
tory screening may be carried out with measurement of 
24-h excretion rates of urine free cortisol or an overnight 
dexamethasone-suppression test. Recent evidence sug-
gests that late night salivary cortisol is also a sensitive and 
convenient screening test. Further evaluation is required 
to confirm the diagnosis and identify the specific etiol-
ogy of Cushing’s syndrome. Appropriate therapy depends 
on the etiology.
Pheochromocytoma
Catecholamine-secreting tumors are located in the 
adrenal medulla (pheochromocytoma) or in extra-adrenal 
paraganglion tissue (paraganglioma) and account for 
hypertension in ∼0.05% of patients. If unrecognized, 
pheochromocytoma may result in lethal cardiovascu-
lar consequences. Clinical manifestations, including 
hypertension, are primarily related to increased circu-
lating catecholamines, although some of these tumors 
may secrete a number of other vasoactive substances. In 
a small percentage of patients, epinephrine is the pre-
dominant catecholamine secreted by the tumor, and 
these patients may present with hypotension rather than 
hypertension. The initial suspicion of the diagnosis is 
based on symptoms and/or the association of pheochro-
mocytoma with other disorders (Table 37-4). Approx-
imately 20% of pheochromocytomas are familial with 
SECTION V
Disorders of the Vasculature
456
autosomal dominant inheritance. Inherited pheochro-
mocytomas may be associated with multiple endocrine 
neoplasia (MEN) type 2A and type 2B, von Hippel-
Lindau disease, and neurofibromatosis (Table 37-4). 
Each of these syndromes is related to specific, identi-
fiable germ-line mutations. Additionally, mutations of 
succinate dehydrogenase genes are associated with para-
ganglioma syndromes, generally characterized by head 
and neck paragangliomas. Laboratory testing consists 
of measuring catecholamines in either urine or plasma. 
Genetic screening is available for evaluating patients and 
relatives suspected of harboring a pheochromocytoma 
associated with a familial syndrome. Surgical excision 
is the definitive treatment of pheochromocytoma and 
results in cure in ∼90% of patients.
Miscellaneous Causes of 
Hypertension
Hypertension due to obstructive sleep apnea is being recog-
nized with increasing frequency. Independent of obesity, 
hypertension occurs in >50% of individuals with obstruc-
tive sleep apnea. The severity of hypertension correlates 
with the severity of sleep apnea. Approximately 70% of 
Table 37-4
Rare Mendelian Forms of Hypertension
Disease
Phenotype
Genetic Cause
Glucocorticoid-remediable  
hyperaldosteronism
Autosomal dominant
Absent or mild hypokalemia
Chimeric 11β-hydroxylase/aldsoterone gene 
on chromosome 8
17α-hydroxylase deficiency
Autosomal recessive
Males: pseudohermaphroditism
Females: primary amenorrhea, absent 
secondary sexual characteristics
Random mutations of the CYP17 gene on 
chromosome 10
11β-hydroxylase deficiency
Autosomal recessive
Masculinization
Mutations of the CYP11B1 gene on 
chromosome 8q21-q22
11β-hydroxysteroid 
dehydrogenase deficiency 
(apparent mineralocorticoid 
excess syndrome)
Autosomal recessive
Hypokalemia, low renin, low aldosterone
Mutations in the 11β-hydroxysteroid 
dehydrogenase gene
Liddle’s syndrome
Autosomal dominant
Hypokalemia, low renin, low aldosterone
Mutation subunits of the epithelial sodium 
channel SCNN1B and SCNN1C genes
Pseudohypoaldosteronism type II 
(Gordon’s syndrome)
Autosomal dominant
Hyperkalemia, normal glomerular 
filtration rate
Linkage to chromosomes 1q31–q42 and 
17p11–q21
Hypertension exacerbated  
in pregnancy
Autosomal dominant
Severe hypertension in early pregnancy
Missense mutation with substitution of 
leucine for serine at codon 810 (MRL810)
Polycystic kidney disease
Autosomal dominant
Large cystic kidneys, renal failure, liver 
cysts, cerebral aneurysms, valvular 
heart disease
Mutations in the PKD1 gene on 
chromosome 16 and PKD2 gene on 
chromosome 4
Pheochromocytoma
Autosomal dominant
(a) Multiple endocrine neoplasia, type 2A  
Medullary thyroid carcinoma,  
  hyperparathyroidism
(b) Multiple endocrine neoplasia, type 2B  
Medullary thyroid carcinoma, mucosal  
  neuromas, thickened corneal nerves,  
  alimentary ganglioneuromatoses,  
  marfanoid habitus
(c) von Hippel-Lindau disease  
Retinal angiomas, hemangioblastomas  
  of the cerebellum and spinal cord,  
  renal cell carcinoma
(d) Neurofibromatosis type 1  
Multiple neurofibromas, café-au-lait  
  spots
(a) Mutations in the RET protooncogene 
 
(b) Mutations in the RET protooncogene 
 
 
 
(c) Mutations in the VHL tumor-suppressor 
gene 
 
(d) Mutations in the NF1 tumor-suppressor 
gene
 
CHAPTER 37
Hypertensive Vascular Disease
457
patients with obstructive sleep apnea are obese. Hyper-
tension related to obstructive sleep apnea also should be 
considered in patients with drug-resistant hypertension 
and patients with a history of snoring. The diagnosis can 
be confirmed by polysomnography. In obese patients, 
weight loss may alleviate or cure sleep apnea and related 
hypertension. Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) 
administered during sleep is an effective therapy for 
obstructive sleep apnea. With CPAP, patients with 
apparently drug-resistant hypertension may be more 
responsive to antihypertensive agents.
Coarctation of the aorta is the most common congeni-
tal cardiovascular cause of hypertension (Chap. 19). 
The incidence is 1–8 per 1000 live births. It is usually 
sporadic but occurs in 35% of children with Turner 
syndrome. Even when the anatomic lesion is surgically 
corrected in infancy, up to 30% of patients develop sub-
sequent hypertension and are at risk of accelerated coro-
nary artery disease and cerebrovascular events. Patients 
with less severe lesions may not be diagnosed until 
young adulthood. The physical findings are diagnostic 
and include diminished and delayed femoral pulses and 
a systolic pressure gradient between the right arm and 
the legs and, depending on the location of the coarcta-
tion, between the right and left arms. A blowing systolic 
murmur may be heard in the posterior left interscapu-
lar areas. The diagnosis may be confirmed by chest x-ray 
and transesophageal echocardiography. Therapeutic 
options include surgical repair and balloon angioplasty, 
with or without placement of an intravascular stent. 
Subsequently, many patients do not have a normal life 
expectancy but may have persistent hypertension, with 
death due to ischemic heart disease, cerebral hemor-
rhage, or aortic aneurysm.
Several additional endocrine disorders, including thy-
roid diseases and acromegaly, cause hypertension. Mild dia-
stolic hypertension may be a consequence of hypothy-
roidism, whereas hyperthyroidism may result in systolic 
hypertension. Hypercalcemia of any etiology, the most 
common being primary hyperparathyroidism, may result 
in hypertension. Hypertension also may be related to a 
number of prescribed or over-the-counter medications.
Monogenic Hypertension
A number of rare forms of monogenic hypertension 
have been identified (Table 37-4). These disorders may 
be recognized by their characteristic phenotypes, and 
in many instances the diagnosis may be confirmed by 
genetic analysis. Several inherited defects in adrenal ste-
roid biosynthesis and metabolism result in mineralo-
corticoid-induced hypertension and hypokalemia. In 
patients with a 17α-hydroxylase deficiency, synthesis 
of sex hormones and cortisol is decreased (Fig. 37-3). 
Consequently, these individuals do not mature sexually; 
males may present with pseudohermaphroditism and 
females with primary amenorrhea and absent secondary 
Mineralocorticoid
Glucocorticoid
Androgen
Cholesterol
Pregnenolone
17 OH Pregnenolone
Deoxycortisol
(17α hydroxylase)
DHEA
Progesterone
Corticosterone
Aldosterone
Deoxycorticosterone
17 OH Progesterone
Cortisone
Cortisol
Androstenedione
Testosterone
(21 hydroxylase)
(11β hydroxylase)
(11β hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase)
Figure 37-3 
Adrenal enzymatic defects.
SECTION V
Disorders of the Vasculature
458
sexual characteristics. Because cortisol-induced negative 
feedback on pituitary ACTH production is diminished, 
ACTH-stimulated adrenal steroid synthesis proximal 
to the enzymatic block is increased. Hypertension and 
hypokalemia are consequences of increased synthesis of 
mineralocorticoids proximal to the enzymatic block, 
particularly desoxycorticosterone. Increased steroid pro-
duction and, hence, hypertension may be treated with 
low-dose glucocorticoids. An 11β-hydroxylase defi-
ciency results in a salt-retaining adrenogenital syndrome 
that occurs in 1 in 100,000 live births. This enzymatic 
defect results in decreased cortisol synthesis, increased 
synthesis of mineralocorticoids (e.g., desoxycortico-
sterone), and shunting of steroid biosynthesis into the 
androgen pathway. In the severe form, the syndrome 
may present early in life, including the newborn period, 
with virilization and ambiguous genitalia in females and 
penile enlargement in males, or in older children as pre-
cocious puberty and short stature. Acne, hirsutism, and 
menstrual irregularities may be the presenting features 
when the disorder is first recognized in adolescence or 
early adulthood. Hypertension is less common in the 
late-onset forms. Patients with an 11β-hydroxysteroid 
dehydrogenase deficiency have an impaired capacity to 
metabolize cortisol to its inactive metabolite, cortisone, 
and hypertension is related to activation of mineralocor-
ticoid receptors by cortisol. This defect may be inher-
ited or acquired, due to licorice-containing glycyrrhizin 
acid. The same substance is present in the paste of sev-
eral brands of chewing tobacco. The defect in Lid-
dle’s syndrome results from constitutive activation of 
amiloride-sensitive epithelial sodium channels on the 
distal renal tubule, resulting in excess sodium reabsorp-
tion; the syndrome is ameliorated by amiloride. Hyper-
tension exacerbated in pregnancy is due to activation of 
the mineralocorticoid receptor by progesterone.
APPROACH TO THE
PATIENT	
Hypertension
History  The initial assessment of a hypertensive 
patient should include a complete history and physi-
cal examination to confirm a diagnosis of hyperten-
sion, screen for other cardiovascular disease risk factors, 
screen for secondary causes of hypertension, identify 
cardiovascular consequences of hypertension and other 
comorbidities, assess blood pressure–related lifestyles, 
and determine the potential for intervention.
Most patients with hypertension have no specific 
symptoms referable to their blood pressure elevation. 
Although popularly considered a symptom of elevated 
arterial pressure, headache generally occurs only in 
patients with severe hypertension. Characteristically, 
a “hypertensive headache” occurs in the morning and 
is localized to the occipital region. Other nonspecific 
symptoms that may be related to elevated blood pres-
sure include dizziness, palpitations, easy fatigability, 
and impotence. When symptoms are present, they 
are generally related to hypertensive cardiovascular 
disease or to manifestations of secondary hyperten-
sion. Table 37-5 lists salient features that should be 
addressed in obtaining a history from a hypertensive 
patient.
Measurement of Blood Pressure  Reli-
able measurements of blood pressure depend on atten-
tion to the details of the technique and conditions of the 
measurement. Proper training of observers, position-
ing of the patient, and selection of cuff size are essen-
tial. Owing to recent regulations preventing the use of 
mercury because of concerns about its potential toxic-
ity, most office measurements are made with aneroid 
sphygmomanometers or with oscillometric devices. 
These instruments should be calibrated periodically, 
and their accuracy confirmed. Before the blood pres-
sure measurement is taken, the individual should be 
seated quietly in a chair (not the exam table) with feet 
on the floor for 5 min in a private, quiet setting with a 
comfortable room temperature. At least two measure-
ments should be made. The center of the cuff should be 
at heart level, and the width of the bladder cuff should 
equal at least 40% of the arm circumference; the length 
of the cuff bladder should be enough to encircle at least 
80% of the arm circumference. It is important to pay 
attention to cuff placement, stethoscope placement, 
and the rate of deflation of the cuff (2 mmHg/s). Systolic 
blood pressure is the first of at least two regular “tap-
ping” Korotkoff sounds, and diastolic blood pressure is 
the point at which the last regular Korotkoff sound is 
Table 37-5
Patient’s Relevant History
Duration of hypertension
Previous therapies: responses and side effects
Family history of hypertension and cardiovascular disease
Dietary and psychosocial history
Other risk factors: weight change, dyslipidemia, smoking, 
diabetes, physical inactivity
Evidence of secondary hypertension: history of renal 
disease; change in appearance; muscle weakness; spells  
of sweating, palpitations, tremor; erratic sleep, snoring, 
daytime somnolence; symptoms of hypo- or hyperthyroidism; 
use of agents that may increase blood pressure
Evidence of target organ damage: history of TIA, stroke, 
transient blindness; angina, myocardial infarction,  
congestive heart failure; sexual function
Other comorbidities
Abbreviation: TIA, transient ischemic attack.
 
CHAPTER 37
Hypertensive Vascular Disease
459
Table 37-6
Basic Laboratory Tests for Initial Evaluation
System
Test
Renal
Microscopic urinalysis, albumin excretion, 
serum BUN and/or creatinine
Endocrine
Serum sodium, potassium, calcium, ?TSH
Metabolic
Fasting blood glucose, total cholesterol, 
HDL and LDL (often computed) cholesterol, 
triglycerides
Other
Hematocrit, electrocardiogram
Abbreviations: BUN, blood urea nitrogen; HDL, LDL, high-/low-
density lipoprotein; TSH, thyroid-stimulating hormone.
heard. In current practice, a diagnosis of hypertension 
generally is based on seated, office measurements.
Currently available ambulatory monitors are fully 
automated, use the oscillometric technique, and typi-
cally are programmed to take readings every 15–30 min. 
Twenty-four-hour ambulatory blood pressure monitor-
ing more reliably predicts cardiovascular disease risk 
than do office measurements. However, ambulatory 
monitoring is not used routinely in clinical practice and 
generally is reserved for patients in whom white coat 
hypertension is suspected. The Seventh Report of the 
Joint National Committee on Prevention, Detection, 
Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure (JNC 7) 
has also recommended ambulatory monitoring for treat-
ment resistance, symptomatic hypotension, autonomic 
failure, and episodic hypertension.
Physical Examination  Body habitus, includ-
ing weight and height, should be noted. At the initial 
examination, blood pressure should be measured in 
both arms and preferably in the supine, sitting, and 
standing positions to evaluate for postural hypoten-
sion. Even if the femoral pulse is normal to palpation, 
arterial pressure should be measured at least once in 
the lower extremity in patients in whom hypertension 
is discovered before age 30. Heart rate also should be 
recorded. Hypertensive individuals have an increased 
prevalence of atrial fibrillation. The neck should be 
palpated for an enlarged thyroid gland, and patients 
should be assessed for signs of hypo- and hyperthy-
roidism. Examination of blood vessels may provide 
clues about underlying vascular disease and should 
include funduscopic examination, auscultation for 
bruits over the carotid and femoral arteries, and palpa-
tion of femoral and pedal pulses. The retina is the only 
tissue in which arteries and arterioles can be exam-
ined directly. With increasing severity of hypertension 
and atherosclerotic disease, progressive funduscopic 
changes include increased arteriolar light reflex, arte-
riovenous crossing defects, hemorrhages and exu-
dates, and, in patients with malignant hypertension, 
papilledema. Examination of the heart may reveal a 
loud second heart sound due to closure of the aortic 
valve and an S4 gallop attributed to atrial contraction 
against a noncompliant left ventricle. Left ventricular 
hypertrophy may be detected by an enlarged, sus-
tained, and laterally displaced apical impulse. An 
abdominal bruit, particularly a bruit that lateralizes 
and extends throughout systole into diastole, raises 
the possibility of renovascular hypertension. Kidneys 
of patients with polycystic kidney disease may be pal-
pable in the abdomen. The physical examination also 
should include evaluation for signs of CHF and a neu-
rologic examination.
Laboratory Testing  Table 37-6 lists rec-
ommended laboratory tests in the initial evaluation of 
hypertensive patients. Repeat measurements of renal 
function, serum electrolytes, fasting glucose, and lipids 
may be obtained after the introduction of a new antihy-
pertensive agent and then annually or more frequently 
if clinically indicated. More extensive laboratory testing 
is appropriate for patients with apparent drug-resistant 
hypertension or when the clinical evaluation suggests a 
secondary form of hypertension.
treatment	
Hypertension
Lifestyle Interventions  Implementation 
of lifestyles that favorably affect blood pressure has 
implications for both the prevention and the treat-
ment of hypertension. Health-promoting lifestyle 
modifications are recommended for individuals with 
prehypertension and as an adjunct to drug therapy in 
hypertensive individuals. These interventions should 
address overall cardiovascular disease risk. Although 
the impact of lifestyle interventions on blood pressure 
is more pronounced in persons with hypertension, in 
short-term trials, weight loss and reduction of dietary 
NaCl have been shown to prevent the development of 
hypertension. In hypertensive individuals, even if these 
interventions do not produce a sufficient reduction in 
blood pressure to avoid drug therapy, the number of 
medications or doses required for blood pressure con-
trol may be reduced. Dietary modifications that effec-
tively lower blood pressure are weight loss, reduced 
NaCl intake, increased potassium intake, moderation 
of alcohol consumption, and an overall healthy dietary 
pattern (Table 37-7).
Prevention and treatment of obesity are important 
for reducing blood pressure and cardiovascular disease 
risk. In short-term trials, even modest weight loss can 
SECTION V
Disorders of the Vasculature
460
lead to a reduction of blood pressure and an increase 
in insulin sensitivity. Average blood pressure reductions 
of 6.3/3.1 mmHg have been observed with a reduction 
in mean body weight of 9.2 kg. Regular physical activ-
ity facilitates weight loss, decreases blood pressure, and 
reduces the overall risk of cardiovascular disease. Blood 
pressure may be lowered by 30 min of moderately 
intense physical activity, such as brisk walking, 6–7 days 
a week, or by more intense, less frequent workouts.
There is individual variability in the sensitivity of 
blood pressure to NaCl, and this variability may have a 
genetic basis. Based on results of meta-analyses, low-
ering of blood pressure by limiting daily NaCl intake to 
4.4–7.4 g (75–125 meq) results in blood pressure reduc-
tions of 3.7–4.9/0.9–2.9 mmHg in hypertensive individu-
als and lesser reductions in normotensive individuals. 
Dietary NaCl reduction also has been shown to reduce 
the long-term risk of cardiovascular events in adults 
with “prehypertension.” Potassium and calcium supple-
mentation have inconsistent, modest antihypertensive 
effects, and, independent of blood pressure, potas-
sium supplementation may be associated with reduced 
stroke mortality. Alcohol use in persons consuming 
three or more drinks per day (a standard drink contains 
∼14 g ethanol) is associated with higher blood pres-
sures, and a reduction of alcohol consumption is asso-
ciated with a reduction of blood pressure. In patients 
with advanced renal disease, dietary protein restriction 
may have a modest effect in mitigating renal damage by 
reducing the intrarenal transmission of systemic arterial 
pressure.
The DASH (Dietary Approaches to Stop Hyperten-
sion) trial convincingly demonstrated that over an 
8-week period a diet high in fruits, vegetables, and 
low-fat dairy products lowers blood pressure in indi-
viduals with high-normal blood pressures or mild 
Table 37-7
Lifestyle Modifications to Manage 
Hypertension
Weight reduction
Attain and maintain BMI <25 kg/m2
Dietary salt reduction
<6 g NaCl/d
Adapt DASH-type 
dietary plan
Diet rich in fruits, vegetables, 
and low-fat dairy products with 
reduced content of saturated 
and total fat
Moderation of alcohol 
consumption
For those who drink alcohol,  
consume ≤2 drinks/day in men 
and ≤1 drink/day in women
Physical activity
Regular aerobic activity, e.g., 
brisk walking for 30 min/d
Abbreviations: BMI, body mass index; DASH, Dietary Approaches 
to Stop Hypertension (trial).
hypertension. Reduction of daily NaCl intake to <6 g 
(100 meq) augmented the effect of this diet on blood 
pressure. Fruits and vegetables are enriched sources of 
potassium, magnesium, and fiber, and dairy products 
are an important source of calcium.
Pharmacologic 
Therapy  Drug therapy 
is recommended for individuals with blood pressures 
≥140/90 mmHg. The degree of benefit derived from 
antihypertensive agents is related to the magnitude of 
the blood pressure reduction. Lowering systolic blood 
pressure by 10–12 mmHg and diastolic blood pressure 
by 5–6 mmHg confers relative risk reductions of 35–40% 
for stroke and 12–16% for CHD within 5 years of the ini-
tiation of treatment. Risk of heart failure is reduced by 
>50%. Hypertension control is the single most effec-
tive intervention for slowing the rate of progression of 
hypertension-related chronic kidney disease.
There is considerable variation in individual responses 
to different classes of antihypertensive agents, and 
the magnitude of response to any single agent may 
be limited by activation of counterregulatory mecha-
nisms that oppose the hypotensive effect of the agent. 
Most available agents reduce systolic blood pres-
sure by 7–13 mmHg and diastolic blood pressure by  
4–8 mmHg when corrected for placebo effect. More 
often than not, combinations of agents, with comple-
mentary antihypertensive mechanisms, are required to 
achieve goal blood pressure reductions. Selection of 
antihypertensive agents and combinations of agents 
should be individualized, taking into account age, 
severity of hypertension, other cardiovascular disease 
risk factors, comorbid conditions, and practical consid-
erations related to cost, side effects, and frequency of 
dosing (Table 37-8).
Diuretics  Low-dose thiazide diuretics often are 
used as first-line agents alone or in combination with 
other antihypertensive drugs. Thiazides inhibit the Na+/
Cl− pump in the distal convoluted tubule and hence 
increase sodium excretion. In the long term, they also 
may act as vasodilators. Thiazides are safe, efficacious, 
inexpensive, and reduce clinical events. They provide 
additive blood pressure–lowering effects when com-
bined with beta blockers, angiotensin-converting 
enzyme inhibitors (ACEIs), or angiotensin receptor 
blockers (ARBs). In contrast, addition of a diuretic to a 
calcium channel blocker is less effective. Usual doses of 
hydrochlorothiazide range from 6.25–50 mg/d. Owing 
to an increased incidence of metabolic side effects 
(hypokalemia, insulin resistance, increased cholesterol), 
higher doses generally are not recommended. Two 
potassium-sparing diuretics, amiloride and triamterene, 
act by inhibiting epithelial sodium channels in the dis-
tal nephron. These agents are weak antihypertensive 
 
CHAPTER 37
Hypertensive Vascular Disease
461
Table 37-8 
Examples of Oral Drugs Used in Treatment of Hypertension
Drug Class
Examples
Usual Total Daily 
Dosea (Dosing 
Frequency/Day)
Other Indications
Contraindications/
Cautions
Diuretics
  Thiazides
  Loop diuretics
  Aldosterone  
antagonists
  K+ retaining
Hydrochlorothiazide
Chlorthalidone
Furosemide
Ethacrynic acid
Spironolactone
Eplerenone
Amiloride
Triamterene
6.25–50 mg (1–2)
25–50 mg (1)
40–80 mg (2–3)
50–100 mg (2–3)
25–100 mg (1–2)
50–100 mg (1–2)
5–10 mg (1–2)
50–100 mg (1–2)
CHF due to systolic  
dysfunction, renal failure
CHF due to systolic  
dysfunction, primary 
aldosteronism
Diabetes, dyslipidemia, 
hyperuricemia, gout, 
hypokalemia
Diabetes, dyslipidemia, 
hyperuricemia, gout, 
hypokalemia
Renal failure, hyperkalemia
Renal failure, hyperkalemia
Beta blockers
  Cardioselective
  Nonselective
  Combined alpha/ 
  beta
Atenolol
Metoprolol
Propranolol
Propranolol LA
Labetalol
Carvedilol
25–100 mg (1)
25–100 mg (1–2)
40–160 mg (2)
60–180 (1)
200–800 mg (2)
12.5–50 mg (2)
Angina, CHF due to  
systolic dysfunction,  
post-MI, sinus 
tachycardia, ventricular 
tachyarrhythmias
?Post-MI, CHF
Asthma, COPD, 2nd- or 
3rd-degree heart block, 
sick-sinus syndrome
Alpha antagonists  
Selective
  Nonselective
Prazosin
Doxazosin
Terazosin
Phenoxybenzamine
2–20 mg (2–3)
1–16 mg (1)
1–10 mg (1–2)
20–120 mg (2–3)
Prostatism
Pheochromocytoma
Sympatholytics
  Central
Clonidine
Clonidine patch
Methyldopa
Reserpine
Guanfacine
0.1–0.6 mg (2)
0.1–0.3 mg (1/week)
250–1000 mg (2)
0.05–0.25 mg (1)
0.5–2 mg (1)
ACE inhibitors
Captopril
Lisinopril
Ramipril
25–200 mg (2)
10–40 mg (1)
2.5–20 mg (1–2)
Post-MI, coronary  
syndromes, CHF with 
low ejection fraction, 
nephropathy
Acute renal failure, 
bilateral renal artery 
stenosis, pregnancy, 
hyperkalemia
Angiotensin II  
antagonists
Losartan
Valsartan
Candesartan
25–100 mg (1–2)
80–320 mg (1)
2–32 mg (1–2)
CHF with low ejection 
fraction, nephropathy, 
ACE inhibitor cough
Renal failure, bilateral 
renal artery stenosis, 
pregnancy, hyperkalemia
Renin inhibitors
Aliskiren
150–300 mg (1)
Diabetic nephropathy
Pregnancy
Calcium antagonists
  Dihydropyridines
  Nondihydropyridines
Nifedipine (long-acting)
Verapamil (long-acting)
Diltiazem (long-acting)
30–60 mg (1)
120–360 mg (1–2)
180-420 mg (1)
Post-MI, supraventricular 
tachycardias, angina
2nd- or 3rd-degree heart 
block
Direct vasodilators
Hydralazine
Minoxidil
25–100 mg (2)
2.5–80 mg (1–2)
Severe coronary artery 
disease
aAt the initiation of therapy, lower doses may be preferable for elderly patients and for select combinations of antihypertensive agents.
Abbreviations: ACE, angiotensin-converting enzyme; CHF, congestive heart failure; COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; MI, myocar-
dial infarction.
agents but may be used in combination with a thiazide 
to protect against hypokalemia. The main pharmaco-
logic target for loop diuretics is the Na+-K+-2Cl− cotrans-
porter in the thick ascending limb of the loop of Henle. 
Loop diuretics generally are reserved for hypertensive 
patients with reduced glomerular filtration rates 
(reflected in serum creatinine >220 μmol/L [>2.5 mg/
dL]), CHF, or sodium retention and edema for some 
other reason, such as treatment with a potent vasodila-
tor, e.g., minoxidil.
SECTION V
Disorders of the Vasculature
462
Blockers of the Renin-Angiotensin Sys-
tem  ACEIs decrease the production of angiotensin II, 
increase bradykinin levels, and reduce sympathetic 
nervous system activity. ARBs provide selective block-
ade of AT1 receptors, and the effect of angiotensin II on 
unblocked AT2 receptors may augment their hypoten-
sive effect. Both classes of agents are effective antihy-
pertensive agents that may be used as monotherapy 
or in combination with diuretics, calcium antagonists, 
and alpha blocking agents. ACEIs and ARBs have been 
shown to improve insulin action and ameliorate the 
adverse effects of diuretics on glucose metabolism. 
Although the overall impact on the incidence of dia-
betes is modest, compared with amlodipine (a cal-
cium antagonist), valsartan (an ARB) has been shown 
to reduce the risk of developing diabetes in high-risk 
hypertensive patients. ACEI/ARB combinations are 
less effective in lowering blood pressure than is the 
case when either class of these agents is used in com-
bination with other classes of agents. In patients with 
vascular disease or a high risk of diabetes, combina-
tion ACEI/ARB therapy has been associated with more 
adverse events (e.g., cardiovascular death, myocardial 
infarction, stroke, and hospitalization for heart failure) 
without increases in benefit. However, in hypertensive 
patients with proteinuria, preliminary data suggest that 
reduction of proteinuria with ACEI/ARB combination 
treatment may be more effective than treatment with 
either agent alone.
Side effects of ACEIs and ARBs include functional 
renal insufficiency due to efferent renal arteriolar dila-
tion in a kidney with a stenotic lesion of the renal artery. 
Additional predisposing conditions to renal insuffi-
ciency induced by these agents include dehydration, 
CHF, and use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. 
Dry cough occurs in ∼15% of patients, and angioedema 
occurs in <1% of patients taking ACEIs. Angioedema 
occurs most commonly in individuals of Asian ori-
gin and more commonly in African Americans than in 
whites. Hyperkalemia due to hypoaldosteronism is an 
occasional side effect of both ACEIs and ARBs.
A new approach to blocking the renin-angiotensin 
system has been introduced into clinical practice for 
the treatment of hypertension: direct renin inhibitors. 
Blockade of the renin-angiotensin system is more com-
plete with renin inhibitors than with ACEIs or ARBs. 
Aliskiren is the first of a class of oral, nonpeptide com-
petitive inhibitors of the enzymatic activity of renin. 
Monotherapy with aliskiren seems to be as effective 
as an ACEI or ARB for lowering blood pressure, but 
not more effective. Further blood reductions may be 
achieved when aliskiren is used in combination with a 
thiazide diuretic, an ACEI, an ARB, or calcium antago-
nists. Currently, aliskiren is not considered a first-line 
antihypertensive agent.
Aldosterone 
Antagonists  Spironolactone is 
a nonselective aldosterone antagonist that may be 
used alone or in combination with a thiazide diuretic. 
It may be a particularly effective agent in patients with 
low-renin essential hypertension, resistant hyperten-
sion, and primary aldosteronism. In patients with CHF, 
low-dose spironolactone reduces mortality and hos-
pitalizations for heart failure when given in addition 
to conventional therapy with ACEIs, digoxin, and loop 
diuretics. Because spironolactone binds to progester-
one and androgen receptors, side effects may include 
gynecomastia, impotence, and menstrual abnormalities. 
These side effects are circumvented by a newer agent, 
eplerenone, which is a selective aldosterone antagonist. 
Eplerenone has recently been approved in the United 
States for the treatment of hypertension.
Beta 
Blockers  β-Adrenergic receptor blockers 
lower blood pressure by decreasing cardiac output, due 
to a reduction of heart rate and contractility. Other pro-
posed mechanisms by which beta blockers lower blood 
pressure include a central nervous system effect and 
inhibition of renin release. Beta blockers are particularly 
effective in hypertensive patients with tachycardia, and 
their hypotensive potency is enhanced by coadminis-
tration with a diuretic. In lower doses, some beta block-
ers selectively inhibit cardiac β1 receptors and have less 
influence on β2 receptors on bronchial and vascular 
smooth-muscle cells; however, there seems to be no 
difference in the antihypertensive potencies of cardi-
oselective and nonselective beta blockers. Certain beta 
blockers have intrinsic sympathomimetic activity, and it 
is uncertain whether this constitutes an overall advan-
tage or disadvantage in cardiac therapy. Beta blockers 
without intrinsic sympathomimetic activity decrease 
the rate of sudden death, overall mortality, and recur-
rent myocardial infarction. In patients with CHF, beta 
blockers have been shown to reduce the risks of hospi-
talization and mortality. Carvedilol and labetalol block 
both β receptors and peripheral α-adrenergic recep-
tors. The potential advantages of combined β- and 
α-adrenergic blockade in treating hypertension remain 
to be determined.
`-Adrenergic 
Blockers  Postsynaptic, selective 
α-adrenoreceptor antagonists lower blood pressure by 
decreasing peripheral vascular resistance. They are effec-
tive antihypertensive agents used either as monotherapy 
or in combination with other agents. However, in clini-
cal trials of hypertensive patients, alpha blockade has 
not been shown to reduce cardiovascular morbidity and 
mortality or to provide as much protection against CHF 
as other classes of antihypertensive agents. These agents 
are also effective in treating lower urinary tract symp-
toms in men with prostatic hypertrophy. Nonselective 
α-adrenoreceptor antagonists bind to postsynaptic and 
 
CHAPTER 37
Hypertensive Vascular Disease
463
presynaptic receptors and are used primarily for the man-
agement of patients with pheochromocytoma.
Sympatholytic Agents  Centrally acting α2 sym-
pathetic agonists decrease peripheral resistance by 
inhibiting sympathetic outflow. They may be particu-
larly useful in patients with autonomic neuropathy who 
have wide variations in blood pressure due to barore-
ceptor denervation. Drawbacks include somnolence, 
dry mouth, and rebound hypertension on withdrawal. 
Peripheral sympatholytics decrease peripheral resistance 
and venous constriction by depleting nerve terminal 
norepinephrine. Although they are potentially effective 
antihypertensive agents, their usefulness is limited by 
orthostatic hypotension, sexual dysfunction, and numer-
ous drug-drug interactions.
Calcium Channel Blockers  Calcium antago-
nists reduce vascular resistance through L-channel 
blockade, which reduces intracellular calcium and 
blunts vasoconstriction. This is a heterogeneous group 
of agents that includes drugs in the following three 
classes: phenylalkylamines (verapamil), benzothiaze-
pines (diltiazem), and 1,4-dihydropyridines (nifedipine-
like). Used alone and in combination with other agents 
(ACEIs, beta blockers, α1-adrenergic blockers), calcium 
antagonists effectively lower blood pressure; however, 
it is unclear if adding a diuretic to a calcium blocker 
results in a further lowering of blood pressure. Side 
effects of flushing, headache, and edema with dihydro-
pyridine use are related to their potencies as arteriolar 
dilators; edema is due to an increase in transcapillary 
pressure gradients, not to net salt and water retention.
Direct Vasodilators  Direct vasodilators decrease 
peripheral resistance and concomitantly activate 
mechanisms that defend arterial pressure, notably the 
sympathetic nervous system, the renin-angiotensin-
aldosterone system, and sodium retention. Usually, 
they are not considered first-line agents but are most 
effective when added to a combination that includes 
a diuretic and a beta blocker. Hydralazine is a potent 
direct vasodilator that has antioxidant and nitric oxide–
enhancing actions, and minoxidil is a particularly 
potent agent and is used most frequently in patients 
with renal insufficiency who are refractory to all other 
drugs. Hydralazine may induce a lupus-like syndrome, 
and side effects of minoxidil include hypertrichosis and 
pericardial effusion.
Comparisons of Antihypertensives  
Based on pooling results from clinical trials, meta-
analyses of the efficacy of different classes of antihy-
pertensive agents suggest essentially equivalent blood 
pressure–lowering effects of the following six major 
classes of antihypertensive agents when used as mono-
therapy: thiazide diuretics, beta blockers, ACEIs, ARBs, 
calcium antagonists, and α2 blockers. On average, stan-
dard doses of most antihypertensive agents reduce 
blood pressure by 8–10/4–7 mmHg; however, there may 
be subgroup differences in responsiveness. Younger 
patients may be more responsive to beta blockers 
and ACEIs, whereas patients over age 50 may be more 
responsive to diuretics and calcium antagonists. There is 
a limited relationship between plasma renin and blood 
pressure response. Patients with high-renin hyperten-
sion may be more responsive to ACEIs and ARBs than 
to other classes of agents, whereas patients with low-
renin hypertension are more responsive to diuretics and 
calcium antagonists. Hypertensive African Americans 
tend to have low renin and may require higher doses 
of ACEIs and ARBs than whites for optimal blood pres-
sure control, although this difference is abolished when 
these agents are combined with a diuretic. Beta block-
ers also appear to be less effective than thiazide diuret-
ics in African Americans than in non-African Americans. 
Identification of genetic variants that influence blood 
pressure responsiveness would potentially provide a 
rational basis for the selection of a specific class of an 
antihypertensive agent in an individual patient. Early 
pharmacogenetic studies, utilizing either a candidate 
gene approach or genomewide scans, have shown asso-
ciations of gene polymorphisms with blood pressure 
responsiveness to specific antihypertensive drugs. How-
ever, the reported effects have generally been too small 
to affect clinical decisions, and associated polymor-
phisms remain to be confirmed in subsequent studies. 
Currently, in practical terms, the presence of comorbidi-
ties often influences the selection of antihypertensive 
agents.
A recent meta-analysis of more than 30 randomized 
trials of blood pressure–lowering therapy indicates that 
for a given reduction in blood pressure, the major drug 
classes seem to produce similar overall net effects on 
total cardiovascular events. In both nondiabetic and 
diabetic hypertensive patients, most trials have failed 
to show significant differences in cardiovascular out-
comes with different drug regimens as long as equiva-
lent decreases in blood pressure were achieved. For 
example, the Antihypertensive and Lipid-Lowering 
Treatment to Prevent Heart Attack Trial (ALLHAT) dem-
onstrated that the occurrence of coronary heart disease 
death and nonfatal myocardial infarction, as well as 
overall mortality, was virtually identical in hypertensive 
patients treated with either an ACEI (lisinopril), a diuretic 
(chlorthalidone), or a calcium antagonist (amlodipine).
However, in specific patient groups, ACEIs may have 
particular advantages, beyond that of blood pressure 
control, in reducing cardiovascular and renal outcomes. 
ACEIs and ARBs decrease intraglomerular pressure and 
proteinuria and may retard the rate of progression of 
renal insufficiency, not totally accounted for by their 
SECTION V
Disorders of the Vasculature
464
hypotensive effects, in both diabetic and nondiabetic 
renal diseases. Among African Americans with hyper-
tension-related renal disease, ACEIs appear to be more 
effective than beta blockers or dihydropyridine calcium 
channel blockers in slowing, although not preventing, 
the decline of glomerular filtration rate. In experimental 
models of hypertension and diabetes, renal protection  
with aliskiren (a renin inhibitor) was comparable to that 
with ACEIs and ARBs. Independent of its blood pres-
sure–lowering effect, aliskiren has renal protective 
effects in patients with hypertension, type 2 diabetes, 
and nephropathy. The renoprotective effect of these 
renin-angiotensin blockers, compared with other anti-
hypertensive drugs, is less obvious at lower blood pres-
sures. In most patients with hypertension and heart 
failure due to systolic and/or diastolic dysfunction, the 
use of diuretics, ACEIs or ARBs, and beta blockers is rec-
ommended to improve survival. Independent of blood 
pressure, in both hypertensive and normotensive indi-
viduals, ACEIs attenuate the development of left ven-
tricular hypertrophy, improve symptomatology and risk 
of death from CHF, and reduce morbidity and mortal-
ity rates in post-myocardial infarction patients. Similar 
benefits in cardiovascular morbidity and mortality rates 
in patients with CHF have been observed with the use 
of ARBs. ACEIs provide better coronary protection than 
do calcium channel blockers, whereas calcium channel 
blockers provide more stroke protection than do either 
ACEIs or beta blockers. Results of a recent large, double-
blind prospective clinical trial (Rationale and Design of 
the Avoiding Cardiovascular Events through Combina-
tion Therapy in Patients Living with Systolic Hyperten-
sion [ACCOMPLISH Trial]) indicated that combination 
treatment with an ACEI (benazepril) plus a calcium 
antagonist (amlodipine) was superior to treatment with 
the ACEI plus a diuretic (hydrochlorothiazide) in reduc-
ing the risk of cardiovascular events and death among 
high-risk patients with hypertension. However, the com-
bination of an ACEI and a diuretic has recently been 
shown to produce major reductions in morbidity and 
mortality in the very elderly.
After a stroke, combination therapy with an ACEI 
and a diuretic, but not with an ARB, reduces the rate of 
recurrent stroke. Some of these apparent differences 
may reflect differences in trial design and/or patient 
groups.
Blood Pressure Goals of Antihyper-
tensive Therapy  Based on clinical trial data, the 
maximum protection against combined cardiovascular 
endpoints is achieved with pressures <135–140 mmHg 
for systolic blood pressure and <80–85 mmHg for diastolic 
blood pressure; however, treatment has not reduced car-
diovascular disease risk to the level in nonhypertensive 
individuals. More aggressive blood pressure targets for 
blood pressure control (e.g., office or clinic blood pres-
sure <130/80 mmHg) are generally recommended for 
patients with diabetes, coronary heart disease, chronic 
kidney disease, or additional cardiovascular disease risk 
factors. An even lower goal blood pressure (systolic blood 
pressure ∼120 mmHg) may be desirable for patients with 
proteinuria (>1 g/d) since the decline of glomerular fil-
tration rate in these patients is particularly blood pres-
sure–dependent. In diabetic patients, effective blood 
pressure control reduces the risk of cardiovascular events 
and death as well as the risk for microvascular disease 
(nephropathy, retinopathy). Risk reduction is greater in 
diabetic than in nondiabetic individuals. Although the 
optimal target blood pressure in patients with heart failure 
has not been established, a reasonable goal is the lowest  
blood pressure that is not associated with evidence of 
hypoperfusion.
To achieve recommended blood pressure goals, 
the  majority of individuals with hypertension will 
require treatment with more than one drug. Three or 
more drugs frequently are needed in patients with dia-
betes and renal insufficiency. For most agents, reduction 
of blood pressure at half-standard doses is only ∼20% 
less than at standard doses. Appropriate combinations 
of agents at these lower doses may have additive or 
almost additive effects on blood pressure with a lower 
incidence of side effects.
Despite theoretical concerns about decreasing cere-
bral, coronary, and renal blood flow by overly aggres-
sive antihypertensive therapy, clinical trials have found 
no evidence for a “J-curve” phenomenon; i.e., at blood 
pressure reductions achieved in clinical practice, there 
does not appear to be a lower threshold for increasing 
cardiovascular risk. A small nonprogressive increase in 
the serum creatinine concentration with blood pres-
sure reduction may occur in patients with chronic 
renal insufficiency. This generally reflects a hemody-
namic response, not structural renal injury, indicating 
that intraglomerular pressure has been reduced. Blood 
pressure control should not be allowed to deteriorate 
in order to prevent a modest rise in creatinine. Even 
among older patients with isolated systolic hyperten-
sion, further lowering of diastolic blood pressure does 
not result in harm. However, relatively little information 
is available concerning the risk-versus-benefit ratio of 
antihypertensive therapy in individuals >80 years, and in 
this population, gradual blood pressure reduction to less 
aggressive target levels of control may be appropriate.
The term resistant hypertension refers to patients 
with blood pressures persistently >140/90 mmHg 
despite taking three or more antihypertensive agents, 
including a diuretic, in a reasonable combination and 
at full doses. Resistant or difficult-to-control hyper-
tension is more common in patients >60 years than 
in younger patients. Resistant hypertension may be 
 
CHAPTER 37
Hypertensive Vascular Disease
465
Table 37-9
Preferred Parenteral Drugs for Selected 
Hypertensive Emergencies
Hypertensive encephalopathy
Nitroprusside, nicardipine, 
labetalol
Malignant hypertension (when 
IV therapy is indicated)
Labetalol, nicardipine, 
nitroprusside, enalaprilat
Stroke
Nicardipine, labetalol, 
nitroprusside
Myocardial infarction/ 
unstable angina
Nitroglycerin, nicardipine, 
labetalol, esmolol
Acute left ventricular failure
Nitroglycerin, enalaprilat, 
loop diuretics
Aortic dissection
Nitroprusside, esmolol, 
labetalol
Adrenergic crisis
Phentolamine, nitroprusside
Postoperative hypertension
Nitroglycerin, nitroprusside, 
labetalol, nicardipine
Preeclampsia/eclampsia  
of pregnancy
Hydralazine, labetalol, 
nicardipine
Source: Adapted from DG Vidt, in S Oparil, MA Weber (eds): Hyper-
tension, 2nd ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier Saunders, 2005.
Table 37-10
Usual Intravenous Doses of Antihypertensive 
Agents Used in Hypertensive Emergenciesa
Antihypertensive 
Agent
Intravenous Dose
Nitroprusside
Initial 0.3 (μg/kg)/min; usual 2–4 (μg/
kg)/min; maximum 10 (μg/kg)/min 
for 10 min
Nicardipine
Initial 5 mg/h; titrate by 2.5 mg/h at 
5–15 min intervals; max 15 mg/h
Labetalol
2 mg/min up to 300 mg or 20 mg 
over 2 min, then 40–80 mg at 
10-min intervals up to 300 mg total
Enalaprilat
Usual 0.625–1.25 mg over 5 min 
every 6–8 h; maximum 5 mg/dose
Esmolol
Initial 80–500 μg/kg over 1 min, then 
50–300 (μg/kg)/min
Phentolamine
5–15 mg bolus
Nitroglycerin
Initial 5 μg/min, then titrate by 
5 μg/min at 3–5-min intervals; if 
no response is seen at 20 μg/min, 
incremental increases of 10–20 μg/
min may be used
Hydralazine
10–50 mg at 30-min intervals
aConstant blood pressure monitoring is required. Start with the low-
est dose. Subsequent doses and intervals of administration should 
be adjusted according to the blood pressure response and duration 
of action of the specific agent.
related to “pseudoresistance” (high office blood pres-
sures and lower home blood pressures), nonadherence 
to therapy, identifiable causes of hypertension (includ-
ing obesity and excessive alcohol intake), and the use 
of any of a number of nonprescription and prescription 
drugs (Table 37-3). Rarely, in older patients, pseudohy-
pertension may be related to the inability to measure 
blood pressure accurately in severely sclerotic arteries. 
This condition is suggested if the radial pulse remains 
palpable despite occlusion of the brachial artery by the 
cuff (Osler maneuver). The actual blood pressure can be 
determined by direct intraarterial measurement. Evalu-
ation of patients with resistant hypertension might 
include home blood pressure monitoring to determine 
if office blood pressures are representative of the usual 
blood pressure. A more extensive evaluation for a sec-
ondary form of hypertension should be undertaken 
if no other explanation for hypertension resistance 
becomes apparent.
Hypertensive Emergencies  Probably due 
to the widespread availability of antihypertensive ther-
apy, in the United States there has been a decline in the 
numbers of patients presenting with “crisis levels” of 
blood pressure. Most patients who present with severe 
hypertension are chronically hypertensive, and in the 
absence of acute end-organ damage, precipitous lower-
ing of blood pressure may be associated with significant 
morbidity and should be avoided. The key to successful 
management of severe hypertension is to differentiate 
hypertensive crises from hypertensive urgencies. The 
degree of target organ damage, rather than the level 
of blood pressure alone, determines the rapidity with 
which blood pressure should be lowered. Tables 37-9 
and 37-10 list a number of hypertension-related emer-
gencies and recommended therapies.
Malignant hypertension is a syndrome associated with 
an abrupt increase of blood pressure in a patient with 
underlying hypertension or related to the sudden onset 
of hypertension in a previously normotensive individual. 
The absolute level of blood pressure is not as impor-
tant as its rate of rise. Pathologically, the syndrome is 
associated with diffuse necrotizing vasculitis, arteriolar 
thrombi, and fibrin deposition in arteriolar walls. Fibri-
noid necrosis has been observed in arterioles of the 
kidney, brain, retina, and other organs. Clinically, the 
syndrome is recognized by progressive retinopathy (arte-
riolar spasm, hemorrhages, exudates, and papilledema), 
deteriorating renal function with proteinuria, microangi-
opathic hemolytic anemia, and encephalopathy. In these 
patients, historic inquiry should include questions about 
the use of monamine oxidase inhibitors and recreational 
drugs (e.g., cocaine, amphetamines).
Although blood pressure should be lowered rap-
idly in patients with hypertensive encephalopathy, 
SECTION V
Disorders of the Vasculature
466
there are inherent risks of overly aggressive therapy. 
In hypertensive individuals, the upper and lower limits 
of autoregulation of cerebral blood flow are shifted to 
higher levels of arterial pressure, and rapid lowering of 
blood pressure to below the lower limit of autoregula-
tion may precipitate cerebral ischemia or infarction as 
a consequence of decreased cerebral blood flow. Renal 
and coronary blood flows also may decrease with overly 
aggressive acute therapy. The initial goal of therapy is to 
reduce mean arterial blood pressure by no more than 
25% within minutes to 2 h or to a blood pressure in 
the range of 160/100–110 mmHg. This may be accom-
plished with IV nitroprusside, a short-acting vasodilator 
with a rapid onset of action that allows for minute-to-
minute control of blood pressure. Parenteral labetalol 
and nicardipine are also effective agents for the treat-
ment of hypertensive encephalopathy.
In patients with malignant hypertension without 
encephalopathy or another catastrophic event, it is 
preferable to reduce blood pressure over hours or lon-
ger rather than minutes. This goal may effectively be 
achieved initially with frequent dosing of short-acting 
oral agents such as captopril, clonidine, and labetalol.
Acute, transient blood pressure elevations that last days 
to weeks frequently occur after thrombotic and hemor-
rhagic strokes. Autoregulation of cerebral blood flow is 
impaired in ischemic cerebral tissue, and higher arterial 
pressures may be required to maintain cerebral blood 
flow. Although specific blood pressure targets have not 
been defined for patients with acute cerebrovascular  
events, aggressive reductions of blood pressure are to 
be avoided. With the increasing availability of improved 
methods for measuring cerebral blood flow (using CT 
technology), studies are in progress to evaluate the 
effects of different classes of antihypertensive agents 
on both blood pressure and cerebral blood flow after 
an acute stroke. Currently, in the absence of other 
indications for acute therapy, for patients with cere-
bral infarction who are not candidates for thrombolytic 
therapy, one recommended guideline is to institute anti-
hypertensive therapy only for patients with a systolic 
blood pressure >220 mmHg or a diastolic blood pres-
sure >130 mmHg. If thrombolytic therapy is to be used, 
the recommended goal blood pressure is <185 mmHg 
systolic pressure and <110 mmHg diastolic pressure. 
In patients with hemorrhagic stroke, suggested guide-
lines for initiating antihypertensive therapy are systolic  
>180 mmHg or diastolic pressure >130 mmHg. The man-
agement of hypertension after subarachnoid hemorrhage 
is controversial. Cautious reduction of blood pressure is 
indicated if mean arterial pressure is >130 mmHg.
In addition to pheochromocytoma, an adrenergic 
crisis due to catecholamine excess may be related to 
cocaine or amphetamine overdose, clonidine with-
drawal, acute spinal cord injuries, and an interaction 
of tyramine-containing compounds with monamine 
oxidase inhibitors. These patients may be treated with 
phentolamine or nitroprusside.
Treatment of hypertension in patients with acute 
aortic dissection is discussed in Chap. 38.
 Mark A. Creager  I   Joseph Loscalzo 
467
 The aorta is the conduit through which blood ejected 
from the left ventricle is delivered to the systemic arte-
rial bed. In adults, its diameter is approximately 3 cm 
at the origin and in the ascending portion, 2.5 cm in 
the descending portion in the thorax, and 1.8–2 cm in 
the abdomen. The aortic wall consists of a thin intima 
composed of endothelium, subendothelial connec-
tive tissue, and an internal elastic lamina; a thick tunica 
media composed of smooth-muscle cells and extracel-
lular matrix; and an adventitia composed primarily of 
connective tissue enclosing the vasa vasorum and nervi 
vascularis. In addition to the conduit function of the 
aorta, its viscoelastic and compliant properties serve a 
buffering function. The aorta is distended during sys-
tole to allow a portion of the stroke volume and elas-
tic energy to be stored, and it recoils during diastole so 
that blood continues to fl ow to the periphery. Because 
of its continuous exposure to high pulsatile pressure and 
shear stress, the aorta is particularly prone to injury and 
disease resulting from mechanical trauma. The aorta 
is also more prone to rupture than is any other vessel, 
especially with the development of aneurysmal dilation, 
since its wall tension, as governed by Laplace’s law (i.e., 
proportional to the product of pressure and radius), will 
be increased. 
 conGenitAL AnomALieS 
oF tHe AortA 
 Congenital anomalies of the aorta usually involve the 
aortic arch and its branches. Symptoms such as dyspha-
gia, stridor, and cough may occur if an anomaly causes 
a ring around or otherwise compresses the esopha-
gus or trachea. Anomalies associated with symptoms 
include double aortic arch, origin of the right subclavian 
artery distal to the left subclavian artery, and right-sided 
 DISEASES OF THE AORTA 
 cHAPter 38 
aortic arch with an aberrant left subclavian artery. 
A Kommerell’s diverticulum is an anatomic remnant 
of a right aortic arch. Most congenital anomalies of the 
aorta do not cause symptoms and are detected during 
catheter-based procedures. The diagnosis of suspected 
congenital anomalies of the aorta typically is confi rmed 
by computed tomographic (CT) or magnetic resonance 
(MR) angiography. Surgery is used to treat symptom-
atic anomalies. 
 Aortic AneurySm 
 An  aneurysm is defi ned as a pathologic dilation of a 
segment of a blood vessel. A  true aneurysm involves all 
three layers of the vessel wall and is distinguished from 
a  pseudoaneurysm , in which the intimal and medial lay-
ers are disrupted and the dilated segment of the aorta is 
lined by adventitia only and, at times, by perivascular 
clot. Aneurysms also may be classifi ed according to their 
gross appearance. A  fusiform aneurysm affects the entire 
circumference of a segment of the vessel, resulting in a 
diffusely dilated artery. In contrast, a  saccular aneurysm 
involves only a portion of the circumference, resulting 
in an outpouching of the vessel wall. Aortic aneurysms 
also are classifi ed according to location, i.e., abdominal 
versus thoracic. Aneurysms of the descending thoracic 
aorta are usually contiguous with infradiaphragmatic 
aneurysms and are referred to as  thoracoabdominal aortic 
aneurysms . 
 etiology 
 Aortic aneurysms result from conditions that cause deg-
radation or abnormal production of the structural com-
ponents of the aortic wall: elastin and collagen. The 
causes of aortic aneurysms may be broadly categorized 
SECTION V
Disorders of the Vasculature
468
The most common pathologic condition associated 
with degenerative aortic aneurysms is atherosclerosis. 
Many patients with aortic aneurysms have coexisting 
risk factors for atherosclerosis (Chap. 30), as well as ath-
erosclerosis in other blood vessels.
Cystic medial necrosis is the histopathologic term 
used to describe the degeneration of collagen and elas-
tic fibers in the tunica media of the aorta as well as the 
loss of medial cells that are replaced by multiple clefts 
of mucoid material. Cystic medial necrosis characteristi-
cally affects the proximal aorta, results in circumferen-
tial weakness and dilation, and leads to the development 
of fusiform aneurysms involving the ascending aorta and 
the sinuses of Valsalva. This condition is particularly 
prevalent in patients with Marfan syndrome, Loeys-
Dietz syndrome, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type  IV, 
hypertension, congenital bicuspid aortic valves, and 
familial thoracic aortic aneurysm syndromes; sometimes 
it appears as an isolated condition in patients without 
any other apparent disease.
Familial clusterings of aortic aneurysms occur in 20% 
of patients, suggesting a hereditary basis for the disease. 
Mutations of the gene that encodes fibrillin-1 are pres-
ent in patients with Marfan syndrome. Fibrillin-1 is an 
important component of extracellular micofibrils, which 
support the architecture of elastic fibers and other con-
nective tissue. Deficiency of fibrillin-1 in the extracel-
lular matrix leads to excessive signaling by transforming 
growth factor β (TGF-β). Loeys-Dietz syndrome is 
caused by mutations in the genes that encode TGF-β 
receptors 1 (TGFBR1) and 2 (TGFBR2). Increased 
signaling by TGF-β and mutations of TGFBR1 and 
TGFBR2 may cause thoracic aortic aneurysms. Muta-
tions of type III procollagen have been implicated in 
Ehlers-Danlos type IV syndrome. Linkage analysis has 
identified loci on chromosomes 5q13–14, 11q23.3–q24, 
and 3p24–25 in several families, although the specific 
alleles have not been described.
The infectious causes of aortic aneurysms include 
syphilis, tuberculosis, and other bacterial infections. 
Syphilis is a relatively uncommon cause of aortic aneu-
rysm. Syphilitic periaortitis and mesoaortitis damage 
elastic fibers, resulting in thickening and weakening of 
the aortic wall. Approximately 90% of syphilitic aneu-
rysms are located in the ascending aorta or aortic arch. 
Tuberculous aneurysms typically affect the thoracic aorta 
and result from direct extension of infection from hilar 
lymph nodes or contiguous abscesses as well as from 
bacterial seeding. Loss of aortic wall elasticity results 
from granulomatous destruction of the medial layer. 
A mycotic aneurysm is a rare condition that develops as 
a result of staphylococcal, streptococcal, Salmonella, or 
other bacterial or fungal infections of the aorta, usually 
at an atherosclerotic plaque. These aneurysms are usu-
ally saccular. Blood cultures are often positive and reveal 
the nature of the infective agent.
as degenerative diseases, inherited or developmental dis-
eases, infections, vasculitis, and trauma (Table 38-1). 
Inflammation, proteolysis, and biomechanical wall stress 
contribute to the degenerative processes that character-
ize most aneurysms of the abdominal and descending 
thoracic aorta. These are mediated by B-cell and T-cell 
lymphocytes, macrophages, inflammatory cytokines, and 
matrix metalloproteinases that degrade elastin and col-
lagen and alter the tensile strength and ability of the 
aorta to accommodate pulsatile stretch. The associated 
histopathology demonstrates destruction of elastin and 
collagen, decreased vascular smooth muscle, in-growth 
of new blood vessels, and inflammation. Factors associ-
ated with degenerative aortic aneurysms include aging, 
cigarette smoking, hypercholesterolemia, male sex, and 
a family history of aortic aneurysms.
Table 38-1 
Diseases of the Aorta: Etiology and 
Associated Factors
Aortic aneurysm
  Degenerative/atherosclerosis
    Aging
    Cigarette smoking
    Male gender
    Family history
  Cystic medial necrosis
    Marfan syndrome
    Loeys-Dietz syndrome
    Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type IV
    Familial
    Bicuspid aortic valve
  Chronic aortic dissection
  Infective (see below)
  Trauma
Acute aortic syndromes (aortic dissection, acute intramural 
hematoma, penetrating atherosclerotic ulcer)
  Atherosclerosis
  Cystic medial necrosis (see above)
  Hypertension
  Vasculitis (see below)
  Pregnancy
  Trauma
Aortic occlusion
  Atherosclerosis
  Thromboembolism
Aortitis
  Vasculitis
    Takayasu’s arteritis
    Giant cell arteritis
  Rheumatic
    HLA-B27–associated spondyloarthropathies
    Behçet’s syndrome
    Cogan’s syndrome
  Idiopathic aortitis
  Infective
    Syphilis
    Tuberculosis
  Mycotic (Salmonella, staphylococcal, streptococcal, fungal)
 
CHAPTER 38
Diseases of the Aorta
469
either contrast-enhanced CT or MRI should be per-
formed at least every 6–12 months to monitor expansion.
Treatment	
Thoracic Aortic Aneurysms
β-Adrenergic blockers currently are recommended 
for patients with thoracic aortic aneurysms, particu-
larly those with Marfan syndrome, who have evidence 
of aortic root dilatation to reduce the rate of further 
Vasculitides associated with aortic aneurysm include 
Takayasu’s arteritis and giant cell arteritis, which may 
cause aneurysms of the aortic arch and descending 
thoracic aorta. Spondyloarthropathies such as ankylos-
ing spondylitis, rheumatoid arthritis, psoriatic arthritis, 
relapsing polychondritis, and reactive arthritis (formerly 
known as Reiter’s syndrome) are associated with dila-
tion of the ascending aorta. Aortic aneurysms occur 
in patients with Behçet’s syndrome and Cogan’s syn-
drome. Aortic aneurysms also result from idiopathic 
aortitis. Traumatic aneurysms may occur after penetrating 
or nonpenetrating chest trauma and most commonly 
affect the descending thoracic aorta just beyond the site 
of insertion of the ligamentum arteriosum. Chronic 
aortic dissections are associated with weakening of the 
aortic wall that may lead to the development of aneu-
rysmal dilatation.
Thoracic Aortic Aneurysms
The clinical manifestations and natural history of tho-
racic aortic aneurysms depend on their location. Cystic 
medial necrosis is the most common pathology associ-
ated with ascending aortic aneurysms, whereas athero-
sclerosis is the condition most frequently associated with 
aneurysms of the aortic arch and descending thoracic 
aorta. The average growth rate of thoracic aneurysms 
is 0.1–0.2 cm per year. Thoracic aortic aneurysms asso-
ciated with Marfan syndrome or aortic dissection may 
expand at a greater rate. The risk of rupture is related to 
the size of the aneurysm and the presence of symptoms, 
ranging approximately from 2–3% per year for tho-
racic aortic aneurysms <4.0 cm in diameter to 7% per 
year for those >6 cm in diameter. Most thoracic aor-
tic aneurysms are asymptomatic; however, compression 
or erosion of adjacent tissue by aneurysms may cause 
symptoms such as chest pain, shortness of breath, cough, 
hoarseness, and dysphagia. Aneurysmal dilation of the 
ascending aorta may cause congestive heart failure as a 
consequence of aortic regurgitation, and compression of 
the superior vena cava may produce congestion of the 
head, neck, and upper extremities.
A chest x-ray may be the first test that suggests the 
diagnosis of a thoracic aortic aneurysm (Fig. 38-1). 
Findings include widening of the mediastinal shadow and 
displacement or compression of the trachea or left main-
stem bronchus. Echocardiography, particularly trans­
esophageal echocardiography, can be used to assess the 
proximal ascending aorta and descending thoracic aorta. 
Contrast-enhanced CT, magnetic resonance imag-
ing (MRI), and conventional invasive aortography are 
sensitive and specific tests for assessment of aneurysms 
of the thoracic aorta and involvement of branch vessels 
(Fig. 38-2). In asymptomatic patients whose aneurysms 
are too small to justify surgery, noninvasive testing with 
Figure 38-1 
A chest x-ray of a patient with a thoracic aortic aneurysm.
Figure 38-2 
An aortogram demonstrating a large fusiform aneurysm of 
the descending thoracic aorta.
SECTION V
Disorders of the Vasculature
470
expansion. Additional medical therapy should be given 
as necessary to control hypertension. Recent prelimi-
nary studies indicate that angiotensin receptor antago-
nists and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors will 
reduce the rate of aortic dilation in patients with Marfan 
syndrome by blocking TGF-β signaling; clinical outcome 
trials of this treatment approach are in progress. Opera-
tive repair with placement of a prosthetic graft is indi-
cated in patients with symptomatic thoracic aortic aneu-
rysms, those in whom the ascending aortic diameter 
is >5.5–6 cm or the descending thoracic aortic diam-
eter is >6.5–7 cm, and those with an aneurysm that has 
increased by >1 cm per year. In patients with Marfan syn-
drome or bicuspid aortic valve, ascending thoracic aor-
tic aneurysms >5 cm should be considered for surgery. 
Endovascular repair is an alternative treatment for some 
patients with descending thoracic aortic aneurysms.
Abdominal Aortic Aneurysms
Abdominal aortic aneurysms occur more frequently 
in males than in females, and the incidence increases 
with age. Abdominal aortic aneurysms ≥4.0 cm may 
affect 1–2% of men older than 50 years. At least 90% 
of all abdominal aortic aneurysms >4.0 cm are related 
to atherosclerotic disease, and most of these aneurysms 
are below the level of the renal arteries. Prognosis is 
related to both the size of the aneurysm and the severity 
of coexisting coronary artery and cerebrovascular dis-
ease. The risk of rupture increases with the size of the 
aneurysm: the 5-year risk for aneurysms <5 cm is 1–2%, 
whereas it is 20–40% for aneurysms >5 cm in diameter. 
The formation of mural thrombi within aneurysms may 
predispose to peripheral embolization.
An abdominal aortic aneurysm commonly produces no 
symptoms. It usually is detected on routine examination as 
a palpable, pulsatile, expansile, and nontender mass, or it is 
an incidental finding observed on an abdominal x-ray or 
ultrasound study performed for other reasons. As abdomi-
nal aortic aneurysms expand, however, they may become 
painful. Some patients complain of strong pulsations in the 
abdomen; others experience pain in the chest, lower back, 
or scrotum. Aneurysmal pain is usually a harbinger of rup-
ture and represents a medical emergency. More often, 
acute rupture occurs without any prior warning, and this 
complication is always life threatening. Rarely, there is 
leakage of the aneurysm with severe pain and tenderness. 
Acute pain and hypotension occur with rupture of the 
aneurysm, which requires an emergency operation.
Abdominal radiography may demonstrate the calci-
fied outline of the aneurysm; however, about 25% of 
aneurysms are not calcified and cannot be visualized by 
x-ray imaging. An abdominal ultrasound can delineate 
the transverse and longitudinal dimensions of an abdom-
inal aortic aneurysm and may detect mural thrombus. 
Abdominal ultrasound is useful for serial documenta-
tion of aneurysm size and can be used to screen patients 
at risk for developing an aortic aneurysm. In one large 
study, ultrasound screening of men age 65–74 years was 
associated with a risk reduction in aneurysm-related 
death of 42%. For this reason, screening by ultrasonogra-
phy is recommended for men age 65–75 years who have 
ever smoked. In addition, siblings or offspring of persons 
with abdominal aortic aneurysms, as well as individu-
als with thoracic aortic or peripheral arterial aneurysms, 
should be considered for screening for abdominal aor-
tic aneurysms. CT with contrast and MRI are accurate 
noninvasive tests to determine the location and size of 
abdominal aortic aneurysms and to plan endovascular or 
open surgical repair (Fig. 38-3). Contrast aortography 
may be used for the evaluation of patients with aneu-
rysms, but the procedure carries a small risk of complica-
tions such as bleeding, allergic reactions, and atheroem-
bolism. Since the presence of mural thrombi may reduce 
the luminal size, aortography may underestimate the 
diameter of an aneurysm.
Treatment	
Abdominal Aortic Aneurysms
Operative repair of the aneurysm with insertion of a 
prosthetic graft or endovascular placement of an aortic 
stent graft (Fig. 38-3) is indicated for abdominal aortic 
aneurysms of any size that are expanding rapidly or are 
Figure 38-3 
A computed tomographic angiogram (CTA) depicting a 
fusiform abdominal aortic aneurysm that has been treated 
with a bifurcated stent graft.
 
CHAPTER 38
Diseases of the Aorta
471
associated with symptoms. For asymptomatic aneu-
rysms, abdominal aortic aneurysm repair is indicated if 
the diameter is >5.5 cm. In randomized trials of patients 
with abdominal aortic aneurysms <5.5 cm, there was 
no difference in the long-term (5- to 8-year) mortality 
rate between those followed with ultrasound surveil-
lance and those undergoing elective surgical repair. 
Thus, serial noninvasive follow-up of smaller aneurysms 
(<5 cm) is an alternative to immediate repair. The deci-
sion to perform an open surgical operation or endovas-
cular repair is based in part on the vascular anatomy and 
comorbid conditions. Endovascular repair of abdominal 
aortic aneurysms has a lower short-term morbidity rate 
but a comparable long-term mortality rate with open 
surgical reconstruction. Long-term surveillance with CT 
or MR aortography is indicated after endovascular repair 
to detect leaks and possible aneurysm expansion.
In surgical candidates, careful preoperative cardiac 
and general medical evaluations (followed by appro-
priate therapy for complicating conditions) are essen-
tial. Preexisting coronary artery disease, congestive 
heart failure, pulmonary disease, diabetes mellitus, and 
advanced age add to the risk of surgery. β-Adrenergic 
blockers decrease perioperative cardiovascular morbid-
ity and mortality. With careful preoperative cardiac eval-
uation and postoperative care, the operative mortality 
rate approximates 1–2%. After acute rupture, the mor-
tality rate of emergent operation is 45–50%. Endovascu-
lar repair with stent placement is an emerging approach 
but at the current time is associated with a mortality 
rate of approximately 40%.
Acute Aortic Syndromes
The four major acute aortic syndromes are aortic rup-
ture (discussed earlier), aortic dissection, intramural 
hematoma, and penetrating atherosclerotic ulcer. Aortic 
dissection is caused by a circumferential or, less fre-
quently, transverse tear of the intima. It often occurs 
along the right lateral wall of the ascending aorta where 
the hydraulic shear stress is high. Another common site 
is the descending thoracic aorta just below the ligamen-
tum arteriosum. The initiating event is either a primary 
intimal tear with secondary dissection into the media 
or a medial hemorrhage that dissects into and disrupts 
the intima. The pulsatile aortic flow then dissects along 
the elastic lamellar plates of the aorta and creates a false 
lumen. The dissection usually propagates distally down 
the descending aorta and into its major branches, but it 
may propagate proximally. Distal propagation may be 
limited by atherosclerotic plaque. In some cases, a sec-
ondary distal intimal disruption occurs, resulting in the 
reentry of blood from the false to the true lumen.
There are at least two important pathologic and 
radiologic variants of aortic dissection: intramural hema-
toma without an intimal flap and penetrating athero-
sclerotic ulcer. Acute intramural hematoma is thought 
to result from rupture of the vasa vasorum with hemor-
rhage into the wall of the aorta. Most of these hema-
tomas occur in the descending thoracic aorta. Acute 
intramural hematomas may progress to dissection and 
rupture. Penetrating atherosclerotic ulcers are caused 
by erosion of a plaque into the aortic media, are usu-
ally localized, and are not associated with extensive 
propagation. They are found primarily in the middle 
and distal portions of the descending thoracic aorta and 
are associated with extensive atherosclerotic disease. 
The ulcer can erode beyond the internal elastic lamina, 
leading to medial hematoma, and may progress to false 
aneurysm formation or rupture.
Several classification schemes have been developed 
for thoracic aortic dissections. DeBakey and colleagues 
initially classified aortic dissections as type I, in which an 
intimal tear occurs in the ascending aorta but involves 
the descending aorta as well; type II, in which the dis-
section is limited to the ascending aorta; and type III, 
in which the intimal tear is located in the descend-
ing aorta with distal propagation of the dissection 
(Fig. 38-4). Another classification (Stanford) is that of 
type A, in which the dissection involves the ascending 
aorta (proximal dissection), and type B, in which it is 
limited to the descending aorta (distal dissection). From 
a management standpoint, classification of aortic dis-
sections and intramural hematomas into type A or B is 
more practical and useful, since DeBakey types I and II 
are managed in a similar manner.
The factors that predispose to aortic dissection 
include systemic hypertension, a coexisting condition in 
70% of patients, and cystic medial necrosis. Aortic dis-
section is the major cause of morbidity and mortality in 
patients with Marfan syndrome and similarly may affect 
patients with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. The incidence 
also is increased in patients with inflammatory aortitis 
(i.e., Takayasu’s arteritis, giant cell arteritis), congenital 
aortic valve anomalies (e.g., bicuspid valve), coarctation 
of the aorta, and a history of aortic trauma. In addition, 
the risk of dissection is increased in otherwise normal 
women during the third trimester of pregnancy.
Clinical Manifestations
The peak incidence of aortic dissection is in the sixth 
and seventh decades. Men are more affected than 
women by a ratio of 2:1. The presentations of aortic 
dissection and its variants are the consequences of inti-
mal tear, dissecting hematoma, occlusion of involved 
arteries, and compression of adjacent tissues. Acute 
aortic dissection presents with the sudden onset of 
pain (Chap. 4), which often is described as very severe 
SECTION V
Disorders of the Vasculature
472
and tearing and is associated with diaphoresis. The 
pain may be localized to the front or back of the chest, 
often the interscapular region, and typically migrates 
with propagation of the dissection. Other symptoms 
include syncope, dyspnea, and weakness. Physical find-
ings may include hypertension or hypotension, loss 
of pulses, aortic regurgitation, pulmonary edema, and 
neurologic findings due to carotid artery obstruction 
(hemiplegia, hemianesthesia) or spinal cord ischemia 
(paraplegia). Bowel ischemia, hematuria, and myocar-
dial ischemia have all been observed. These clinical 
manifestations reflect complications resulting from the 
dissection occluding the major arteries. Furthermore, 
clinical manifestations may result from the compres-
sion of adjacent structures (e.g., superior cervical gan-
glia, superior vena cava, bronchus, esophagus) by the 
expanding dissection, causing aneurysmal dilation, and 
include Horner’s syndrome, superior vena cava syn-
drome, hoarseness, dysphagia, and airway compro-
mise. Hemopericardium and cardiac tamponade may 
Type A
Type B
Figure 38-4 
Classification of aortic dissections. Stanford classification: 
Type A dissections (top panels) involve the ascending aorta 
independent of site of tear and distal extension; type B dis-
sections (bottom panels) involve transverse and/or descend-
ing aorta without involvement of the ascending aorta. 
DeBakey classification: Type I dissection involves ascending 
to descending aorta (top left); type II dissection is limited to 
ascending or transverse aorta, without descending aorta (top 
center + top right); type III dissection involves descending 
aorta only (bottom left). (From DC Miller, in RM Doroghazi, EE 
Slater [eds]: Aortic Dissection. New York, McGraw-Hill, 1983; 
with permission.)
complicate a type A lesion with retrograde dissection. 
Acute aortic regurgitation is an important and com-
mon (>50%) complication of proximal dissection. It is 
the outcome of either a circumferential tear that widens 
the aortic root or a disruption of the annulus by a dis-
secting hematoma that tears a leaflet(s) or displaces it, 
inferior to the line of closure. Signs of aortic regurgita-
tion include bounding pulses, a wide pulse pressure, a 
diastolic murmur often radiating along the right sternal 
border, and evidence of congestive heart failure. The 
clinical manifestations depend on the severity of the 
regurgitation.
In dissections involving the ascending aorta, the 
chest x-ray often reveals a widened superior medias-
tinum. A pleural effusion (usually left-sided) also may 
be present. This effusion is typically serosanguine-
ous and not indicative of rupture unless accompanied 
by hypotension and falling hematocrit. In dissections 
of the descending thoracic aorta, a widened medias-
tinum may be observed on chest x-ray. In addition, 
the descending aorta may appear to be wider than the 
ascending portion. An electrocardiogram that shows 
no evidence of myocardial ischemia is helpful in dis-
tinguishing aortic dissection from myocardial infarc-
tion. Rarely, the dissection involves the right or, less 
commonly, left coronary ostium and causes acute 
myocardial infarction.
The diagnosis of aortic dissection can be established 
by noninvasive techniques such as echocardiography, 
CT, and MRI. Aortography is used less commonly 
because of the accuracy of these noninvasive tech-
niques. Transthoracic echocardiography can be per-
formed simply and rapidly and has an overall sensitivity 
of 60–85% for aortic dissection. For diagnosing proxi-
mal ascending aortic dissections, its sensitivity exceeds 
80%; it is less useful for detecting dissection of the arch 
and descending thoracic aorta. Transesophageal echo-
cardiography requires greater skill and patient cooper-
ation but is very accurate in identifying dissections of 
the ascending and descending thoracic aorta but not 
the arch, achieving 98% sensitivity and approximately 
90% specificity. Echocardiography also provides impor-
tant information regarding the presence and severity of 
aortic regurgitation and pericardial effusion. CT and 
MRI are both highly accurate in identifying the intimal 
flap and the extent of the dissection and involvement 
of major arteries; each has a sensitivity and specificity 
>90%. They are useful in recognizing intramural hem-
orrhage and penetrating ulcers. MRI also can detect 
blood flow, which may be useful in characterizing ante-
grade versus retrograde dissection. The relative utility 
of transesophageal echocardiography, CT, and MRI 
depends on the availability and expertise in individual 
institutions as well as on the hemodynamic stability of 
the patient, with CT and MRI obviously less suitable 
for unstable patients.
 
CHAPTER 38
Diseases of the Aorta
473
Treatment	
Aortic Dissection
Medical therapy should be initiated as soon as the diag-
nosis is considered. The patient should be admitted to 
an intensive care unit for hemodynamic monitoring. 
Unless hypotension is present, therapy should be aimed 
at reducing cardiac contractility and systemic arterial 
pressure, and thus shear stress. For acute dissection, 
unless contraindicated, β-adrenergic blockers should be 
administered parenterally, using intravenous proprano-
lol, metoprolol, or the short-acting esmolol to achieve 
a heart rate of approximately 60 beats/min. This should 
be accompanied by sodium nitroprusside infusion to 
lower systolic blood pressure to ≤120 mmHg. Labetalol 
(Chap. 37), a drug with both β- and α-adrenergic block-
ing properties, also may be used as a parenteral agent in 
acute therapy for dissection.
The calcium channel antagonists verapamil and dil-
tiazem may be used intravenously if nitroprusside or 
β-adrenergic blockers cannot be employed. The addi-
tion of a parenteral angiotensin-converting enzyme 
(ACE) inhibitor such as enalaprilat to a β-adrenergic 
blocker also may be considered. Isolated use of a direct 
vasodilator such as hydralazine is contraindicated 
because these agents can increase hydraulic shear and 
may propagate the dissection.
Emergent or urgent surgical correction is the pre-
ferred treatment for acute ascending aortic dissections 
and intramural hematomas (type A) and for compli-
cated type B dissections, including those characterized 
by propagation, compromise of major aortic branches, 
impending rupture, or continued pain. Surgery involves 
excision of the intimal flap, obliteration of the false 
lumen, and placement of an interposition graft. A com-
posite valve-graft conduit is used if the aortic valve is 
disrupted. The overall in-hospital mortality rate after 
surgical treatment of patients with aortic dissection is 
reported to be 15–25%. The major causes of periopera-
tive mortality and morbidity include myocardial infarc-
tion, paraplegia, renal failure, tamponade, hemorrhage, 
and sepsis. Endoluminal stent grafts may be considered 
in selected patients. Other transcatheter techniques, 
such as fenestration of the intimal flaps and stenting of 
narrowed branch vessels to increase flow to compro-
mised organs, are used in selected patients. For uncom-
plicated and stable distal dissections and intramural 
hematomas (type B), medical therapy is the preferred 
treatment. The in-hospital mortality rate of medically 
treated patients with type B dissection is 10–20%. Long-
term therapy for patients with aortic dissection and 
intramural hematomas (with or without surgery) consists 
of control of hypertension and reduction of cardiac con-
tractility with the use of beta blockers plus other anti-
hypertensive agents, such as ACE inhibitors or calcium 
antagonists. Patients with chronic type B dissection and 
intramural hematomas should be followed on an outpa-
tient basis every 6–12 months with contrast-enhanced 
CT or MRI to detect propagation or expansion. Patients 
with Marfan syndrome are at high risk for postdissection 
complications. The long-term prognosis for patients with 
treated dissections is generally good with careful follow-
up; the 10-year survival rate is approximately 60%.
Chronic Atherosclerotic 
Occlusive Disease
Atherosclerosis may affect the thoracic and abdominal 
aorta. Occlusive aortic disease caused by atherosclerosis 
usually is confined to the distal abdominal aorta below 
the renal arteries. Frequently, the disease extends to 
the iliac arteries (Chap. 39). Claudication characteristi-
cally involves the buttocks, thighs, and calves and may 
be associated with impotence in males (Leriche syn-
drome). The severity of the symptoms depends on the 
adequacy of collaterals. With sufficient collateral blood 
flow, a complete occlusion of the abdominal aorta may 
occur without the development of ischemic symptoms. 
The physical findings include the absence of femoral 
and other distal pulses bilaterally and the detection of an 
audible bruit over the abdomen (usually at or below the 
umbilicus) and the common femoral arteries. Atrophic 
skin, loss of hair, and coolness of the lower extremities 
usually are observed. In advanced ischemia, rubor on 
dependency and pallor on elevation can be seen.
The diagnosis usually is established by physical exam-
ination and noninvasive testing, including leg pressure 
measurements, Doppler velocity analysis, pulse volume 
recordings, and duplex ultrasonography. The anatomy 
may be defined by MRI, CT, or conventional aortogra-
phy, typically performed when one is considering revas-
cularization. Catheter-based endovascular or operative 
treatment is indicated in patients with lifestyle-limiting 
or debilitating symptoms of claudication and patients 
with critical limb ischemia.
Acute Aortic Occlusion
Acute occlusion in the distal abdominal aorta constitutes 
a medical emergency because it threatens the viabil-
ity of the lower extremities; it usually results from an 
occlusive (saddle) embolus that almost always originates 
from the heart. Rarely, acute occlusion may occur as 
the result of in situ thrombosis in a preexisting severely 
narrowed segment of the aorta.
The clinical picture is one of acute ischemia of the 
lower extremities. Severe rest pain, coolness, and pallor 
of the lower extremities and the absence of distal pulses 
bilaterally are the usual manifestations. Diagnosis should 
be established rapidly by MRI, CT, or aortography. 
Emergency thrombectomy or revascularization is indicated.
SECTION V
Disorders of the Vasculature
474
Aortitis
Aortitis, a term referring to inflammatory disease of the 
aorta, may be caused by large vessel vasculitides such as 
Takayasu’s arteritis and giant cell arteritis, rheumatic and 
HLA-B27–associated spondyloarthropathies, Behçet’s syn-
drome, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA)-
associated vasculitides, Cogan’s syndrome, and infections 
such as syphilis, tuberculosis, and Salmonella, or may be 
associated with retroperitoneal fibrosis. Aortitis may result 
in aneurysmal dilation and aortic regurgitation, occlu-
sion of the aorta and its branch vessels, or acute aortic 
syndromes.
Takayasu’s Arteritis
This inflammatory disease often affects the ascend-
ing aorta and aortic arch, causing obstruction of the 
aorta and its major arteries. Takayasu’s arteritis is also 
termed pulseless disease because of the frequent occlu-
sion of the large arteries originating from the aorta. It 
also may involve the descending thoracic and abdomi-
nal aorta and occlude large branches such as the renal 
arteries. Aortic aneurysms also may occur. The pathol-
ogy is a panarteritis characterized by mononuclear cells 
and occasionally giant cells, with marked intimal hyper-
plasia, medial and adventitial thickening, and, in the 
chronic form, fibrotic occlusion. The disease is most 
prevalent in young females of Asian descent but does 
occur in women of other geographic and ethnic origins 
and also in young men. During the acute stage, fever, 
malaise, weight loss, and other systemic symptoms may 
be evident. Elevations of the erythrocyte sedimentation 
rate and C-reactive protein are common. The chronic 
stages of the disease, which is intermittently active, pres-
ent with symptoms related to large artery occlusion, 
such as upper extremity claudication, cerebral ischemia, 
and syncope. The process is progressive, and there is no 
definitive therapy. Glucocorticoids and immunosup-
pressive agents have been reported to be effective in 
some patients during the acute phase. Surgical bypass or 
endovascular intervention of a critically stenotic artery 
may be necessary.
Giant Cell Arteritis
This vasculitis occurs in older individ­uals and affects 
women more often than men. Primarily large and 
medium-size arteries are affected. The pathology is that 
of focal granulomatous lesions involving the entire arte-
rial wall; it may be associated with polymyalgia rheu-
matica. Obstruction of medium-size arteries (e.g., 
temporal and ophthalmic arteries) and major branches 
of the aorta and the development of aortitis and aortic 
regurgitation are important complications of the disease. 
High-dose glucocorticoid therapy may be effective when 
given early.
Rheumatic Aortitis
Rheumatoid arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, psoriatic 
arthritis, reactive arthritis (formerly known as Reiter’s 
syndrome), relapsing polychondritis, and inflamma-
tory bowel disorders may all be associated with aortitis 
involving the ascending aorta. The inflammatory lesions 
usually involve the ascending aorta and may extend 
to the sinuses of Valsalva, the mitral valve leaflets, and 
adjacent myocardium. The clinical manifestations are 
aneurysm, aortic regurgitation, and involvement of the 
cardiac conduction system.
Idiopathic Aortitis
Idiopathic abdominal aortitis is characterized by adven-
titial and periaortic inflammation with thickening of the 
aortic wall. It is associated with abdominal aortic aneu-
rysms and idiopathic retroperitoneal fibrosis. Affected 
individuals may present with vague constitutional symp-
toms, fever, and abdominal pain. Retroperitoneal fibro-
sis can cause ureteral obstruction and hydronephrosis. 
Glucocorticoids and immunosuppressive agents may 
reduce the inflammation.
Infective Aortitis
Infective aortitis may result from direct invasion of the 
aortic wall by bacterial pathogens such as Staphylococcus, 
Streptococcus, and Salmonella or by fungi. These bacteria 
cause aortitis by infecting the aorta at sites of atheroscle-
rotic plaque. Bacterial proteases lead to degradation of 
collagen, and the ensuing destruction of the aortic wall 
leads to the formation of a saccular aneurysm referred to 
as a mycotic aneurysm. Mycotic aneurysms have a pre-
dilection for the suprarenal abdominal aorta. The patho-
logic characteristics of the aortic wall include acute 
and chronic inflammation, abscesses, hemorrhage, and 
necrosis. Mycotic aneurysms typically affect the elderly 
and occur in men three times more frequently than in 
women. Patients may present with fever, sepsis, and 
chest, back, or abdominal pain; there may have been a 
preceding diarrheal illness. Blood cultures are positive 
in the majority of patients. Both CT and MRI are use-
ful to diagnose mycotic aneurysms. Treatment includes 
antibiotic therapy and surgical removal of the affected 
part of the aorta and revascularization of the lower 
extremities with grafts placed in uninfected tissue.
Syphilitic aortitis is a late manifestation of luetic infec-
tion that usually affects the proximal ascending aorta, 
particularly the aortic root, resulting in aortic dilation 
and aneurysm formation. Syphilitic aortitis occasionally 
 
CHAPTER 38
Diseases of the Aorta
475
may involve the aortic arch or the descending aorta. The 
aneurysms may be saccular or fusiform and are usually 
asymptomatic, but compression of and erosion into adja-
cent structures may result in symptoms; rupture also may 
occur.
The initial lesion is an obliterative endarteritis of 
the vasa vasorum, especially in the adventitia. This is an 
inflammatory response to the invasion of the adventitia by 
the spirochetes. Destruction of the aortic media occurs as 
the spirochetes spread into this layer, usually via the lym-
phatics accompanying the vasa vasorum. Destruction of 
collagen and elastic tissues leads to dilation of the aorta, 
scar formation, and calcification. These changes account 
for the characteristic radiographic appearance of linear 
calcification of the ascending aorta.
The disease typically presents as an incidental chest 
radiographic finding 15–30 years after initial infection. 
Symptoms may result from aortic regurgitation, narrow-
ing of coronary ostia due to syphilitic aortitis, compres-
sion of adjacent structures (e.g., esophagus), or rupture. 
Diagnosis is established by a positive serologic test, i.e., 
rapid plasmin reagin (RPR) or fluorescent treponemal 
antibody. Treatment includes penicillin and surgical 
excision and repair.
476
 VASCULAR DISEASES OF THE EXTREMITIES 
 chapter 39 
 Mark A. Creager 
I  Joseph Loscalzo 
 arteriaL DisorDers 
 peripheral arTery Disease 
 Peripheral artery disease (PAD) is defi ned as a clini-
cal disorder in which there is a stenosis or occlusion in 
the aorta or the arteries of the limbs. Atherosclerosis 
is the leading cause of PAD in patients >40 years old. 
Other causes include thrombosis, embolism, vasculitis, 
fi bromuscular dysplasia, entrapment, cystic adventitial 
disease, and trauma. The highest prevalence of athero-
sclerotic PAD occurs in the sixth and seventh decades 
of life. As in patients with atherosclerosis of the coro-
nary and cerebral vasculature, there is an increased risk 
of developing PAD in cigarette smokers and in persons 
with diabetes mellitus, hypercholesterolemia, hyperten-
sion, or hyperhomocysteinemia. 
 Pathology 
 (See also  Chap. 30 ) Segmental lesions that cause ste-
nosis or occlusion are usually localized to large and 
medium-size vessels. The pathology of the lesions 
includes atherosclerotic plaques with calcium depo-
sition, thinning of the media, patchy destruction of 
muscle and elastic fi bers, fragmentation of the internal 
elastic lamina, and thrombi composed of plate-
lets and fi brin. The primary sites of involvement are 
the abdominal aorta and iliac arteries (30% of symp-
tomatic patients), the femoral and popliteal arteries 
(80–90% of patients), and the more distal vessels, 
including the tibial and peroneal arteries (40–50% of 
patients). Atherosclerotic lesions occur preferentially 
at arterial branch points, which are sites of increased 
turbulence, altered shear stress, and intimal injury. 
Involvement of the distal vasculature is most common 
in elderly individuals and patients with diabetes 
mellitus. 
 Clinical evaluation 
 Fewer than 50% of patients with PAD are symptomatic, 
although many have a slow or impaired gait. The most 
common  symptom is intermittent claudication, which 
is defi ned as a pain, ache, cramp, numbness, or a sense 
of fatigue in the muscles; it occurs during exercise and 
is relieved by rest. The site of claudication is distal to 
the location of the occlusive lesion. For example, but-
tock, hip, and thigh discomfort occurs in patients with 
aortoiliac disease, whereas calf claudication develops 
in patients with femoral-popliteal disease. Symptoms 
are far more common in the lower than in the upper 
extremities because of the higher incidence of obstruc-
tive lesions in the former region. In patients with severe 
arterial occlusive disease in whom resting blood fl ow 
cannot accommodate basal nutritional needs of the tis-
sues, critical limb ischemia may develop. Patients com-
plain of rest pain or a feeling of cold or numbness in 
the foot and toes. Frequently, these symptoms occur at 
night when the legs are horizontal and improve when 
the legs are in a dependent position. With severe isch-
emia, rest pain may be persistent. 
 Important  physical ﬁ ndings of PAD include decreased 
or absent pulses distal to the obstruction, the presence 
of bruits over the narrowed artery, and muscle atro-
phy. With more severe disease, hair loss, thickened 
nails, smooth and shiny skin, reduced skin temperature, 
and pallor or cyanosis are common physical signs. In 
patients with critical limb ischemia, ulcers or gangrene 
may occur. Elevation of the legs and repeated fl exing 
of the calf muscles produce pallor of the soles of the 
feet, whereas rubor, secondary to reactive hyperemia, 
may develop when the legs are dependent. The time 
required for rubor to develop or for the veins in the foot 
to fi ll when the patient’s legs are transferred from an ele-
vated to a dependent position is related to the severity 
of the ischemia and the presence of collateral vessels. 
 
CHAPTER 39
Vascular Diseases of the Extremities
477
Patients with severe ischemia may develop peripheral 
edema because they keep their legs in a dependent posi-
tion much of the time. Ischemic neuropathy can result 
in numbness and hyporeflexia.
Noninvasive testing
The history and physical examination are often suf-
ficient to establish the diagnosis of PAD. An objec-
tive assessment of the presence and severity of disease 
is obtained by noninvasive techniques. Arterial pres-
sure can be recorded noninvasively in the legs by place-
ment of sphygmomanometric cuffs at the ankles and the 
use of a Doppler device to auscultate or record blood 
flow from the dorsalis pedis and posterior tibial arteries. 
Normally, systolic blood pressure in the legs and arms 
is similar. Indeed, ankle pressure may be slightly higher 
than arm pressure due to pulse-wave amplification. In 
the presence of hemodynamically significant steno-
ses, the systolic blood pressure in the leg is decreased. 
Thus, the ratio of the ankle and brachial artery pressures 
(termed the ankle:brachial index, or ABI) is ≥1.0 in nor-
mal individuals and <1.0 in patients with PAD; a ratio 
of <0.5 is consistent with severe ischemia.
Other noninvasive tests include segmental pres-
sure measurements, segmental pulse volume record-
ings, duplex ultrasonography (which combines B-mode 
imaging and Doppler flow velocity waveform analysis 
examination), transcutaneous oximetry, and stress test-
ing (usually using a treadmill). Placement of pneu-
matic cuffs enables assessment of systolic pressure along 
the legs. The presence of pressure gradients between 
sequential cuffs provides evidence of the presence and 
location of hemodynamically significant stenoses. In 
addition, the amplitude of the pulse volume contour 
becomes blunted in the presence of significant PAD. 
Duplex ultrasonography is used to image and detect 
stenotic lesions in native arteries and bypass grafts.
Treadmill testing allows the physician to assess func-
tional limitations objectively. Decline of the ABI imme-
diately after exercise provides further support for the 
diagnosis of PAD in patients with equivocal symptoms 
and findings on examination.
Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA), computed 
tomographic angiography (CTA), and conventional 
contrast angiography should not be used for routine 
diagnostic testing but are performed before poten-
tial revascularization (Fig. 39-1). Each test is useful in 
defining the anatomy to assist planning for catheter-
based and surgical revascularization procedures.
Prognosis
The natural history of patients with PAD is influenced 
primarily by the extent of coexisting coronary artery 
and cerebrovascular disease. Approximately one-third to 
Figure 39-1 
Magnetic resonance angiography of a patient with intermit-
tent claudication, showing stenoses of the distal abdominal 
aorta and right iliac common iliac artery (A) and stenoses of 
the right and left superficial femoral arteries (B). (Courtesy of 
Dr. Edwin Gravereaux; with permission.)
478
Disorders of the Vasculature
SECTION V
one-half of patients with symptomatic PAD have evi-
dence of coronary artery disease (CAD) based on clinical 
presentation and electrocardiogram, and over one-half 
have significant CAD by coronary angiography. Patients 
with PAD have a 15–30% 5-year mortality rate and a 
two- to sixfold increased risk of death from coronary 
heart disease. Mortality rates are highest in those with 
the most severe PAD. Measurement of ABI is useful for 
detecting PAD and identifying persons at risk for future 
atherothrombotic events. The likelihood of symptom-
atic progression of PAD is lower than the chance of 
succumbing to CAD. Approximately 75–80% of nondi-
abetic patients who present with mild to moderate clau-
dication remain symptomatically stable. Deterioration 
is likely to occur in the remainder, with approximately 
1–2% of the group ultimately developing critical limb 
ischemia each year. Approximately 25–30% of patients 
with critical limb ischemia undergo amputation within 
1 year. The prognosis is worse in patients who continue 
to smoke cigarettes or have diabetes mellitus.
treatment	
Peripheral Artery Disease
Patients with PAD should receive therapies to reduce 
the risk of associated cardiovascular events, such as 
myocardial infarction and death, and to improve limb 
symptoms, prevent progression to critical limb isch-
emia, and preserve limb viability. Risk factor modifica-
tion and antiplatelet therapy should be initiated to 
improve cardiovascular outcomes. The importance 
of discontinuing cigarette smoking cannot be over-
emphasized. The physician must assume a major role 
in this lifestyle modification. Counseling and adjunc-
tive drug therapy with the nicotine patch, bupropion, 
or varenicline increase smoking cessation rates and 
reduce recidivism. It is important to control blood pres-
sure in hypertensive patients. Angiotensin converting-
enzyme inhibitors may reduce the risk of cardiovascular 
events in patients with symptomatic PAD. β-adrenergic 
blockers do not worsen claudication and may be used 
to treat hypertension, especially in patients with coex-
istent CAD. Treatment of hypercholesterolemia with 
statins is advocated to reduce the risk of myocardial 
infarction, stroke, and death. The National Cholesterol 
Education Program Adult Treatment Panel considers 
PAD a coronary heart disease equivalent and recom-
mends treatment to reduce low-density lipoprotein 
(LDL) cholesterol to <100 mg/dL. Platelet inhibitors, 
including aspirin and clopidogrel, reduce the risk of 
adverse cardiovascular events in patients with ath-
erosclerosis and are recommended for patients with 
PAD. Dual antiplatelet therapy with both aspirin and 
clopidogrel is not more effective than aspirin alone in 
reducing cardiovascular morbidity and mortality rates 
in patients with PAD. The anticoagulant warfarin is as 
effective as antiplatelet therapy in preventing adverse 
cardiovascular events but causes more major bleeding; 
therefore, it is not indicated to improve outcomes in 
patients with chronic PAD.
Therapies for intermittent claudication and critical 
limb ischemia include supportive measures, medica-
tions, nonoperative interventions, and surgery. Support-
ive measures include meticulous care of the feet, which 
should be kept clean and protected against excessive 
drying with moisturizing creams. Well-fitting and pro-
tective shoes are advised to reduce trauma. Elastic sup-
port hose should be avoided, as it reduces blood flow 
to the skin. In patients with critical limb ischemia, shock 
blocks under the head of the bed together with a can-
opy over the feet may improve perfusion pressure and 
ameliorate some of the rest pain.
Patients with claudication should be encouraged to 
exercise regularly and at progressively more strenuous 
levels. Supervised exercise training programs for 30- to 
45-min sessions, three to five times per week for at least 
12 weeks, prolong walking distance. Patients also should 
be advised to walk until nearly maximum claudication 
discomfort occurs and then rest until the symptoms 
resolve before resuming ambulation. Pharmacologic 
treatment of PAD has not been as successful as the medi-
cal treatment of CAD (Chap. 33). In particular, vasodila-
tors as a class have not proved to be beneficial. During 
exercise, peripheral vasodilation occurs distal to sites of 
significant arterial stenoses. As a result, perfusion pres-
sure falls, often to levels lower than that generated in the 
interstitial tissue by the exercising muscle. Drugs such as 
α-adrenergic blocking agents, calcium channel antago-
nists, papaverine, and other vasodilators have not been 
shown to be effective in patients with PAD.
Cilostazol, a phosphodiesterase inhibitor with vaso-
dilator and antiplatelet properties, increases claudica-
tion distance by 40–60% and improves measures of 
quality of life. The mechanism of action accounting for 
its beneficial effects is not known. Pentoxifylline, a sub-
stituted xanthine derivative, increases blood flow to 
the microcirculation and enhances tissue oxygenation. 
Although several placebo-controlled studies have found 
that pentoxifylline increases the duration of exercise 
in patients with claudication, its efficacy has not been 
confirmed in all clinical trials. Statins appeared promis-
ing for treatment of intermittent claudication in initial 
clinical trials, but more studies are needed to confirm 
their efficacy. There is no definitive medical therapy for 
critical limb ischemia, although several studies have 
suggested that long-term parenteral administration of 
vasodilator prostaglandins decreases pain and facilitates 
healing of ulcers. Clinical trials of angiogenic growth 
factors are proceeding. Intramuscular gene transfer 
 
CHAPTER 39
Vascular Diseases of the Extremities
479
of DNA encoding vascular endothelial growth factor, 
fibroblast growth factor, hepatocyte growth factor, or 
hypoxia-inducible factor 1α, as well as administration 
of endothelial progenitor cells, may promote collateral 
blood vessel growth in patients with critical limb isch-
emia. Some trial results have been negative, and others 
encouraging. The outcome of ongoing studies will fur-
ther elucidate the potential role of therapeutic angio-
genesis for PAD.
Revascularization  Revascularization 
proce-
dures, including catheter-based and surgical interven-
tions, are usually indicated for patients with disabling, 
progressive, or severe symptoms of intermittent claudi-
cation despite medical therapy and for those with criti-
cal limb ischemia. MRA, CTA, or conventional contrast 
angiography should be performed to assess vascular 
anatomy in patients who are being considered for revas-
cularization. Nonoperative interventions include percuta-
neous transluminal angiography (PTA), stent placement,  
and atherectomy (Chap. 36). PTA and stenting of the  
iliac artery are associated with higher success rates than 
are PTA and stenting of the femoral and popliteal arteries. 
Approximately 90–95% of iliac PTAs are initially success-
ful, and the 3-year patency rate is >75%. Patency rates 
may be higher if a stent is placed in the iliac artery. The 
initial success rates for femoral-popliteal PTA and stenting 
are approximately 80%, with 60% 3-year patency rates. 
Patency rates are influenced by the severity of pretreat-
ment stenoses; the prognosis of occlusive lesions is worse 
than that of nonocclusive stenotic lesions. The role of 
drug-eluting stents in PAD is under investigation.
Several operative procedures are available for treat-
ing patients with aortoiliac and femoral-popliteal artery 
disease. The preferred operative procedure depends on 
the location and extent of the obstruction(s) and the 
general medical condition of the patient. Operative pro-
cedures for aortoiliac disease include aortobifemoral 
bypass, axillofemoral bypass, femoro-femoral bypass, 
and aortoiliac endarterectomy. The most frequently 
used procedure is the aortobifemoral bypass using knit-
ted Dacron grafts. Immediate graft patency approaches 
99%, and 5- and 10-year graft patency in survivors is 
>90% and 80%, respectively. Operative complications 
include myocardial infarction and stroke, infection of 
the graft, peripheral embolization, and sexual dysfunc-
tion from interruption of autonomic nerves in the pelvis. 
The operative mortality rate ranges from 1–3%, mostly 
due to ischemic heart disease.
Operative therapy for femoral-popliteal artery dis-
ease includes in situ and reverse autogenous saphenous 
vein bypass grafts, placement of polytetrafluoroethyl-
ene (PTFE) or other synthetic grafts, and thromboen-
darterectomy. The operative mortality rate ranges from 
1–3%. The long-term patency rate depends on the type 
of graft used, the location of the distal anastomosis, and 
the patency of runoff vessels beyond the anastomosis. 
Patency rates of femoral-popliteal saphenous vein bypass 
grafts approach 90% at 1 year and 70–80% at 5 years. 
Five-year patency rates of infrapopliteal saphenous vein 
bypass grafts are 60–70%. In contrast, 5-year patency 
rates of infrapopliteal PTFE grafts are <30%. Lumbar 
sympathectomy alone or as an adjunct to aortofemoral 
reconstruction has fallen into disfavor.
Preoperative cardiac risk assessment may identify 
individuals who are especially likely to experience an 
adverse cardiac event during the perioperative period. 
Patients with angina, prior myocardial infarction, ven-
tricular ectopy, heart failure, or diabetes are among 
those at increased risk. Stress testing with treadmill 
exercise (if feasible), radionuclide myocardial perfu-
sion imaging, or echocardiography permits further 
stratification of patient risk (Chap. 36). Patients with 
abnormal test results require close supervision and 
adjunctive management with anti-ischemic medica-
tions. β-adrenergic blockers and statins reduce the risk 
of postoperative cardiovascular complications. Coronary 
angiography and coronary artery revascularization com-
pared with optimal medical therapy do not improve 
outcomes in most patients undergoing peripheral vas-
cular surgery, but cardiac catheterization should be 
considered in patients with unstable angina and angina 
refractory to medical therapy as well as those suspected 
of having left main or three-vessel CAD.
Fibromuscular Dysplasia
Fibromuscular dysplasia is a hyperplastic disorder that 
affects medium-size and small arteries. It occurs pre-
dominantly in females and usually involves the renal 
and carotid arteries but can affect extremity vessels such 
as the iliac and subclavian arteries. The histologic clas-
sification includes intimal fibroplasia, medial dysplasia, 
and adventitial hyperplasia. Medial dysplasia is subdi-
vided into medial fibroplasia, perimedial fibroplasia, 
and medial hyperplasia. Medial fibroplasia is the most 
common type and is characterized by alternating areas 
of thinned media and fibromuscular ridges. The inter-
nal elastic lamina usually is preserved. The iliac arter-
ies are the limb arteries most likely to be affected by 
fibromuscular dysplasia. It is identified angiographically 
by a “string of beads” appearance caused by thickened 
fibromuscular ridges contiguous with thin, less-involved 
portions of the arterial wall. When limb vessels are 
involved, clinical manifestations are similar to those for 
atherosclerosis, including claudication and rest pain. 
PTA and surgical reconstruction have been beneficial in 
patients with debilitating symptoms or threatened limbs.
480
Disorders of the Vasculature
SECTION V
Thromboangiitis Obliterans
Thromboangiitis obliterans (Buerger’s disease) is an 
inflammatory occlusive vascular disorder involv-
ing small and medium-size arteries and veins in the 
distal upper and lower extremities. Cerebral, visceral, 
and coronary vessels may be affected rarely. This dis-
order develops most frequently in men <40 years of 
age. The prevalence is higher in Asians and individuals 
of Eastern European descent. Although the cause of 
thromboangiitis obliterans is not known, there is a 
definite relationship to cigarette smoking in patients 
with this disorder.
In the initial stages of thromboangiitis obliterans, 
polymorphonuclear leukocytes infiltrate the walls of the 
small and medium-size arteries and veins. The internal 
elastic lamina is preserved, and a cellular, inflammatory 
thrombus develops in the vascular lumen. As the dis-
ease progresses, mononuclear cells, fibroblasts, and giant 
cells replace the neutrophils. Later stages are character-
ized by perivascular fibrosis, organized thrombus, and 
recanalization.
The clinical features of thromboangiitis obliter-
ans often include a triad of claudication of the affected 
extremity, Raynaud’s phenomenon, and migratory 
superficial vein thrombophlebitis. Claudication usually 
is confined to the calves and feet or the forearms and 
hands because this disorder primarily affects distal ves-
sels. In the presence of severe digital ischemia, trophic 
nail changes, painful ulcerations, and gangrene may 
develop at the tips of the fingers or toes. The physi-
cal examination shows normal brachial and popliteal 
pulses but reduced or absent radial, ulnar, and/or tibial 
pulses. Arteriography is helpful in making the diag-
nosis. Smooth, tapering segmental lesions in the distal 
vessels are characteristic, as are collateral vessels at sites 
of vascular occlusion. Proximal atherosclerotic dis-
ease is usually absent. The diagnosis can be confirmed 
by excisional biopsy and pathologic examination of an 
involved vessel.
There is no specific treatment except abstention 
from tobacco. The prognosis is worse in individuals 
who continue to smoke, but results are discouraging 
even in those who stop smoking. Arterial bypass of 
the larger vessels may be used in selected instances, as 
well as local debridement, depending on the symp-
toms and severity of ischemia. Antibiotics may be 
useful; anticoagulants and glucocorticoids are not 
helpful. If these measures fail, amputation may be 
required.
Vasculitis
Other vasculitides may affect the arteries that supply the 
upper and lower extremities.
Acute Arterial Occlusion
Acute arterial occlusion results in the sudden cessation 
of blood flow to an extremity. The severity of isch-
emia and the viability of the extremity depend on the 
location and extent of the occlusion and the presence 
and subsequent development of collateral blood vessels. 
There are two principal causes of acute arterial occlu-
sion: embolism and thrombus in situ.
The most common sources of arterial emboli are the 
heart, aorta, and large arteries. Cardiac disorders that 
cause thromboembolism include atrial fibrillation, both 
chronic and paroxysmal; acute myocardial infarction; 
ventricular aneurysm; cardiomyopathy; infectious and 
marantic endocarditis; thrombi associated with pros-
thetic heart valves; and atrial myxoma. Emboli to the 
distal vessels may also originate from proximal sites of 
atherosclerosis and aneurysms of the aorta and large 
vessels. Less frequently, an arterial occlusion results 
paradoxically from a venous thrombus that has entered 
the systemic circulation via a patent foramen ovale or 
another septal defect. Arterial emboli tend to lodge at 
vessel bifurcations because the vessel caliber decreases 
at those sites; in the lower extremities, emboli lodge most 
frequently in the femoral artery, followed by the iliac 
artery, aorta, and popliteal and tibioperoneal arteries.
Acute arterial thrombosis in situ occurs most fre-
quently in atherosclerotic vessels at the site of an athero-
sclerotic plaque or aneurysm and in arterial bypass grafts. 
Trauma to an artery may also result in the formation of 
an acute arterial thrombus. Arterial occlusion may com-
plicate arterial punctures and placement of catheters; it 
also may result from arterial dissection if the intimal flap 
obstructs the artery. Less common causes include tho-
racic outlet compression syndrome, which causes sub-
clavian artery occlusion, and entrapment of the popliteal 
artery by abnormal placement of the medial head of the 
gastrocnemius muscle. Polycythemia and hypercoagu-
lable disorders are also associated with acute arterial 
thrombosis.
Clinical features
The symptoms of an acute arterial occlusion depend 
on the location, duration, and severity of the obstruc-
tion. Often, severe pain, paresthesia, numbness, and 
coldness develop in the involved extremity within 1 h. 
Paralysis may occur with severe and persistent ischemia. 
Physical findings include loss of pulses distal to the 
occlusion, cyanosis or pallor, mottling, decreased skin 
temperature, muscle stiffening, loss of sensation, weak-
ness, and/or absent deep tendon reflexes. If acute arterial 
occlusion occurs in the presence of an adequate collateral 
circulation, as is often the case in acute graft occlu-
sion, the symptoms and findings may be less impres-
sive. In this situation, the patient complains about an 
 
CHAPTER 39
Vascular Diseases of the Extremities
481
abrupt decrease in the distance walked before claudica-
tion occurs or of modest pain and paresthesia. Pallor and 
coolness are evident, but sensory and motor functions 
generally are preserved. The diagnosis of acute arterial 
occlusion is usually apparent from the clinical presenta-
tion. In most circumstances, MRA, CTA, or catheter-
based arteriography is used to confirm the diagnosis and 
demonstrate the location and extent of occlusion.
Treatment	
Acute Arterial Occlusion
Once the diagnosis is made, the patient should be anti-
coagulated with intravenous heparin to prevent propa-
gation of the clot. In cases of severe ischemia of recent 
onset, particularly when limb viability is jeopardized, 
immediate intervention to ensure reperfusion is indi-
cated. Endovascular or surgical thromboembolectomy 
or arterial bypass procedures are used to restore blood 
flow to the ischemic extremity promptly, particularly 
when a large proximal vessel is occluded.
Intraarterial thrombolytic therapy with recombinant 
tissue plasminogen activator, reteplase, or tenecteplase 
is often effective when acute arterial occlusion is 
caused by a thrombus in an atherosclerotic vessel or 
arterial bypass graft. Thrombolytic therapy may also be 
indicated when the patient’s overall condition contra-
indicates surgical intervention or when smaller distal 
vessels are occluded, thus preventing surgical access. 
Meticulous observation for hemorrhagic complications 
is required during intraarterial thrombolytic therapy. 
Another endovascular approach to thrombus removal is 
percutaneous mechanical thrombectomy using devices 
that employ hydrodynamic forces or rotating baskets to 
fragment and remove the clot. These treatments may 
be used alone but usually are used in conjunction with 
pharmacologic thrombolysis. Amputation is performed 
when the limb is not viable, as characterized by loss 
of sensation, paralysis, and the absence of Doppler-
detected blood flow in both arteries and veins.
If the limb is not in jeopardy, a more conservative 
approach that includes observation and administration 
of anticoagulants may be taken. Anticoagulation prevents 
recurrent embolism and reduces the likelihood of throm-
bus propagation; it can be initiated with intravenous hep-
arin and followed by oral warfarin. Recommended doses 
are the same as those used for deep vein thrombosis. 
Emboli resulting from infective endocarditis, the presence 
of prosthetic heart valves, or atrial myxoma often require 
surgical intervention to remove the cause.
Atheroembolism
Atheroembolism constitutes a subset of acute arte-
rial occlusion. In this condition, multiple small depos-
its of fibrin, platelets, and cholesterol debris embolize 
Figure 39-2 
Atheroembolism causing cyanotic discoloration and impend-
ing necrosis of the toes (“blue toe” syndrome).
from proximal atherosclerotic lesions or aneurysmal 
sites. Large protruding aortic atheromas are a source of 
emboli that may lead to stroke and renal insufficiency as 
well as limb ischemia. Atheroembolism may occur after 
intraarterial procedures. Since the emboli tend to lodge 
in the small vessels of the muscle and skin and may not 
occlude the large vessels, distal pulses usually remain 
palpable. Patients complain of acute pain and tenderness 
at the site of embolization. Digital vascular occlusion 
may result in ischemia and the “blue toe” syndrome; 
digital necrosis and gangrene may develop (Fig. 39-2). 
Localized areas of tenderness, pallor, and livedo reticu-
laris (see later) occur at sites of emboli. Skin or muscle 
biopsy may demonstrate cholesterol crystals.
Ischemia resulting from atheroemboli is notoriously 
difficult to treat. Usually, neither surgical revascular-
ization procedures nor thrombolytic therapy is help-
ful because of the multiplicity, composition, and distal 
location of the emboli. Some evidence suggests that 
platelet inhibitors prevent atheroembolism. Surgical 
intervention to remove or bypass the atherosclerotic 
vessel or aneurysm that causes the recurrent atheroem-
boli may be necessary.
Thoracic Outlet Compression 
Syndrome
This is a symptom complex resulting from compression 
of the neurovascular bundle (artery, vein, or nerves) at 
the thoracic outlet as it courses through the neck and 
shoulder. Cervical ribs, abnormalities of the scalenus 
anticus muscle, proximity of the clavicle to the first rib, 
or abnormal insertion of the pectoralis minor muscle 
may compress the subclavian artery, subclavian vein, 
and brachial plexus as these structures pass from the tho-
rax to the arm. Depending on the structures affected, 
482
Disorders of the Vasculature
SECTION V
thoracic outlet compression syndrome is divided into 
arterial, venous, and neurogenic forms. Patients with 
neurogenic thoracic outlet compression may develop 
shoulder and arm pain, weakness, and paresthesias. 
Patients with arterial compression may experience clau-
dication, Raynaud’s phenomenon, and even ischemic 
tissue loss and gangrene. Venous compression may cause 
thrombosis of the subclavian and axillary veins; this is 
often associated with effort and is referred to as Paget-
Schroetter syndrome.
APPROACH TO THE
PATIENT	
Thoracic Outlet Compression Syndrome
Examination of a patient with thoracic outlet com-
pression syndrome is often normal unless provocative 
maneuvers are performed. Occasionally, distal pulses 
are decreased or absent and digital cyanosis and isch-
emia may be evident. Tenderness may be present in the 
supraclavicular fossa. In patients with axillo-subclavian 
venous thrombosis, the affected extremity typically 
is swollen. Dilated collateral veins may be apparent 
around the shoulder and upper arm.
Several maneuvers that support the diagnosis of 
thoracic outlet compression syndrome may be used 
to precipitate symptoms, cause a subclavian artery 
bruit, and diminish arm pulses. These maneuvers 
include the abduction and external rotation test, in 
which the affected arm is abducted by 90° and the 
shoulder is externally rotated; the scalene maneu-
ver (extension of the neck and rotation of the head 
to the side of the symptoms); the costoclavicular 
maneuver (posterior rotation of shoulders); and the 
hyperabduction maneuver (raising the arm 180°). A 
chest x-ray will indicate the presence of cervical ribs. 
Duplex ultrasonography, MRA, and contrast angiog-
raphy can be performed during provocative maneu-
vers to demonstrate thoracic outlet compression of 
the subclavian artery. Duplex ultrasography, magnetic 
resonance venography, or contrast venography can be 
used to diagnose axillo-subclavian vein thrombosis. 
Neurophysiologic tests such as the electromyogram, 
nerve conduction studies, and somatosensory evoked 
potentials may be abnormal if the brachial plexus is 
involved, but the diagnosis of neurogenic thoracic 
outlet syndrome is not necessarily excluded if these 
tests are normal owing to their low sensitivity.
Most patients can be managed conservatively. They 
should be advised to avoid the positions that cause 
symptoms. Many patients benefit from shoulder girdle 
exercises. Surgical procedures such as removal of the first 
rib and resection of the scalenus anticus muscle are nec-
essary occasionally for relief of symptoms or treatment 
of ischemia.
Popliteal Artery Entrapment
Popliteal artery entrapment typically affects young 
athletic men and women when the gastrocnemius or 
popliteus muscle compresses the popliteal artery and 
causes intermittent claudication. Thrombosis, embo-
lism, or popliteal artery aneurysm may occur. The 
pulse examination may be normal unless provoca-
tive maneuvers such as ankle dorsiflexion and plantar 
flexion are performed. The diagnosis is confirmed by 
duplex ultrasound, CTA, MRA, or conventional angi-
ography. Treatment involves surgical release of the 
popliteal artery or vascular reconstruction.
Popliteal Artery Aneurysm
Popliteal artery aneurysms are the most common periph-
eral artery aneurysms. Approximately 50% are bilateral. 
Patients with popliteal artery aneurysms often have aneu-
rysms of other arteries, especially the aorta. The most 
common clinical presentation is limb ischemia secondary 
to thrombosis or embolism. Rupture occurs less fre-
quently. Other complications include compression of the 
adjacent popliteal vein or peroneal nerve. Popliteal artery 
aneurysm can be detected by palpation and confirmed 
by duplex ultrasonography. Repair is indicated for 
symptomatic aneurysms or when the diameter exceeds 
2–3 cm, owing to the risk of thrombosis, embolism, or 
rupture.
Arteriovenous Fistula
Abnormal communications between an artery and a 
vein, bypassing the capillary bed, may be congenital or 
acquired. Congenital arteriovenous fistulas are a result 
of persistent embryonic vessels that fail to differenti-
ate into arteries and veins; they may be associated with 
birthmarks, can be located in almost any organ of the 
body, and frequently occur in the extremities. Acquired 
arteriovenous fistulas either are created to provide vas-
cular access for hemodialysis or occur as a result of a 
penetrating injury such as a gunshot or knife wound or 
as complications of arterial catheterization or surgical 
dissection. An uncommon cause of arteriovenous fistula 
is rupture of an arterial aneurysm into a vein.
The clinical features depend on the location and size 
of the fistula. Frequently, a pulsatile mass is palpable, 
and a thrill and a bruit lasting throughout systole and 
diastole are present over the fistula. With long-standing 
fistulas, clinical manifestations of chronic venous insuf-
ficiency, including peripheral edema; large, tortuous 
varicose veins; and stasis pigmentation become apparent 
because of the high venous pressure. Evidence of isch-
emia may occur in the distal portion of the extremity. 
Skin temperature is higher over the arteriovenous 
 
CHAPTER 39
Vascular Diseases of the Extremities
483
fistula. Large arteriovenous fistulas may result in an 
increased cardiac output with consequent cardiomegaly 
and high-output heart failure (Chap. 17).
The diagnosis is often evident from the physical exam-
ination. Compression of a large arteriovenous fistula 
may cause reflex slowing of the heart rate (Nicoladoni-
Branham sign). Duplex ultrasonography may detect 
an arteriovenous fistula, especially one that affects the 
femoral artery and vein at the site of catheter access. 
Computed tomographic and conventional angiography 
can confirm the diagnosis and are useful in demonstrating 
the site and size of the arteriovenous fistula.
Management of arteriovenous fistulas may involve 
surgery, radiotherapy, or embolization. Congenital arte-
riovenous fistulas are often difficult to treat because the 
communications may be numerous and extensive, and 
new communications frequently develop after ligation 
of the most obvious ones. Many of these lesions are 
best treated conservatively using elastic support hose to 
reduce the consequences of venous hypertension. Occa-
sionally, embolization with autologous material, such as 
fat or muscle, or with hemostatic agents, such as gelatin 
sponges or silicon spheres, is used to obliterate the fis-
tula. Acquired arteriovenous fistulas are usually amenable 
to surgical treatment that involves division or excision of 
the fistula. Occasionally, autogenous or synthetic graft-
ing is necessary to reestablish continuity of the artery and 
vein.
Raynaud’s Phenomenon
Raynaud’s phenomenon is characterized by episodic 
digital ischemia, manifested clinically by the sequential 
development of digital blanching, cyanosis, and rubor 
of the fingers or toes after cold exposure and subse-
quent rewarming. Emotional stress may also precipitate 
Raynaud’s phenomenon. The color changes are usu-
ally well demarcated and are confined to the fingers or 
toes. Typically, one or more digits will appear white 
when the patient is exposed to a cold environment or 
touches a cold object. The blanching, or pallor, repre-
sents the ischemic phase of the phenomenon and results 
from vasospasm of digital arteries. During the ischemic 
phase, capillaries and venules dilate, and cyanosis results 
from the deoxygenated blood that is present in these 
vessels. A sensation of cold or numbness or paresthesia 
of the digits often accompanies the phases of pallor and 
cyanosis.
With rewarming, the digital vasospasm resolves, 
and blood flow into the dilated arterioles and capillar-
ies increases dramatically. This “reactive hyperemia” 
imparts a bright red color to the digits. In addition to 
rubor and warmth, patients often experience a throb-
bing, painful sensation during the hyperemic phase. 
Although the triphasic color response is typical of 
Table 39-1 
Classification of Raynaud’s Phenomenon
Primary or idiopathic Raynaud’s phenomenon: Raynaud’s 
disease
Secondary Raynaud’s phenomenon
Collagen vascular diseases: scleroderma, systemic 
lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis,  
dermatomyositis, polymyositis
Arterial occlusive diseases: atherosclerosis of the 
extremities, thromboangiitis obliterans, acute arterial 
occlusion, thoracic outlet syndrome
Pulmonary hypertension
Neurologic disorders: intervertebral disk disease,  
syringomyelia, spinal cord tumors, stroke,  
poliomyelitis, carpal tunnel syndrome
Blood dyscrasias: cold agglutinins, cryoglobulinemia, 
cryofibrinogenemia, myeloproliferative disorders, 
Waldenström’s macroglobulinemia
Trauma: vibration injury, hammer hand syndrome,  
electric shock, cold injury, typing, piano playing
Drugs: ergot derivatives, methysergide, β-adrenergic 
receptor blockers, bleomycin, vinblastine, cisplatin
Raynaud’s phenomenon, some patients may develop 
only pallor and cyanosis; others may experience only 
cyanosis.
Raynaud’s phenomenon is broadly separated into 
two categories: the idiopathic variety, termed Raynaud’s 
disease, and the secondary variety, which is associated 
with other disease states or known causes of vasospasm 
(Table 39-1).
Raynaud’s disease
This appellation is applied when the secondary causes 
of Raynaud’s phenomenon have been excluded. Over 
50% of patients with Raynaud’s phenomenon have 
Raynaud’s disease. Women are affected about five 
times more often than men, and the age of presenta-
tion is usually between 20 and 40 years. The fingers 
are involved more frequently than the toes. Initial epi-
sodes may involve only one or two fingertips, but sub-
sequent attacks may involve the entire finger and may 
include all the fingers. The toes are affected in 40% of 
patients. Although vasospasm of the toes usually occurs 
in patients with symptoms in the fingers, it may happen 
alone. Rarely, the earlobes, the tip of the nose, and the 
penis are involved. Raynaud’s phenomenon occurs fre-
quently in patients who also have migraine headaches or 
variant angina. These associations suggest that there may 
be a common predisposing cause for the vasospasm.
Results of physical examination are often entirely 
normal; the radial, ulnar, and pedal pulses are normal. 
The fingers and toes may be cool between attacks and 
484
Disorders of the Vasculature
SECTION V
may perspire excessively. Thickening and tightening of 
the digital subcutaneous tissue (sclerodactyly) develop in 
10% of patients. Angiography of the digits for diagnostic 
purposes is not indicated.
In general, patients with Raynaud’s disease have 
milder forms of Raynaud’s phenomenon. Fewer than 1% 
of these patients lose a part of a digit. After the diagnosis 
is made, the disease improves spontaneously in approxi-
mately 15% of patients and progresses in about 30%.
Secondary causes of Raynaud’s phenomenon
Raynaud’s phenomenon occurs in 80–90% of patients 
with systemic sclerosis (scleroderma) and is the pre-
senting symptom in 30%. It may be the only symptom 
of scleroderma for many years. Abnormalities of the 
digital vessels may contribute to the development of 
Raynaud’s phenomenon in this disorder. Ischemic fin-
gertip ulcers may develop and progress to gangrene and 
autoamputation. About 20% of patients with systemic 
lupus erythematosus (SLE) have Raynaud’s phenom-
enon. Occasionally, persistent digital ischemia develops 
and may result in ulcers or gangrene. In most severe 
cases, the small vessels are occluded by a proliferative 
endarteritis. Raynaud’s phenomenon occurs in about 
30% of patients with dermatomyositis or polymyositis. 
It frequently develops in patients with rheumatoid 
arthritis and may be related to the intimal proliferation 
that occurs in the digital arteries.
Atherosclerosis of the extremities is a common cause 
of Raynaud’s phenomenon in men >50 years. Throm-
boangiitis obliterans is an uncommon cause of Ray-
naud’s phenomenon but should be considered in young 
men, particularly those who are cigarette smokers. The 
development of cold-induced pallor in these disorders 
may be confined to one or two digits of the involved 
extremity. Occasionally, Raynaud’s phenomenon may 
follow acute occlusion of large and medium-size arteries 
by a thrombus or embolus. Embolization of atheroem-
bolic debris may cause digital ischemia. The latter situ-
ation often involves one or two digits and should not 
be confused with Raynaud’s phenomenon. In patients 
with thoracic outlet compression syndrome, Raynaud’s 
phenomenon may result from diminished intravascular 
pressure, stimulation of sympathetic fibers in the bra-
chial plexus, or a combination of both. Raynaud’s phe-
nomenon occurs in patients with primary pulmonary 
hypertension (Chap. 40); this is more than coincidental 
and may reflect a neurohumoral abnormality that affects 
both the pulmonary and digital circulations.
A variety of blood dyscrasias may be associated with 
Raynaud’s phenomenon. Cold-induced precipitation 
of plasma proteins, hyperviscosity, and aggregation of 
red cells and platelets may occur in patients with cold 
agglutinins, cryoglobulinemia, or cryofibrinogenemia. 
Hyperviscosity syndromes that accompany myeloprolif-
erative disorders and Waldenström macroglobulinemia 
should also be considered in the initial evaluation of 
patients with Raynaud’s phenomenon.
Raynaud’s phenomenon occurs often in patients 
whose vocations require the use of vibrating hand tools, 
such as chain saws or jackhammers. The frequency of 
Raynaud’s phenomenon also seems to be increased in 
pianists and keyboard operators. Electric shock injury to 
the hands or frostbite may lead to the later development 
of Raynaud’s phenomenon.
Several drugs have been causally implicated in 
Raynaud’s phenomenon. They include ergot prepara-
tions, methysergide, β-adrenergic receptor antagonists, 
and the chemotherapeutic agents bleomycin, vinblastine, 
and cisplatin.
Treatment	
Raynaud’s Phenomenon
Most patients with Raynaud’s phenomenon experience 
only mild and infrequent episodes. These patients need 
reassurance and should be instructed to dress warmly and 
avoid unnecessary cold exposure. In addition to gloves 
and mittens, patients should protect the trunk, head, and 
feet with warm clothing to prevent cold-induced reflex 
vasoconstriction. Tobacco use is contraindicated.
Drug treatment should be reserved for severe cases. 
Dihydropyridine calcium channel antagonists such 
as nifedipine, isradipine, felodipine, and amlodipine 
decrease the frequency and severity of Raynaud’s 
phenomenon. Diltiazem may be considered but is 
less effective. The postsynaptic α1-adrenergic antago-
nist prazosin has been used with favorable responses; 
doxazosin and terazosin may also be effective. Topi-
cal glyceryl trinitrate may be useful in some patients. 
Digital sympathectomy is helpful in some patients who 
are unresponsive to medical therapy.
Acrocyanosis
In this condition, there is arterial vasoconstriction and 
secondary dilation of the capillaries and venules with 
resulting persistent cyanosis of the hands and, less fre-
quently, the feet. Cyanosis may be intensified by 
exposure to a cold environment. Acrocyanosis may be 
categorized as primary or secondary to an underlying 
condition. In primary acrocyanosis, women are affected 
much more frequently than men, and the age of onset is 
usually <30 years. Generally, patients are asymptomatic 
but seek medical attention because of the discoloration. 
The prognosis is favorable, and pain, ulcers, and gan-
grene do not occur. Examination reveals normal pulses, 
peripheral cyanosis, and moist palms. Trophic skin 
changes and ulcerations do not occur. The disorder can 
 
CHAPTER 39
Vascular Diseases of the Extremities
485
be distinguished from Raynaud’s phenomenon because 
it is persistent and not episodic, the discoloration 
extends proximally from the digits, and blanching does 
not occur. Ischemia secondary to arterial occlusive dis-
ease can usually be excluded by the presence of normal 
pulses. Central cyanosis and decreased arterial oxygen 
saturation are not present. Patients should be reassured 
and advised to dress warmly and avoid cold exposure. 
Pharmacologic intervention is not indicated.
Secondary acrocyanosis may result from hypoxemia, 
connective tissue diseases, atheroembolism, antiphos-
pholipid antibodies, cold agglutinins, or cryoglobulins 
and is associated with anorexia nervosa and orthostatic 
tachycardia syndrome. Treatment should be directed at 
the underlying disorder.
Livedo Reticularis
In this condition, localized areas of the extremities 
develop a mottled or rete (netlike) appearance of red-
dish to blue discoloration. The mottled appearance 
may be more prominent after cold exposure. There 
are primary and secondary forms of livedo reticularis. 
The primary, or idiopathic, form of this disorder may 
be benign or associated with ulcerations. The benign 
form occurs more frequently in women than in men, 
and the most common age of onset is the third decade. 
Patients with the benign form are usually asymptom-
atic and seek attention for cosmetic reasons. These 
patients should be reassured and advised to avoid cold 
environments. No drug treatment is indicated. Pri-
mary livedo reticularis with ulceration is also called 
atrophie blanche en plaque. The ulcers are painful and 
may take months to heal. Secondary livedo reticularis 
can occur with atheroembolism (see earlier), SLE and 
other vasculitides, anticardiolipin antibodies, hyper-
viscosity, cryoglobulinemia, and Sneddon’s syndrome 
(ischemic stroke and livedo reticularis). Rarely, skin 
ulcerations develop.
Pernio (Chilblains)
Pernio is a vasculitic disorder associated with exposure 
to cold; acute forms have been described. Raised ery-
thematous lesions develop on the lower part of the legs 
and feet in cold weather. They are associated with pru-
ritus and a burning sensation, and they may blister and 
ulcerate. Pathologic examination demonstrates angiitis 
characterized by intimal proliferation and perivascular 
infiltration of mononuclear and polymorphonuclear leu-
kocytes. Giant cells may be present in the subcutaneous 
tissue. Patients should avoid exposure to cold, and ulcers 
should be kept clean and protected with sterile dressings. 
Sympatholytic drugs and dihydropyridine calcium chan-
nel antagonists may be effective in some patients.
Erythromelalgia
This disorder is characterized by burning pain and ery-
thema of the extremities. The feet are involved more 
frequently than the hands, and males are affected more 
frequently than females. Erythromelalgia may occur at 
any age but is most common in middle age. It may be 
primary (also termed erythermalgia) or secondary. The 
most common causes of secondary erythromelalgia 
are myeloproliferative disorders such as polycythemia 
vera and essential thrombocytosis. Less common 
causes include drugs, such as calcium channel block-
ers, bromocriptine, and pergolide; neuropathies; con-
nective tissue diseases such as SLE; and paraneoplastic 
syndromes. Patients complain of burning in the 
extremities that is precipitated by exposure to a warm 
environment and aggravated by a dependent position. 
The symptoms are relieved by exposing the affected 
area to cool air or water or by elevation. Erythrome-
lalgia can be distinguished from ischemia secondary to 
peripheral arterial disorders and peripheral neuropathy 
because the peripheral pulses are present and the neu-
rologic examination is normal. There is no specific 
treatment; aspirin may produce relief in patients with 
erythromelalgia secondary to myeloproliferative disease. 
Treatment of associated disorders in secondary erythro-
melalgia may be helpful.
Frostbite
In this condition, tissue damage results from severe 
environmental cold exposure or from direct contact 
with a very cold object. Tissue injury results from both 
freezing and vasoconstriction. Frostbite usually affects 
the distal aspects of the extremities or exposed parts of 
the face, such as the ears, nose, chin, and cheeks. Super-
ficial frostbite involves the skin and subcutaneous tissue. 
Patients experience pain or paresthesia, and the skin 
appears white and waxy. After rewarming, there is cya-
nosis and erythema, wheal-and-flare formation, edema, 
and superficial blisters. Deep frostbite involves muscle, 
nerves, and deeper blood vessels. It may result in edema 
of the hand or foot, vesicles and bullae, tissue necrosis, 
and gangrene.
Initial treatment is rewarming, performed in an envi-
ronment where reexposure to freezing conditions will not 
occur. Rewarming is accomplished by immersion of the 
affected part in a water bath at temperatures of 40°–44°C 
(104°–111°F). Massage, application of ice water, and 
extreme heat are contraindicated. The injured area should 
be cleansed with soap or antiseptic, and sterile dressings 
should be applied. Analgesics are often required during 
rewarming. Antibiotics are used if there is evidence of 
infection. The efficacy of sympathetic blocking drugs is 
not established. After recovery, the affected extremity may 
exhibit increased sensitivity to cold.
486
Disorders of the Vasculature
SECTION V
Disorders of the Veins and 
Lymphatics
Venous Disorders
Veins in the extremities can be broadly classified as either 
superficial or deep. In the lower extremity, the superfi-
cial venous system includes the greater and lesser saphe-
nous veins and their tributaries. The deep veins of the leg 
accompany the major arteries. Perforating veins connect 
the superficial and deep systems at multiple locations. 
Bicuspid valves are present throughout the venous system 
to direct the flow of venous blood centrally.
Venous thrombosis
The presence of thrombus within a superficial or deep 
vein, along with the accompanying inflammatory 
response in the vessel wall, is termed venous thrombosis or 
thrombophlebitis. Initially the thrombus is composed princi-
pally of platelets and fibrin. Red cells become interspersed 
with fibrin, and the thrombus tends to propagate in the 
direction of blood flow. The inflammatory response in 
the vessel wall may be minimal or characterized by granu-
locyte infiltration, loss of endothelium, and edema.
The factors that predispose to venous thrombosis 
were initially described by Virchow in 1856 and include 
stasis, vascular damage, and hypercoagulability. Accord-
ingly, a variety of clinical situations are associated with 
increased risk of venous thrombosis (Table 39-2). 
Venous thrombosis may occur in >50% of patients hav-
ing orthopedic surgical procedures, particularly those 
involving the hip or knee, and in 10–40% of patients 
who undergo abdominal or thoracic operations. The 
prevalence of venous thrombosis is particularly high in 
patients with cancer of the pancreas, lungs, genitouri-
nary tract, stomach, and breast. Approximately 10–20% 
of patients with idiopathic deep vein thrombosis have or 
develop clinically overt cancer; there is no consensus on 
whether these individuals should be subjected to inten-
sive diagnostic workup to search for occult malignancy.
The risk of thrombosis is increased after trauma 
such as fractures of the spine, pelvis, femur, and tibia. 
Immobilization, regardless of the underlying disease, is 
a major predisposing cause of venous thrombosis. This 
may account for the relatively high incidence in patients 
with acute myocardial infarction or congestive heart 
failure. The incidence of venous thrombosis is increased 
during pregnancy, particularly in the third trimester, and 
in the first month postpartum, as well as in individuals 
who use oral contraceptives, postmenopausal hormone 
replacement therapy, or selective estrogen receptor 
modulators. A variety of inherited and acquired disor-
ders that produce systemic hypercoagulability, including 
resistance to activated protein C (factor V Leiden); pro-
thrombin G20210A gene mutation; antithrombin III, 
Table 39-2 
Conditions Associated With an Increased 
Risk for Development of Venous Thrombosis
Surgery
Orthopedic, thoracic, abdominal, and genitourinary  
procedures
Neoplasms
Pancreas, lung, ovary, testes, urinary tract, breast,  
stomach
Trauma
Fractures of spine, pelvis, femur, or tibia; spinal cord 
injuries
Immobilization
Acute myocardial infarction, congestive heart failure, 
stroke, postoperative convalescence
Pregnancy
Estrogen for replacement or contraception
Selective estrogen replacement modulators
Hypercoagulable states
Resistance to activated protein C; prothrombin 20210A 
gene mutation deficiencies of antithrombin III, protein C, 
or protein S; antiphospholipid antibodies; myeloprolif-
erative diseases; dysfibrinogenemia; disseminated  
intravascular coagulation
Venulitis
Thromboangiitis obliterans, Behçet’s disease,  
homocysteinuria
Previous deep vein thrombosis
protein C, and protein S deficiencies; antiphospholipid 
syndrome; hyperhomocysteinemia; SLE; myeloprolif-
erative diseases; dysfibrinogenemia; heparin-induced 
thrombocytopenia; and disseminated intravascular coag-
ulation, are associated with venous thrombosis. Venu-
litis occurring in thromboangiitis obliterans, Behçet’s 
syndrome, and homocystinuria may also cause venous 
thrombosis.
Superficial vein thrombosis
Thrombosis of the greater or lesser saphenous veins or 
their tributaries (i.e., superficial vein thrombosis) does 
not result in pulmonary embolism. It is associated with 
intravenous catheters and infusions, occurs in vari-
cose veins, and may develop in association with deep 
venous thrombosis (DVT). Migrating superficial vein 
thrombosis is often a marker for a carcinoma and may 
also occur in patients with vasculitides, such as throm-
boangiitis obliterans. The clinical features of superficial 
vein thrombosis are easily distinguished from those of 
DVT. Patients complain of pain localized to the site of 
the thrombus. Examination reveals a reddened, warm, 
and tender cord extending along a superficial vein. The 
surrounding area may be red and edematous.
 
CHAPTER 39
Vascular Diseases of the Extremities
487
Treatment	
Superficial Vein Thrombosis
Treatment is primarily supportive. Initially, patients can 
be placed at bed rest with leg elevation and application 
of warm compresses. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory 
drugs may provide analgesia but may also obscure clini-
cal evidence of thrombus propagation. If a thrombosis 
of the greater saphenous vein develops in the thigh and 
extends toward the saphenofemoral vein junction, it is 
reasonable to consider anticoagulant therapy to pre-
vent extension of the thrombus into the deep system 
and a possible pulmonary embolism.
Varicose veins
Varicose veins are dilated, tortuous superficial veins 
that result from defective structure and function of the 
valves of the saphenous veins, intrinsic weakness of the 
vein wall, high intraluminal pressure, or, rarely, arte-
riovenous fistulas. Varicose veins can be categorized as 
primary or secondary. Primary varicose veins originate 
in the superficial system and occur two to three times 
as frequently in women as in men. Approximately one-
half of these patients have a family history of varicose 
veins. Secondary varicose veins result from deep venous 
insufficiency and incompetent perforating veins or 
from deep venous occlusion that causes enlargement of 
superficial veins that are serving as collaterals.
Patients with venous varicosities are often concerned 
about the cosmetic appearance of their legs. Symptoms 
consist of a dull ache or pressure sensation in the legs 
after prolonged standing; this is relieved with leg eleva-
tion. The legs feel heavy, and mild ankle edema devel-
ops occasionally. Extensive venous varicosities may 
cause skin ulcerations near the ankle. Superficial venous 
thrombosis may be a recurring problem, and, rarely, a 
varicosity ruptures and bleeds. Visual inspection of the 
legs in the dependent position usually confirms the 
presence of varicose veins.
Varicose veins usually can be treated with conserva-
tive measures. Symptoms often decrease when the legs 
are elevated periodically, prolonged standing is avoided, 
and elastic support hose are worn. External compression 
stockings provide a counterbalance to the hydrostatic pres-
sure in the veins. Ablative procedures, including sclero-
therapy, endovenous radio frequency or laser ablation, 
and surgery, may be considered to treat varicose veins 
in selected patients who have persistent symptoms, have 
recurrent superficial vein thrombosis, and/or develop 
skin ulceration. Ablative therapy may also be indicated 
for cosmetic reasons. Small, symptomatic varicose veins 
can be treated with sclerotherapy, in which a sclerosing 
solution is injected into the involved varicose vein and 
a compression bandage is applied. Percutaneous, endove-
nous delivery of radio frequency or laser energy can be 
used to treat incompetent great saphenous veins. Surgical 
therapy usually involves ligation and stripping of the great 
and small saphenous veins.
Chronic venous insufficiency
Chronic venous insufficiency may result from DVT 
and/or valvular incompetence. After DVT, the deli-
cate valve leaflets become thickened and contracted so 
that they cannot prevent retrograde flow of blood; the 
vein becomes rigid and thick walled. Although most 
veins recanalize after an episode of thrombosis, the large 
proximal veins may remain occluded. Secondary incom-
petence develops in distal valves because high pressures 
distend the vein and separate the leaflets. Primary deep 
venous valvular dysfunction may also occur without 
previous thrombosis. Patients with venous insufficiency 
often complain of a dull ache in the leg that worsens 
with prolonged standing and resolves with leg elevation. 
Examination demonstrates increased leg circumference, 
edema, and superficial varicose veins. Erythema, der-
matitis, and hyperpigmentation develop along the distal 
aspect of the leg, and skin ulceration may occur near the 
medial and lateral malleoli (Fig. 39-3). Cellulitis may be 
a recurring problem. The CEAP (clinical, etiologic, ana-
tomic, pathophysiologic) classification schema incorpo-
rates the range of symptoms and signs of chronic venous 
insufficiency to characterize its severity (Table 39-3).
Patients should be advised to avoid prolonged stand-
ing or sitting; frequent leg elevation is helpful. Graduated 
compression stockings should be worn during the day. 
Figure 39-3 
Venous insufficiency with active venous ulcer near 
the medial malleolus. (Courtesy of Dr. Steven Dean, with 
permission.)
488
Disorders of the Vasculature
SECTION V
These efforts should be intensified if skin ulcers develop. 
Ulcers should be treated with applications of wet to dry 
dressings or occlusive hydrocolloid dressings. Commer-
cially available compressive dressings that consist of paste 
with zinc oxide, calamine, glycerin, and gelatin may 
be applied and should be changed weekly until healing 
occurs. Recurrent ulceration and severe edema may be 
treated by surgical interruption of incompetent commu-
nicating veins. Subfascial endoscopic perforator surgery 
(SEPS) is a minimally invasive technique to interrupt 
incompetent communicating veins. Rarely, surgical val-
vuloplasty and bypass of venous occlusions are employed.
Lymphatic Disorders
Lymphatic capillaries are blind-ended tubes formed by 
a single layer of endothelial cells. The absent or widely 
fenestrated basement membrane of lymphatic capillaries 
allows access to interstitial proteins and particles. Lym-
phatic capillaries merge to form larger vessels that contain 
smooth muscle and are capable of vasomotion. Small- and 
medium-size lymphatic vessels empty into progressively 
larger channels, most of which drain into the thoracic 
duct. The lymphatic circulation is involved in the absorp-
tion of interstitial fluid and in the response to infection.
Lymphedema
Lymphedema may be categorized as primary or second-
ary (Table 39-4). The prevalence of primary lymph-
edema is approximately 1 per 10,000 individuals. Primary 
lymphedema may be secondary to agenesis, hypoplasia, 
or obstruction of the lymphatic vessels. It may be asso-
ciated with Turner’s syndrome, Klinefelter’s syndrome, 
Noonan’s syndrome, yellow nail syndrome, intestinal 
lymphangiectasia syndrome, and lymphangiomyomato-
sis. Women are affected more frequently than are men. 
There are three clinical subtypes: congenital lymphedema, 
which appears shortly after birth; lymphedema praecox, 
Table 39-3 
CEAP (Clinical, Etiologic, Anatomic, 
Pathophysiologic) Classification
C0 No visible or palpable signs of venous disease
C1 Telangiectases, reticular veins
C2 Varicose veins
C3 Edema without skin changes
C4 Skin changes, including pigmentation, eczema,  
lipodermatosclerosis, and atrophie blanche
C5 Healed venous ulcer
C6 Active venous ulcer
Table 39-4
Causes of Lymphedema
Primary
Congenital (includes  
Milroy’s disease)
Lymphedema praecox 
(includes Nonne-Milroy-
Meige [or chronic familial 
lymphedema of the 
limbs] disease)
Lymphedema tarda
Secondary
Recurrent lymphangitis
Filariasis
Tuberculosis
Neoplasm
Surgery
Radiation therapy
which has its onset at the time of puberty; and lymph-
edema tarda, which usually begins after age 35. Familial 
forms of congenital lymphedema (Milroy’s disease) and 
lymphedema praecox (Meige’s disease) may be inherited 
in an autosomal dominant manner with variable pen-
etrance; autosomal or sex-linked recessive forms are less 
common.
Secondary lymphedema is an acquired condition that 
results from damage to or obstruction of previously nor-
mal lymphatic channels (Table 39-4). Recurrent episodes 
of bacterial lymphangitis, usually caused by streptococci, 
are a very common cause of lymphedema. The most com-
mon cause of secondary lymphedema worldwide is filari-
asis. Tumors, such as prostate cancer and lymphoma, can 
also obstruct lymphatic vessels. Both surgery and radiation 
therapy for breast carcinoma may cause lymphedema of 
the upper extremity. Less common causes include tuber-
culosis, contact dermatitis, lymphogranuloma venereum, 
rheumatoid arthritis, pregnancy, and self-induced or facti-
tious lymphedema after application of tourniquets.
Lymphedema is generally a painless condition, but 
patients may experience a chronic dull, heavy sensa-
tion in the leg, and most often they are concerned 
about the appearance of the leg. Lymphedema of the 
lower extremity, initially involving the foot, gradually 
progresses up the leg so that the entire limb becomes 
edematous. In the early stages, the edema is soft and pits 
easily with pressure. In the chronic stages, the limb has 
a woody texture, and the tissues become indurated and 
fibrotic. At this point the edema may no longer be pit-
ting. The limb loses its normal contour, and the toes 
appear square. Lymphedema should be distinguished 
from other disorders that cause unilateral leg swell-
ing, such as DVT and chronic venous insufficiency. 
In the latter condition, the edema is softer, and there is 
often evidence of a stasis dermatitis, hyperpigmenta-
tion, and superficial venous varicosities. Other causes 
of leg swelling that resemble lymphedema are pretibial 
myxedema and lipedema. Pretibial myxedema occurs 
 
CHAPTER 39
Vascular Diseases of the Extremities
489
in patients with hyperthyroidism, especially Graves’ 
disease, and is caused by deposition of hyaluronic acid-
rich protein in the dermis. Lipedema usually occurs in 
women and is caused by accumulation of adipose tissue 
in the leg from the thigh to the ankle with sparing of 
the feet. The evaluation of patients with lymphedema 
should include diagnostic studies to clarify the cause. 
Abdominal and pelvic ultrasound and CT can be used to 
detect obstructing lesions such as neoplasms. MRI may 
reveal edema in the epifascial compartment and identify 
lymph nodes and enlarged lymphatic channels. Lym-
phoscintigraphy and lymphangiography are rarely indi-
cated, but either can be used to confirm the diagnosis or 
differentiate primary from secondary lymphedema. Lym-
phoscintigraphy involves the injection of radioactively 
labeled technetium-containing colloid into the distal 
subcutaneous tissue of the affected extremity. In lym-
phangiography, contrast material is injected into a distal 
lymphatic vessel that has been isolated and cannulated. 
In primary lymphedema, lymphatic channels are absent, 
hypoplastic, or ectatic. In secondary lymphedema, lym-
phatic channels are usually dilated, and it may be possible 
to determine the level of obstruction.
Treatment	
Lymphedema
Patients with lymphedema of the lower extremities 
must be instructed to take meticulous care of their 
feet to prevent recurrent lymphangitis. Skin hygiene is 
important, and emollients can be used to prevent dry-
ing. Prophylactic antibiotics are often helpful, and fun-
gal infection should be treated aggressively. Patients 
should be encouraged to participate in physical activ-
ity; frequent leg elevation can reduce the amount of 
edema. Physical therapy, including massage to facili-
tate lymphatic drainage, may be helpful. Patients can 
be fitted with graduated compression hose to reduce 
the amount of lymphedema that develops with upright 
posture. Occasionally, intermittent pneumatic com-
pression devices can be applied at home to facilitate 
reduction of the edema. Diuretics are contraindicated 
and may cause depletion of intravascular volume and 
metabolic abnormalities. Microsurgical lymphaticove-
nous anastomotic procedures have been performed  
to rechannel lymph flow from obstructed lymphatic  
vessels into the venous system.
 Stuart Rich 
490
 Pulmonary hypertension , an abnormal elevation in pul-
monary artery pressure, may be the result of left heart 
failure, pulmonary parenchymal or vascular disease, 
thromboembolism, or a combination of these factors. 
Whether the pulmonary hypertension arises from car-
diac, pulmonary, or intrinsic vascular disease, it gener-
ally is a feature of advanced disease. Because the causes 
of pulmonary hypertension are so diverse, it is essential 
that the etiology underlying the pulmonary hyperten-
sion be clearly determined before beginning treatment. 
 PAthoPhysiology 
 The right ventricle responds to an increase in pulmo-
nary vascular resistance by increasing right ventricular 
(RV) systolic pressure to preserve cardiac output. In 
some patients, chronic changes occur in the pulmonary 
circulation, resulting in progressive remodeling of the 
vasculature, which can sustain or promote pulmonary 
hypertension even if the initiating factor is removed. 
 The ability of the RV to adapt to increased vascu-
lar resistance is infl uenced by several factors, including 
age and the rapidity of the development of pulmonary 
hypertension. For example, a large acute pulmonary 
thromboembolism can result in RV failure and shock, 
whereas chronic thromboembolic disease of equal sever-
ity may result in only mild exercise intolerance. Coexist-
ing hypoxemia can impair the ability of the ventricle to 
compensate. Studies support the concept that RV failure 
occurs in pulmonary hypertension when the RV myocar-
dium becomes ischemic as a result of excessive demands 
and inadequate RV coronary blood fl ow. The onset of 
RV failure, often manifest by peripheral edema, is associ-
ated with a poor outcome. 
 DiAgnosis 
 The most common symptom attributable to pulmo-
nary hypertension is exertional dyspnea. Other common 
symptoms are fatigue, angina pectoris, syncope, near 
syncope, and peripheral edema. 
 The physical examination typically reveals increased 
jugular venous pressure, a reduced carotid pulse, and a 
palpable RV impulse. Most patients have an increased 
pulmonic component of the second heart sound, a 
right-sided fourth heart sound, and tricuspid regurgi-
tation ( Chap. 9 ). Peripheral cyanosis and/or edema 
tend to occur in later stages of the disease. 
 Laboratory ﬁ ndings 
( Fig. 40-1 ) The chest x-ray generally shows enlarged cen-
tral pulmonary arteries. The lung fi elds may reveal other 
pathology. The electrocardiogram usually shows right 
axis deviation and RV hypertrophy. The echocardiogram 
commonly demonstrates RV and right atrial enlargement, 
a reduction in left ventricular (LV) cavity size, and a tri-
cuspid regurgitant jet that can be used to estimate RV sys-
tolic pressure by Doppler. Pulmonary function tests are 
helpful in documenting underlying obstructive airways 
disease, whereas high-resolution chest computed tomogra-
phy (CT) is preferred to diagnose restrictive lung disease. 
Hypoxemia and an abnormal diffusing capacity for carbon 
monoxide occur with pulmonary hypertension of many 
causes. A perfusion lung scan is almost always abnormal in 
patients with thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension. 
However, diffuse defects of a nonsegmental nature often 
can be seen in long-standing pulmonary hypertension in the 
absence of thromboemboli. Laboratory tests should include 
antinuclear antibody and HIV testing. Because of the high 
frequency of thyroid abnormalities in patients with idio-
pathic pulmonary hypertension, it is recommended that 
the thyroid-stimulating hormone level be determined 
periodically. 
 Cardiac catheterization 
 Cardiac catheterization is mandatory for accurate mea-
surement of pulmonary artery pressure, cardiac output, 
 PULMONARY HYPERTENSION 
 cHaPter 40 
 
CHAPTER 40
Pulmonary Hypertension
491
and LV filling pressure as well as documentation of 
an underlying cardiac shunt. Care should be taken to 
record pressures only at end expiration. It is recom-
mended that patients with pulmonary arterial hyperten-
sion undergo drug testing with a short-acting pulmonary 
vasodilator to determine the extent of pulmonary vaso-
dilator reactivity. Inhaled nitric oxide, intravenous 
adenosine, and intravenous epoprostenol have com-
parable effects in reducing pulmonary artery pressure 
acutely. Nitric oxide is administered via inhalation in 
10–20 parts per million. Adenosine is given in doses 
Echocardiogram
Dilated right
ventricle
Left heart disease
Valvular heart disease
Congenital abnormality
Dilated right
ventricle
Pulmonary function tests
Cardiac catheterization
Normal or
restrictive pattern
Obstructive
pattern
High resolution
chest CT
COLD
Interstitial
lung disease
Normal or enlarged
pulmonary arteries
Measure exercise
capacity
Lab tests:
• CBC  • ANA  • HIV  • TSH  • LFTs
Pulmonary
thromboembolism
Cardiac catheterization
• Vasodilator testing
Figure 40-1 
An algorithm for the workup of a patient with unex-
plained pulmonary hypertension. All potential etiologies 
and associated conditions must be investigated in a patient 
with clinical findings consistent with pulmonary hypertension. 
COLD, chronic obstructive lung disease; CBC, complete 
blood count; ANA, antinuclear antibodies; HIV, human immu-
nodeficiency virus; TSH, thyroid-stimulating hormone; LFTs, 
liver function tests.
of 50 μg/kg per min and increased every 2 min until 
side effects develop. Epoprostenol is given in doses 
of 2 ng/kg per min and increased every 30 min until 
side effects develop. Patients who respond usually can 
be treated with calcium channel blockers and have a 
more favorable prognosis.
Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension
Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) refers to a vari-
ety of diseases that include idiopathic PAH, as noted in 
Table 40-1. Patients with PAH have a common histo-
pathology characterized by medial hypertrophy, eccen-
tric and concentric intimal fibrosis, recanalized thrombi 
appearing as fibrous webs, and plexiform lesions.
Pathobiology
Vasoconstriction, 
vascular 
proliferation, 
thrombo-
sis, and inflammation appear to underlie the develop-
ment of PAH (Fig. 40-2). Abnormalities in multiple 
molecular pathways and genes that regulate the pulmo-
nary vascular endothelial and smooth-muscle cells have 
been identified. These abnormalities include decreased 
expression of the voltage-regulated potassium channel, 
mutations in the bone morphogenetic protein-2 recep-
tor, increased tissue factor expression, overactivation 
of the serotonin transporter, transcription factor activa-
tion of hypoxia-inducible factor-1 alpha, and activation 
of nuclear factor of activated T cells. As a result, there 
appears to be loss of apoptosis of the smooth-muscle 
cells that allows their proliferation and the emergence 
of apoptosis-resistant endothelial cells that can obliter-
ate the vascular lumen. In addition, thrombin deposi-
tion in the pulmonary vasculature from a procoagulant 
state that develops as an independent abnormality or 
as a result of endothelial dysfunction may amplify the 
vascular proliferation.
Idiopathic Pulmonary Arterial 
Hypertension
Idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension (IPAH), 
formerly referred to as primary pulmonary hyperten-
sion, is uncommon, with an estimated incidence of two 
cases per million. There is a female predominance, with 
most patients presenting in the fourth and fifth decades, 
although the age range is from infancy to >60 years.
Familial IPAH accounts for up to 20% of cases of 
IPAH and is characterized by autosomal dominant 
inheritance and incomplete penetrance. The clinical and 
pathologic features of familial and sporadic IPAH are 
identical. Heterozygous germ-line mutations involving 
492
SECTION V
Disorders of the Vasculature
Table 40-1
A Clinical Classification of Pulmonary 
Hypertension
Category 1. Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH)
  Key feature: elevation in pulmonary arterial pressure 
  (PAP) with normal pulmonary capillary wedge  
  pressure (pcwp)
  Includes:
    Idiopathic (IPAH)
    • Sporadic
    • Familial
    • Exposure to drugs or toxins
    • Persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn
    • Pulmonary capillary hemangiomatosis (PCH)
    Associated with other active conditions
    • Collagen vascular disease
    • Congenital systemic-to-pulmonary shunts
    • Portal hypertension
    • HIV infection
Category 2. Pulmonary venous hypertension
  Key feature: elevation in PAP with elevation in pcwp
  Includes:
    • Left-sided atrial or ventricular heart disease
    • Left-sided valvular heart disease
    • Pulmonary venous obstruction
    • Pulmonary venoocclusive disease (PVOD)
Category 3. Pulmonary hypertension associated with 
hypoxemic lung disease
  Key feature: chronic hypoxia with mild elevation of PAP
  Includes:
    • Chronic obstructive lung disease
    • Interstitial lung disease
    • Sleep-disordered breathing
    • Alveolar hypoventilation disorders
    • Chronic exposure to high altitude
    • Developmental abnormalities
Category 4. Pulmonary hypertension due to chronic 
thromboembolic disease
  Key feature: elevation of PA pressure with 
  documentation of pulmonary arterial obstruction  
  for >3 months
  Includes:
    • Chronic pulmonary thromboembolism
    • Nonthrombotic pulmonary embolism (tumor, foreign 
material)
Category 5. Miscellaneous
  Key feature: elevation in PAP in association with a 
systemic disease where a causal relationship is not 
clearly understood
  Includes:
    • Sarcoidosis
    • Chronic anemias
    • Histiocytosis X
    • Lymphangiomatosis
    • Schistosomiasis
Hyperpolarized
mitochondria
Overexpressed
serotonin
transporter
NFAT
activation
Thrombosis
Constriction
Proliferation
Increased
tissue factor
HIF-1α
activation
Suppressed
apoptosis
Inflammation
KV 1.5
down regulation
BMPR-2
insufficiency
Figure 40-2 
Multiple biologic pathways that can lead to pulmonary 
arterial hypertension. Some of the better-characterized ones 
are illustrated. Because of the redundancy in these path-
ways and the spectrum of abnormalities that may coexist, 
it is unlikely that a single agent will produce disease rever-
sal. BMPR-2, bone morphogenetic protein receptor-2; HIF, 
hypoxia inducible factor; KV 1.5, voltage-regulated potassium 
channel 1.5; NFAT, nuclear factor of activated T cells.
the gene that code the type II bone morphogenetic pro-
tein receptor (BMPR II), a member of the transforming 
growth factor (TGF) β superfamily, appear to account 
for most cases of familial IPAH. The TGF-β superfami-
lies include multifunctional proteins that initiate diverse 
cellular responses by binding to and activating serine/
threonine kinase receptors. The low gene penetrance 
indicates that other risk factors or abnormalities are nec-
essary to manifest clinical disease. Germ-line mutations 
in the activin-like kinase gene and endoglin gene, which 
have been linked to hereditary hemorrhagic telangiecta-
sia, coexist in some patients with familial IPAH.
Natural History
The natural history of IPAH is uncertain, but the disease 
typically is diagnosed late in its course. Before current 
therapies, a mean survival of 2–3 years from the time of 
diagnosis was reported. Functional class remains a strong 
predictor of survival, with patients who are in New York 
Heart Association (NYHA) functional class IV having a 
mean survival of <6 months. The cause of death is usu-
ally RV failure, which is manifest by progressive hypox-
emia, tachycardia, hypotension, and edema.
 
CHAPTER 40
Pulmonary Hypertension
493
treatment	
Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension
Because the pulmonary artery pressure in PAH increases 
with exercise, patients should be cautioned against par-
ticipating in activities that impose physical stress. Diuretic 
therapy relieves peripheral edema and may be useful in 
reducing RV volume overload. Pulse oximetry should be 
monitored, as O2 supplementation helps alleviate dys-
pnea and RV ischemia in patients whose arterial O2 satu-
ration is reduced. Anticoagulant therapy is advocated for 
all patients with PAH based on studies demonstrating 
that warfarin increases survival of patients with PAH. The 
dose of warfarin generally is titrated to achieve an inter-
national normalized ratio (INR) of 2–3 times control.
Several treatments are approved for PAH; they are 
reviewed below without making a distinction among 
the different types. However, the efficacy and side effects 
of these drugs may not be the same in all types of PAH. 
Other than calcium channel blockers, none of the drugs 
produce a significant lowering of the pulmonary arte-
rial pressure, and their long-term effects on survival are 
undefined. The principles for the selection and use of the 
approved drug treatments are reviewed in Table 40-2.
Calcium Channel Blockers  Patients who 
respond to short-acting vasodilators at the time of car-
diac catheterization (a fall in mean pulmonary arte-
rial pressure ≥10 mmHg and a final mean pressure  
<40 mmHg) should be treated with calcium channel 
blockers. Typically, these patients require high doses 
(e.g., nifedipine, 240 mg/d, or amlodipine, 20 mg/d). 
Patients may have dramatic reductions in pulmonary 
artery pressure and pulmonary vascular resistance 
associated with improved symptoms, regression of RV 
hypertrophy, and improved survival now documented 
to exceed 20 years. However, <20% of patients respond 
to calcium channel blockers in the long term. These 
drugs are not effective in patients who are not vasore-
active. They also have not been approved for the treat-
ment of PAH by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration.
Endothelin Receptor Antagonists  The 
endothelin receptor antagonists bosentan and ambris-
entan are approved treatments of PAH. In random-
ized clinical trials, both improved exercise tolerance 
as measured by an increase in 6-min walking distance. 
Therapy with bosentan is initiated at 62.5 mg bid  
for the first month and increased to 125 mg bid there-
after. Ambrisentan is initiated as 5 mg once daily and 
can be increased to 10 mg daily. Because of the high 
frequency of abnormal hepatic function tests associated 
with these drugs, primarily an increase in transaminases, 
it is recommended that liver function be monitored 
monthly throughout the duration of use. Bosentan is 
contraindicated in patients who are on cyclosporine or 
glyburide concurrently.
Phosphodiesterase-5 Inhibitors  Sildenafil 
and tadalafil, phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors, are approved 
for the treatment of PAH. Phosphodiesterase-5 is respon-
sible for the hydrolysis of cyclic GMP in pulmonary vas-
cular smooth muscle, the mediator through which nitric 
oxide lowers pulmonary artery pressure and inhibits 
pulmonary vascular growth. Clinical trials have shown 
that both drugs improve exercise tolerance in patients 
with PAH. The effective dose for sildenafil is 20–80 mg  
tid. The effective dose for tadalafil is 40 mg once 
daily. The most common side effect is headache. Nei-
ther drug should be given to patients who are taking  
nitrovasodilators.
Prostacyclins  Iloprost, a prostacyclin analogue, 
is approved via inhalation for PAH. It has been shown to 
improve a composite measure of symptoms and exer-
cise tolerance by 10%. Therapy can be given at either 2.5 
or 5 μg per inhalation treatment via a dedicated nebu-
lizer. The most common side effects are flushing and 
cough. Because of the very short half-life (<30 min) it is 
Table 40-2
Principles of Drug Treatment of Pulmonary 
Arterial Hypertension
• Establish a correct diagnosis:
  Patients should undergo cardiac catheterization before  
  initiating therapy.
• Obtain baseline assessments of the disease:
  Tests should be obtained to monitor the patient’s  
  response to therapy to know whether the treatments  
  are effective.
• Test vasoreactivity:
  Patients should be tested at the time of diagnosis so that 
  reactive patients are not missed.
• Reactive patients should be treated with calcium channel 
  blockers:
  Calcium blockers in high doses are the drugs of choice.
• Nonreactive patients should be offered other therapies:
  No specific treatment has been established as first-line  
  therapy.
• Periodic follow-up assessment of drug efficacy is  
  essential:
  Repeat assessments should be performed within   
  8 weeks of initiating a new drug, as patients who do  
  not respond initially are not likely to respond with  
  longer exposure. 
  Therapies can lose efficacy over time.
• Ineffective treatments should be replaced:
  A different treatment should be substituted rather than  
  added. 
  Patients who fail all treatments should be considered for  
  lung transplantation.
• Benefits and risks of combination therapies are largely  
  unknown:
  Only the addition of sildenafil to epoprostenol has been  
  shown to be efficacious.
494
SECTION V
Disorders of the Vasculature
recommended that treatments be administered as often 
as every 2 h.
Epoprostenol is approved as a chronic IV treatment of 
PAH. Clinical trials have demonstrated an improvement in 
symptoms, exercise tolerance, and survival even if no acute 
hemodynamic response to drug challenge occurs. Drug 
administration requires placement of a permanent central 
venous catheter and infusion through an ambulatory infu-
sion pump system. Side effects include flushing, jaw pain, 
and diarrhea, which are tolerated by most patients.
Treprostinil, an analogue of epoprostenol, is approved 
for PAH and may be given intravenously, subcutane-
ously, or via inhalation. Clinical trials have demonstrated 
an improvement in symptoms with exercise. Local pain 
at the infusion site with subcutaneous administration 
has caused most patients to switch to another therapy. 
Side effects are similar to those seen with epoprostenol.
The intravenous prostacyclins have the greatest effi-
cacy as treatments for PAH and are often effective in 
patients who have failed all other treatments. Favorable 
properties include vasodilation, platelet inhibition, inhi-
bition of vascular smooth muscle growth, and inotropic 
effects. It generally takes several months to titrate the 
dose of epoprostenol or treprostinil upward to achieve 
optimal clinical efficacy, which can be determined by 
symptoms, exercise testing, and catheterization. The 
optimal doses of these drugs have not been deter-
mined, but the typical doses of epoprostenol range 
from 25 to 40 ng/kg per min, and from 75 to 150 ng/kg 
per min for treprostinil. The major problem with intra-
venous therapy is infection related to the indwelling 
venous catheter, which requires close monitoring and 
diligence on the part of the patient. In addition, abrupt 
discontinuation of intravenous prostacyclins can lead to 
a rebound increase in pulmonary pressure.
It is recommended that every patient diagnosed with 
PAH be treated. Although no drug has been demon-
strated to be superior as first-line therapy, many prefer 
to initiate treatment with an oral or inhaled form of ther-
apy. Patients who fail to improve adequately within the 
first 2 months should be switched to a different therapy, 
as there is concern that delaying a more effective treat-
ment may allow the disease to progress and become 
less responsive. The use of these drugs in combination 
has become popular, but the only randomized clinical 
trial demonstrating beneficial effects added sildenafil to 
patients treated with epoprostenol.
Lung Transplantation  Lung transplantation 
is considered for patients who, while on an intravenous 
prostacyclin, continue to manifest right heart failure. 
Acceptable results have been achieved with heart-lung, 
bilateral lung, and single-lung transplantation. The avail-
ability of donor organs often influences the choice of 
procedure.
Conditions Associated with 
Pulmonary Hypertension
Collagen Vascular Disease
All the collagen vascular diseases may be associated with 
PAH. This complication occurs commonly with the 
CREST syndrome (calcinosis, Raynaud’s phenomenon, 
esophageal involvement, sclerodactyly, and telangiecta-
sia) and in scleroderma and less frequently in systemic 
lupus erythematosus, Sjögren’s syndrome, dermatomyo-
sitis, polymyositis, and rheumatoid arthritis. Often these 
patients have coexistent interstitial pulmonary fibrosis 
even though it may not be apparent on chest x-ray, 
CT, or pulmonary function tests. Consequently, they 
tend to have hypoxemia as an important clinical fea-
ture, along with the other classic findings of pulmonary 
hypertension. A fall in diffusing capacity may precede 
the development of pulmonary hypertension. Treat-
ment of these patients is identical to that of patients 
with IPAH (see earlier) but is less effective. The treat-
ment of the pulmonary hypertension, however, does 
not affect the natural history of the underlying collagen 
vascular disease.
Congenital Systemic to Pulmonary 
Shunts
It is common for large post-tricuspid cardiac shunts (e.g., 
ventricular septal defect, patent ductus arteriosus) to pro-
duce severe PAH (Chap. 19). Although less common, 
this also may occur in pretricuspid shunts (e.g., atrial septal 
defect, anomalous pulmonary venous drainage). In patients 
with uncorrected shunts, the clinical features include those 
associated with right-to-left shunting, such as hypoxemia 
and peripheral cyanosis, which worsen dramatically with 
exertion (Chap. 6). PAH may also occur years or even 
decades after surgical correction in the absence of right-
to-left shunting. These patients present similarly to patients 
with IPAH but tend to have better long-term survival. 
The treatments are similar to those for IPAH.
Portal Hypertension
Portal hypertension is associated with PAH, but the 
mechanism is unknown. Patients with advanced cirrho-
sis can have the combined features of a high-output car-
diac state in association with the features of pulmonary 
hypertension and RV failure. Thus, a normal cardiac 
output may actually reflect a marked impairment of RV 
function. The etiology of ascites and edema can be con-
fusing in these patients because this condition can have 
both cardiac and hepatic causes. Overall, these patients 
have a worse prognosis than do patients with IPAH. 
Patients with mild pulmonary hypertension who have 
 
CHAPTER 40
Pulmonary Hypertension
495
a favorable response to epoprostenol have undergone 
successful liver transplantation with improvement of the 
pulmonary vascular disease.
Anorexigens
A causal relationship has been established between 
exposure to several anorexigens, including aminorex 
and the fenfluramines, and the development of PAH. 
Often the pulmonary hypertension will develop years 
after the last exposure. Although the clinical features are 
identical to those of IPAH, the patients appear to be less 
responsive to medical treatments.
Pulmonary Capillary 
Hemangiomatosis
Pulmonary capillary hemangiomatosis is a very rare 
form of pulmonary hypertension. Histologically it is 
characterized by the presence of infiltrating thin-walled 
blood vessels throughout the pulmonary interstitium 
and walls of the pulmonary arteries and veins. The pre-
senting symptoms are those of IPAH but often with 
hypoxemia or hemoptysis as a clinical feature. The diag-
nosis may be suggested by findings on chest CT. The 
clinical course is usually one of progressive deterioration 
leading to death. There is no established therapy.
Pulmonary Venous Hypertension
Pulmonary hypertension occurs as a result of increased 
resistance to pulmonary venous drainage. It is associated 
with diastolic dysfunction of the left ventricle, diseases 
affecting the pericardium or mitral or aortic valves, and 
rare entities such as cor triatriatum, left atrial myxoma, 
extrinsic compression of the central pulmonary veins 
from fibrosing mediastinitis, and pulmonary venoocclu-
sive disease. Pulmonary venous hypertension affects the 
pulmonary veins and venules, producing arterialization 
of the external elastic lamina, medial hypertrophy, and 
focal eccentric intimal fibrosis. Microcirculatory lesions 
include capillary congestion, focal alveolar edema, and 
dilation of the interstitial lymphatics. Although these 
lesions are potentially reversible, regression may take 
years after the underlying cause is removed. Pulmo-
nary venous hypertension often triggers reactive vaso-
constriction in the pulmonary arterial bed and results in 
proliferative changes of the intima and media that can 
produce severe elevations in pulmonary artery pressure. 
Clinically it may be confusing and appear as if two sepa-
rate disease processes are occurring simultaneously. The 
distinction is important, however, as treatments that are 
effective in PAH may make patients with pulmonary 
venous hypertension worse.
Left Ventricular Diastolic 
Dysfunction
Pulmonary hypertension as a result of LV diastolic failure 
is common but often unrecognized (Chap. 17). It can 
occur with or without LV systolic failure. The most com-
mon risk factors are hypertensive heart disease; coronary 
artery disease; and impaired LV compliance related to age, 
diabetes, obesity, and hypoxemia. Symptoms of orthopnea 
and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea are prominent. Many 
patients improve considerably if LV end-diastolic pressure 
is lowered, but current treatments are unsatisfactory.
Mitral Valve Disease
Mitral stenosis and mitral regurgitation represent impor-
tant causes of pulmonary hypertension (Chap. 20) from 
reactive pulmonary vasoconstriction resulting in marked 
elevations in pulmonary artery pressures. An echocar-
diogram usually shows abnormalities such as thickened 
mitral valve leaflets with reduced mobility or severe mitral 
regurgitation documented by Doppler echocardiography 
(Chap. 12). At cardiac catheterization, a pressure gradient 
between the pulmonary capillary wedge pressure and LV 
end-diastolic pressure is diagnostic of mitral stenosis.
In patients with mitral stenosis, corrective surgery of 
the mitral valve or mitral balloon valvuloplasty predict-
ably results in a reduction in pulmonary artery pressure 
and pulmonary vascular resistance. Patients with mitral 
regurgitation, however, may not have as dramatic a 
response to surgery because of persistent elevations in 
LV end-diastolic pressure.
Pulmonary Venoocclusive Disease
Pulmonary venoocclusive disease is a rare and distinct 
pathologic entity found in <10% of patients who present 
with unexplained pulmonary hypertension. Histologically 
it is manifest by intimal proliferation and fibrosis of the 
intrapulmonary veins and venules, occasionally extend-
ing to the arteriolar bed. A CT scan may reveal sep-
tal thickening, diffuse or mosaic ground-glass opacities, 
multiple small nodules, or areas of alveolar consolidation. 
Advanced pulmonary venous obstruction explains the 
orthopnea that can mimic LV failure, pulmonary edema 
noted on chest x-ray, and the increase in pulmonary cap-
illary wedge pressure at catheterization. Effective therapy 
for this condition has not been established.
Pulmonary Hypertension 
Associated with Lung Disease  
and Hypoxemia
The acute hypoxic response of the pulmonary arterial 
smooth-muscle cells involves inhibition of the potassium 
496
SECTION V
Disorders of the Vasculature
current, membrane depolarization, and calcium entry 
through L-type calcium channels. Hypoxia, acting through 
the small G protein RhoA, stimulates Rho kinase, which 
inhibits myosin vs. heavy chain in light chain phosphatase, 
thereby increasing phosphorylation of the light chain and 
augmenting contraction. Chronic hypoxia results in mus-
cularization of the arterioles with minimal effects on the 
intima. When it occurs as an isolated entity, the changes 
produced are potentially reversible.
Although chronic hypoxia is an established cause of 
pulmonary hypertension, it rarely leads to an increase 
in the systolic pulmonary artery pressure >50 mmHg. 
Polycythemia in response to the hypoxemia is a char-
acteristic finding. Hypoxia also may occur in conjunc-
tion with other causes of pulmonary hypertension 
associated with more extensive vascular changes. Clini-
cally, the hypoxia has an added adverse effect. Patients 
with chronic hypoxia who have a marked elevation in 
pulmonary pressure should be evaluated for the other 
causes of the pulmonary hypertension.
Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease
Chronic obstructive lung disease (COLD) is associated 
with mild pulmonary hypertension in the advanced stages. 
The factors leading to an increase in pulmonary vascular 
resistance are numerous, but alveolar hypoxia is consid-
ered the predominant one. The presence of pulmonary 
hypertension in patients with COLD confers a worse out-
come. The only effective therapy is supplemental oxygen. 
Clinical trials have documented that continuous oxygen 
therapy relieves the pulmonary vasoconstriction, reverses 
chronic ischemia throughout the systemic and pulmonary 
vascular beds, and improves survival. Long-term oxygen 
therapy is indicated if the resting arterial Po2 remains 
<55 mmHg. Pulmonary vasodilators can worsen gas 
exchange and should not be used.
Interstitial Lung Disease
Pulmonary hypertension is common in interstitial lung 
disease that results from parenchymal and vascular 
remodeling. Coexisting hypoxemia occurs frequently 
and contributes to morbidity. Interstitial lung disease 
often is associated with the collagen vascular diseases. Many 
patients have pulmonary fibrosis of unknown etiology. 
Patients are commonly older than 50 years and report 
an insidious onset of progressive dyspnea and cough 
for months to years. It is uncommon for the mean 
pulmonary artery pressure to exceed 40 mmHg. The 
pulmonary vasodilators approved for PAH have not 
been shown to be helpful.
Sleep-Disordered Breathing
The incidence of pulmonary hypertension in the setting 
of obstructive sleep apnea, a common condition, is <20% 
and is generally mild. Some patients have severe pulmonary 
hypertension in conjunction with sleep apnea, which may 
be unrelated. It is recommended that the sleep apnea and 
the PAH be treated as coexisting problems.
Alveolar Hypoventilation
Pulmonary hypertension can occur in patients with chronic 
hypoventilation and hypoxia secondary to thoracover-
tebral deformities. Symptoms are slowly progressive and 
are related to hypoxemia. In patients with advanced dis-
ease, intermittent positive-pressure breathing and sup-
plemental oxygen have been used successfully.
Pulmonary hypertension secondary to hypoxemia has 
been reported in patients with neuromuscular disease as 
a result of generalized weakness of the respiratory mus-
cles and in patients with diaphragmatic paralysis, gen-
erally from trauma to the phrenic nerve. Patients with 
nontraumatic bilateral diaphragmatic paralysis may go 
unrecognized until they present with either respiratory 
failure or pulmonary hypertension.
Pulmonary Hypertension Due  
to Thromboembolic Disease
Chronic Thromboembolic 
Pulmonary Hypertension
Most patients treated for acute pulmonary thrombo-
embolism with intravenous heparin and chronic oral 
warfarin do not develop chronic pulmonary hyperten-
sion. However, some patients have impaired fibrinolytic 
resolution of the thromboembolism, which leads to 
organization and incomplete recanalization and chronic 
obstruction of the pulmonary vascular bed. Because the 
initial pulmonary thromboembolism goes undetected 
or untreated, many patients are misdiagnosed as having 
IPAH. These patients may have underlying thrombo-
philic disorders, such as the lupus anticoagulant/anticar-
diolipin antibody syndrome, prothrombin gene mutation, 
or factor V Leiden.
Diagnosis
The physical examination is characteristic of pulmonary 
hypertension but may include bruits heard over areas 
of the lung, representing blood flow through vessels 
with partial occlusion. A perfusion lung scan or con-
trast-enhanced spiral CT scan should reveal multiple 
 
CHAPTER 40
Pulmonary Hypertension
497
thromboemboli. High-resolution CT scanning is nec-
essary to document the location and proximal extent 
of the thromboemboli and hence the potential for 
operability.
treatment	
Chronic Thromboembolic Pulmonary 
Hypertension
Pulmonary thromboendarterectomy is an established 
surgical treatment in patients whose thrombi are acces-
sible to surgical removal. The operative mortality is 
<10% in experienced centers. Postoperative survivors 
can expect an improvement in functional class and 
exercise tolerance. Lifelong anticoagulation using war-
farin is mandatory. Thrombolytic therapy is rarely help-
ful in patients with chronic thromboembolic pulmonary 
hypertension and may expose them to the increased 
risk of bleeding without potential benefit.
Other Disorders Affecting the 
Pulmonary Vasculature
Sarcoidosis
Sarcoidosis can produce pulmonary hypertension as 
a result of fibrocystic lung involvement or direct car-
diovascular involvement. Consequently, patients with 
sarcoidosis who present with progressive dyspnea and 
pulmonary hypertension require a thorough evalua-
tion. There is a subset of patients with sarcoidosis and 
severe pulmonary hypertension who exhibit a favorable 
response to epoprostenol therapy.
Sickle Cell Disease
Cardiovascular system abnormalities are prominent in 
the clinical spectrum of sickle cell disease, including 
pulmonary hypertension. The etiology is multifactorial, 
including hemolysis, hypoxemia, thromboembolism, 
chronic high cardiac output, and chronic liver disease. 
The presence of pulmonary hypertension in patients 
with sickle cell disease is associated with higher mortality. 
Intensification of sickle cell disease–specific therapy 
appears to reduce the morbidity. Clinical trials assessing 
drugs to treat pulmonary hypertension are ongoing, but 
the efficacy of those drugs is unknown.
Schistosomiasis
Although extremely rare in North America, 
schistosomiasis is one of the most common 
causes of pulmonary hypertension worldwide. 
The development of pulmonary hypertension occurs in 
the setting of hepatosplenic disease and portal hyperten-
sion. Studies suggest that inflammation from the infec-
tion triggers the pulmonary vascular changes that occur. 
The diagnosis is confirmed by finding the parasite ova 
in the urine or stools of patients with symptoms, which 
can be difficult. The efficacy of therapies directed 
toward pulmonary hypertension in these patients is 
unknown.
HIV Infection
The mechanism by which HIV infection produces pul-
monary hypertension is unknown. Although the inci-
dence is estimated at 1 per 200 cases, the marked rise in 
the prevalence of HIV infection worldwide could have 
a significant impact on the frequency with which these 
entities are seen in combination. The evaluation and treat-
ments are identical to those for IPAH. Treatment of the 
HIV infection does not appear to affect the severity or 
natural history of the underlying pulmonary hypertension.
This page intentionally left blank 
Cardiovascular 
Atlases
SECTION VI
 ary l. Goldberger 
500
 The electrocardiograms (ECGs) in this Atlas supple-
ment those illustrated in  Chap. 11 . The interpretations 
emphasize ﬁ ndings of speciﬁ c teaching value. 
 All of the ﬁ gures are from ECG Wave-Maven, 
Copyright 2003, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, 
 http://ecg.bidmc.harvard.edu . 
 The abbreviations used in this chapter are as follows: 
 AF—atrial ﬁ brillation 
 HCM—hypertrophic cardiomyopathy 
 ATLAS OF ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY 
 CHAPTER 41 
 LVH—left ventricular hypertrophy 
 MI—myocardial infarction 
 NSR—normal sinus rhythm 
 RBBB—right bundle branch block 
 RV—right ventricular 
 RVH—right ventricular hypertrophy 
 MyOCARdIAL ISCHEMIA ANd INFARCTION 
 Figure 41-1 
Anterior wall ischemia (deep T-wave inversions and ST-segment depressions in I, aVL, V 3 −V 6 ) in a patient with  LVH (increased 
voltage in V 2 −V 5 ). 
  I
  II
  III
  II
  aVR
  aVL
  aVF
  V1
  V2
  V3
  V4
  V5
  V6
 
CHAPTER 41
Atlas of Electrocardiography
501
Figure 41-2 
Acute anterolateral wall ischemia with ST elevations in V4−V6. Probable prior inferior MI with Q waves in leads II, III, and aVF.
  I
  II
  III
  II
  aVR
  aVL
  aVF
  V1
  V2
  V3
  V4
  V5
  V6
  I
  II
  III
  II
  aVR
  aVL
  aVF
  V1
  V2
  V3
  V4
  V5
  V6
Figure 41-3 
Acute lateral ischemia with ST elevations in I and aVL with probable reciprocal ST depressions inferiorly (II, III, and aVF). 
Ischemic ST depressions also in V3 and V4. Left atrial abnormality.
SECTION VI
Cardiovascular Atlases
502
Figure 41-4 
Sinus tachycardia. Marked ischemic ST-segment elevations in inferior limb leads (II, III, aVF) and laterally (V6) suggestive of 
acute inferolateral MI, and prominent ST-segment depressions with upright T waves in V1−V4 are consistent with associated 
acute posterior MI.
  I
  II
  III
  II
  aVR
  aVL
  aVF
  V1
  V2
  V3
  V4
  V5
  V6
Figure 41-5 
Acute, extensive anterior MI with marked ST elevations in I, aVL, V1−V6 and small pathologic Q waves in V3−V6. Marked 
reciprocal ST-segment depressions in III and aVF.
  I
  II
  III
  II
  aVR
  aVL
  aVF
  V1
  V2
  V3
  V4
  V5
  V6
 
CHAPTER 41
Atlas of Electrocardiography
503
Figure 41-6 
Acute anterior wall MI with ST elevations and Q waves in V1−V4 and aVL and reciprocal inferior ST depressions.
  I
  II
  III
  II
  aVR
  aVL
  aVF
  V1
  V2
  V3
  V4
  V5
  V6
Figure 41-7 
NSR with premature atrial complexes. RBBB; pathologic Q waves and ST elevation due to acute anterior/septal MI in V1−V3.
  I
  II
  III
  II
  aVR
  aVL
  aVF
  V1
  V2
  V3
  V4
  V5
  V6
SECTION VI
Cardiovascular Atlases
504
Figure 41-8 
Acute anteroseptal MI (Q waves and ST elevations in V1−V4) with RBBB (note terminal R waves in V1).
  I
  II
  III
  II
  aVR
  aVL
  aVF
  V1
  V2
  V3
  V4
  V5
  V6
Figure 41-9 
Extensive prior MI involving inferior-posterior-lateral wall (Q waves in leads II, III, aVF, tall R waves in V1, V2, and Q waves in 
V5, V6). T-wave abnormalities in leads I and aVL, V5, and V6.
  I
  II
  III
  II
  aVR
  aVL
  aVF
  V1
  V2
  V3
  V4
  V5
  V6
 
CHAPTER 41
Atlas of Electrocardiography
505
Figure 41-10 
NSR with PR prolongation (“1st-degree AV block”), left atrial abnormality, LVH, and RBBB. Pathologic Q waves in V1−V5 and 
aVL with ST elevations (a chronic finding in this patient). Findings compatible with prior anterolateral MI and LV aneurysm.
  I
  II
  III
  II
  aVR
  aVL
  aVF
  V1
  V2
  V3
  V4
  V5
  V6
Figure 41-11 
Prior inferior-posterior MI. Wide (0.04 s) Q waves in the inferior leads (II, III, aVF); broad R wave in V1 (a Q wave “equivalent” 
here). Absence of right-axis deviation and the presence of upright T waves in V1−V2 are also against RVH.
  I
  II
  III
  II
  aVR
  aVL
  aVF
  V1
  V2
  V3
  V4
  V5
  V6
SECTION VI
Cardiovascular Atlases
506
Figure 41-12 
NSR with RBBB (broad terminal R wave in V1) and left anterior fascicular block (hemiblock) and pathologic anterior Q waves in 
V1−V3. Patient had severe multivessel coronary artery disease, with echocardiogram showing septal dyskinesis and apical 
akinesis.
  I
  II
  III
  II
  aVR
  aVL
  aVF
  V1
  V2
  V3
  V4
  V5
  V6
Figure 41-13 
Acute pericarditis with diffuse ST elevations in I, II, III, aVF, V3−V6, without T-wave inversions. Also note concomitant 
PR-segment elevation in aVR and PR depression in the inferolateral leads.
  I
  II
  III
  II
  aVR
  aVL
  aVF
  V1
  V2
  V3
  V4
  V5
  V6
Pericarditis
 
CHAPTER 41
Atlas of Electrocardiography
507
Figure 41-14 
Sinus rhythm; diffuse ST elevations (I, II, aVL, aVF, V2−V6) with associated PR deviations (elevated PR in aVR; depressed in 
V4−V6); borderline low voltage. Q-wave and T-wave inversions in II, III, and aVF. Diagnosis: acute pericarditis with inferior 
Q-wave MI.
  I
  II
  III
  II
  aVR
  aVL
  aVF
  V1
  V2
  V3
  V4
  V5
  V6
Figure 41-15 
NSR, prominent left atrial abnormality (see I, II, V1), right-axis deviation and RVH (tall, relatively narrow R wave in V1) in a patient 
with mitral stenosis.
  I
  II
  III
  II
  aVR
  aVL
  aVF
  V1
  V2
  V3
  V4
  V5
  V6
Valvular Heart Disease and Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy
SECTION VI
Cardiovascular Atlases
508
Figure 41-16 
NSR, left atrial abnormality, and LVH by voltage criteria with borderline right-axis deviation in a patient with mixed mitral stenosis 
(left atrial abnormality and right-axis deviation) and mitral regurgitation (LVH). Prominent precordial T-wave inversions and QT 
prolongation also present.
  I
  II
  III
  II
  aVR
  aVL
  aVF
  V1
  V2
  V3
  V4
  V5
  V6
Figure 41-17 
Coarse AF, tall R in V2 with vertical QRS axis (positive R in aVF) indicating RVH. Tall R in V4 may be due to concomitant LVH. 
Patient had severe mitral stenosis with moderate mitral regurgitation.
  I
  II
  III
  II
  aVR
  aVL
  aVF
  V1
  V2
  V3
  V4
  V5
  V6
 
CHAPTER 41
Atlas of Electrocardiography
509
Figure 41-18 
NSR; first-degree A-V “block” (P-R prolongation); LVH (tall R in aVL); RBBB (wide multiphasic R wave in V1) and left anterior 
fascicular block in a patient with HCM. Deep Q waves in I and aVL are consistent with septal hypertrophy.
  I
  II
  III
  II
  aVR
  aVL
  aVF
  V1
  V2
  V3
  V4
  V5
  V6
Figure 41-19 
LVH with deep T-wave inversions in limb leads and precordial leads. Striking T-wave inversions in mid-precordial leads suggest 
apical HCM (Yamaguchi’s syndrome).
  I
  II
  III
  II
  aVR
  aVL
  aVF
  V1
  V2
  V3
  V4
  V5
  V6
SECTION VI
Cardiovascular Atlases
510
Figure 41-20 
Sinus tachycardia with S1Q3T3 pattern (T-wave inversion in III), incomplete RBBB, and right precordial T-wave inversions 
consistent with acute RV overload in a patient with pulmonary emboli.
  I
  II
  III
  II
  aVR
  aVL
  aVF
  V1
  V2
  V3
  V4
  V5
  V6
Figure 41-21 
Sinus tachycardia, right-axis deviation, RVH with tall R in V1 and deep S in V6 and inverted T waves in II, III, aVF, and V1−V5 in a 
patient with atrial septal defect and severe pulmonary hypertension.
  I
  II
  III
  II
  aVR
  aVL
  aVF
  V1
  V2
  V3
  V4
  V5
  V6
Pulmonary Embolism and Chronic Pulmonary Hypertension
 
CHAPTER 41
Atlas of Electrocardiography
511
Figure 41-22 
Signs of right atrial/RV overload in a patient with chronic obstructive lung disease: (1) peaked P waves in II; (2) QR in V1 with 
narrow QRS; (3) delayed precordial transition, with terminal S waves in V5/V6; (4) superior axis deviation with an S1-S2-S3 pattern.
  I
  II
  III
  II
  aVR
  aVL
  aVF
  V1
  V2
  V3
  V4
  V5
  V6
Figure 41-23 
(1) Low voltage; (2) incomplete RBBB (rsr’ in V1−V3); (3) borderline peaked P waves in lead II with vertical P-wave axis (prob-
able right atrial overload); (4) slow R-wave progression in V1−V3; (5) prominent S waves in V6; and (6) atrial premature beats. This 
combination is seen typically in severe chronic obstructive lung disease.
  I
  II
  III
  II
  aVR
  aVL
  aVF
  V1
  V2
  V3
  V4
  V5
  V6
SECTION VI
Cardiovascular Atlases
512
Electrolyte Disorders
Figure 41-24 
Prominent U waves (II, III, and V4−V6) with ventricular repolarization prolongation in a patient with severe hypokalemia.
  I
  II
  III
  II
  aVR
  aVL
  aVF
  V1
  V2
  V3
  V4
  V5
  V6
Figure 41-25 
Abbreviated ST segment such that the T wave looks like it takes off directly from QRS in some leads (I, V4, aVL, and V5) in a 
patient with severe hypercalcemia. Note also high takeoff of ST segment in V2/V3 simulating acute ischemia.
  I
  II
  III
  II
  aVR
  aVL
  aVF
  V1
  V2
  V3
  V4
  V5
  V6
 
CHAPTER 41
Atlas of Electrocardiography
513
Miscellaneous
Figure 41-26 
NSR with LVH, left atrial abnormality, and tall peaked T waves in the precordial leads with inferolateral ST depressions (II, III, aVF, 
and V6); left anterior fascicular block and borderline prolonged QT interval in a patient with renal failure, hypertension, and 
hyperkalemia; prolonged QT is secondary to associated hypocalcemia.
  I
  II
  III
  II
  aVR
  aVL
  aVF
  V1
  V2
  V3
  V4
  V5
  V6
Figure 41-27 
Normal ECG in an 11-year-old male. T-wave inversions in V1−V2. Vertical QRS axis (+90°) and early precordial transition between 
V2 and V3 are normal findings in children.
  I
  II
  III
  II
  aVR
  aVL
  aVF
  V1
  V2
  V3
  V4
  V5
  V6
SECTION VI
Cardiovascular Atlases
514
Figure 41-28 
Left atrial abnormality and LVH in a patient with long-standing hypertension.
  I
  II
  III
  II
  aVR
  aVL
  aVF
  V1
  V2
  V3
  V4
  V5
  V6
Figure 41-29 
Normal variant ST-segment elevations in a healthy 21-year-old male (commonly referred to as benign early repolarization 
pattern). ST elevations exhibit upward concavity and are most apparent in V3 and V4, and less than 1 mm in the limb leads. 
Precordial QRS voltages are prominent, but within normal limits for a young adult. No evidence of left atrial abnormality or ST 
depression/T wave inversions to go along with LVH.
  I
  II
  III
  II
  aVR
  aVL
  aVF
  V1
  V2
  V3
  V4
  V5
  V6
 
CHAPTER 41
Atlas of Electrocardiography
515
Figure 41-30 
NSR with first-degree AV “block” (PR interval = 0.24 s) and complete left bundle branch block.
  I
  II
  III
  II
  aVR
  aVL
  aVF
  V1
  V2
  V3
  V4
  V5
  V6
Figure 41-31 
Dextrocardia with: (1) inverted P waves in I and aVL; (2) negative QRS complex and T wave in I; and (3) progressively decreasing 
voltage across the precordium.
  I
  II
  III
  II
  aVR
  aVL
  aVF
  V1
  V2
  V3
  V4
  V5
  V6
SECTION VI
Cardiovascular Atlases
516
Figure 41-32 
Sinus tachycardia; intraventricular conduction delay (IVCD) with a rightward QRS axis. QT interval is prolonged for the rate. The 
triad of sinus tachycardia, a wide QRS complex, and a long QT in appropriate clinical context suggests tricyclic antidepressant 
overdose. Terminal S wave (rS) in I, and terminal R wave (qR) in aVR are also noted as part of this IVCD variant.
  I
  II
  III
  II
  aVR
  aVL
  aVF
  V1
  V2
  V3
  V4
  V5
  V6
517
 ATLAS OF NONINVASIVE CARDIAC IMAGING 
 CHAPTER 42 
 Rick A Nishimura 
I  Panithya Chareonthaitawee 
I  Matthew Martinez 
 ECHOCARDIOGRAPHIC IMAGES 
 All videos can be accessed via the following link:
http://www.mhprofessional.com/mediacenter/. 
 Video 42-1  Real-time two-dimensional echocardiographic 
images of a patient with a normal heart.  A. Parasternal long-
axis view.  B. Parasternal short-axis view. There is symmet-
ric contraction of the ventricles, evidenced by a decrease 
in cavity size and increase in wall thickness during systole. 
Echocardiographic imaging is performed in multiple acoustic 
windows with different transducer rotations so that the entire 
heart and great vessels can be displayed in various planes. 
Most information from a study is obtained from visual analysis 
of the two-dimensional images, although objective measure-
ments of cardiac dimensions can be made. 
 Video 42-2  Real-time two-dimensional echocardiographic 
images of a patient with a severe decrease in left ventricu-
lar systolic function. The estimated ejection fraction is 20%. 
 A. Parasternal long-axis view.  B. Parasternal short-axis view. 
 Video 42-3  Real-time two-dimensional echocardiographic 
images of a patient with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. There 
is a marked increase in left ventricular wall thickness with 
hyperdynamic systolic function.  A. Parasternal long-axis 
view.  B. Parasternal short-axis view. 
 Video 42-4  Real-time two-dimensional parasternal long-
axis images from a patient with aortic stenosis. There 
is normal left ventricular cavity size with normal systolic 
function. The aortic valve is thickened and calciﬁ ed, with 
restricted opening. 
 Video 42-5  Real-time two-dimensional echocardiographic 
images of a patient with mitral stenosis. There is diastolic 
doming and restricted leaﬂ et opening secondary to fusion of 
the commissures.  A. Parasternal long-axis view.  B. Parasternal 
short-axis view. 
 Video 42-6  Real-time two-dimensional echocardiographic 
images from the parasternal long-axis view of a patient with 
mitral valve prolapse. During systole, both anterior and pos-
terior leaﬂ et of the mitral valve prolapse into the left atrium. 
A. Gray-scale images demonstrate a leaﬂ et morphology 
and motion.  B. Color ﬂ ow imaging demonstrating late sys-
tolic blue-colored jet of mitral regurgitation. Abnormalities 
of the valve apparatus such as annular dilatation, prolapse, 
ﬂ ail leaﬂ ets, vegetation, and rheumatic involvement can be 
diagnosed by two-dimensional echocardiography. The left 
ventricular response to volume overload can be assessed 
by two-dimensional echocardiography. 
 Video 42-7  Real-time two-dimensional images with color 
ﬂ ow Doppler imaging of a patient with mitral regurgitation 
due to ruptured chordae tendineae.  A. Gray-scale image 
showing a thickened redundant posterior leaﬂ et of the 
mitral valve with loss of coaptation during systole.  B . Color 
ﬂ ow imaging showing severe mitral regurgitation as high 
velocity turbulence (mosaic pattern) extending into the left 
atrium during systole. 
 Video 42-8 Real-time transesophageal echocardiographic 
images of a patient with severe mitral regurgitation due 
to a ﬂ ail posterior leaﬂ et. The posterior mitral valve leaﬂ et 
is completely unsupported and moves into the left atrium 
during systole. Transesophageal echocardiography provides 
high-resolution images of posterior structure such as the left 
atrium, mitral valve, and aorta. 
 Video 42-9  Real-time two-dimensional echocardiographic 
images of a patient with a vegetation on the mitral valve. There 
is a mobile echo density attached directly to the mitral valve 
apparatus that intermittently appears in the left atrium. 
 Video 42-10  Real-time transesophageal echocardiographic 
images of a patient with a left atrial myxoma. There is a 
large echo-dense mass in the left atrium that is attached to 
the atrial septum. The mass moves across the mitral valve 
during diastole. Although an echocardiographic image can-
not provide pathologic conﬁ rmation of the etiology of a 
mass, the diagnosis of atrial myxoma can be suspected 
from the appearance, mobility, and attachment to the atrial 
septum. 
 Video 42-11  Real-time two-dimensional echocardiographic 
images from the parasternal long-axis view of a patient with 
a large aneurysm of the ascending aorta. 
SECTION VI
Cardiovascular Atlases
518
Video 42-12  Real-time two-dimensional echocardiographic 
images of a patient with pericardial effusion. The effusion is 
shown as a black echo-free space surrounding the heart.
Video 42-13  Real-time two-dimensional echocardiographic 
images from a subcostal view showing a large secundum 
atrial septal defect. There is a “drop out” in the region of the 
mid atrial septum. The right ventricle is enlarged from right 
ventricular volume overload.
Video 42-14  Real-time two-dimensional echocardiographic 
images showing a close-up view of the atrial septum in a 
patient with the question of an atrial septal defect. A. Gray-
scale image showing a questionable “drop out” in the atrial 
septum. B. Color flow imaging confirms left to right flow 
across the atrial septum.
Video 42-15  Real-time two-dimensional stress echocardio-
gram in a normal subject. The studies at rest are shown on 
the left and the studies during peak exercise are shown on the 
right. A. Parasternal long-axis (top) and short-axis (bottom) 
views. B. Apical four-chamber (top) and two-chamber (bottom) 
Figure 42-1
Anterior planar thallium images following stress, showing increased lung uptake on the left (count intensity in lung >50% of 
that in myocardium) and normal lung uptake on the right (count intensity in lung <50% of that in myocardium).
Increased lung uptake of thallium may be seen immediately after stress. It reflects increased pulmonary capillary wedge 
pressure and occurs in the presence of severe coronary artery disease and/or left ventricular systolic dysfunction. It provides 
important adverse prognostic information that is incremental to other clinical, stress, and coronary angiographic variables.
views. At rest, there is contraction of all segments of the myo-
cardium. During exercise, there is an increase in contractility 
and in the thickening of all segments of the myocardium with 
a decrease in end-systolic volume.
Video 42-16  Real-time two-dimensional stress echo-
cardiogram of a patient with coronary artery disease. The 
studies at rest are shown on the left and studies dur-
ing peak exercise are shown on the right. A. Parasternal 
long-axis (top) and short-axis (bottom) views. B. Apical 
four-chamber (top) and two-chamber (bottom) views. The 
images during peak exercise show regional wall motion 
abnormalities in the anteroseptal distribution indicative 
of myocardial ischemia. This was subsequently found to 
be associated with a high-grade lesion on the left anterior 
descending artery.
Nuclear Images
 
CHAPTER 42
Atlas of Noninvasive Cardiac Imaging
519
Figure 42-3
Mesh cinegraphic display of images obtained from electrocardiographic gating of a SPECT 99mTc sestamibi scan in a 
64-year-old male patient with a previous infarct (same patient as in Fig. 42-2). Gated images are generally acquired about 
30–45 min following stress. Electrocardiographic gating allows calculation of left ventricular volumes and global systolic func-
tion, as well as visual assessment of regional wall motion. In this patient, the calculated left ventricular ejection fraction was 
13%. There was severe global hypokinesis.
Figure 42-2
Exercise SPECT 99mTc sestamibi scan in a 64-year-old male patient with a previous infarct. The stress images (left) show 
a large defect involving the apex, anterior, septal, and inferior walls (arrowheads) with little change from the rest images (right), 
signifying a fixed defect consistent with infarction. There is also severe left ventricular enlargement and severely reduced left 
ventricular systolic function by gated images (next image). The relative advantage of 201Tl and 99mTc are detailed in Table e20-1 
of Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 17th edition. The better image quality and assessment of ventricular function 
permitted by 99mTc compounds have contributed to their more common use for stress imaging, although both 201Tl- and 
99mTc-labeled compounds provide clinically useful myocardial perfusion images in the majority of patients. A “dual-isotope” 
protocol is employed in some centers. This uses 201Tl for the initial rest image and a 99mTc-labeled compound for the subsequent 
stress image, primarily for patient and scheduling convenience. SPECT, single-photon emission computed tomography; 99mTc, 
technetium 99m.
SECTION VI
Cardiovascular Atlases
520
Figure 42-5 
MR image of a patient with a right ventricular myxoma, which is shown as a bright oblong structure in the right ventricular out-
flow tract.
MRI/CT Images
Video 42-17  MRI scan in real time of a patient with a large left 
ventricular apical aneurysm. The long-axis view demonstrates 
Figure 42-4 
Adenosine PET N-13 ammonia in a 55-year-old obese male patient with typical angina. The stress images (left) show a 
large defect involving the apex, anterior, septal, inferior, and lateral walls (arrowheads) with normal or near-normal tracer uptake 
in the corresponding regions on the rest images (arrowheads), signifying a reversible defect consistent with ischemia. The 
patient was found to have severe multivessel coronary artery disease on subsequent invasive angiography.
The robust methods for attenuation correction with PET improve the specificity, particularly in obese populations and women, 
while the superior resolution and higher extraction fraction of PET tracers increase the sensitivity of detection of coronary artery 
disease. The excellent image quality of PET has contributed to their emerging use for stress imaging. Additional advantages 
include assessment of left ventricular volumes and systolic function, shorter imaging protocols, and lower radiation exposure, 
particularly with N-13 ammonia.
PET, positron emission tomography; SPECT, single-photon emission computed tomography.
a thin dyskinetic apical aneurysm with a preserved systolic 
function of the basal anterior and basal inferior wall. MRI 
scanning allows excellent visualization of the endocardial 
border.
 
CHAPTER 42
Atlas of Noninvasive Cardiac Imaging
521
Figure 42-6 
MR image with contrast enhancement of a patient with a large apical aneurysm and thrombus. Imaging the heart 10–20 min 
after gadolinium injection demonstrates enhancement of the infarcted tissue (visible as dense white image). The infarcted tissue 
retains contrast by virtual of its large extracellular volume. The left ventricular thrombus adherent to the infarcted myocardium is 
shown as a dark laminated area adjacent to the white myocardium.
Figure 42-7 
MR images with contrast enhancement in a patient with acute pericarditis. In the presence of pericardial inflammation, the gado-
linium enhancement occurs, seen as a white layer in the pericardium.
Video 42-18  Cine MRI scan of a patient with a dilated 
ascending aorta (annulo-aortic ectasia). There is a central 
jet of aortic regurgitation entering the left ventricular outflow 
tract.
SECTION VI
Cardiovascular Atlases
522
Figure 42-8 
Three-dimensional reconstruction of a CT angiogram, showing a severe coarctation of the descending aorta. The large collateral 
vessels are the result of the severe stenosis of the distal thoracic aorta.
A
B
Figure 42-9 
Three-dimensional reconstruction of a CT angiogram of the pulmonary veins, demonstrating an anomalous pulmonary venous 
drainage into the inferior vena cava. A. Frontal view. B. Posterior view.
 
CHAPTER 42
Atlas of Noninvasive Cardiac Imaging
523
Figure 42-11 
Noncontrast image from an electron beam CT revealing 
two small foci of calcification in the left anterior descending 
artery (arrows).
Figure 42-12 
CT image from a patient with calcific constrictive pericarditis. 
Calcification is seen as a bright signal in the anterior pericar-
dium as well as calcification extending into the lateral wall of 
the left ventricle.
Figure 42-10 
Cardiac CT images demonstrating a calcified mass in the right ventricle, which at pathologic examination was a chronic thrombus. 
Calcification is seen as a bright signal in both the noncontrast (upper) and contrast-enhanced (lower) images.
SECTION VI
Cardiovascular Atlases
524
Video 42-19  CT coronary angiogram showing a normal 
right coronary artery. The video highlights multiple thin slices 
through the right coronary artery.
Figure 42-13 
A reconstructed CT coronary angiogram showing a normal right coronary artery.
Figure 42-14 
Three-dimensional reconstruction of a CT angiogram showing a large fistula of the left anterior descending artery.
 
CHAPTER 42
Atlas of Noninvasive Cardiac Imaging
525
Figure 42-15 
Three-dimensional reconstruction of a CT angiogram demonstrating three saphenous vein coronary artery bypass grafts in dif-
ferent views. In the upper left-hand panel is an anterior posterior view of the heart and grafts. The heart is sequentially rotated 
clockwise in the panels going from left to right to illustrate the ability of CT angiography to visualize the saphenous vein grafts. 
RCA, saphenous vein graft to the right coronary artery; CX, saphenous vein graft to the circumflex artery; DIAG, saphenous vein 
graft to the diagonal artery.
 Ary L. Goldberger 
526
 The electrocardiograms in this Atlas supplement those 
illustrated in Chaps. 15 and 16. The interpretations 
emphasize ﬁ ndings of speciﬁ c teaching value. 
 All of the ﬁ gures are adapted from cases in ECG 
Wave-Maven, Copyright 2003, Beth Israel Deaconess 
Medical Center,  http://ecg.bidmc.harvard.edu . 
 The abbreviations used in this chapter are as follows: 
 AF—atrial ﬁ brillation 
 AV—atrioventricular 
 AVRT—atrioventricular reentrant tachycardia 
 LBBB—left bundle branch block 
 LV—left ventricular 
 LVH—left ventricular hypertrophy 
 MI—myocardial infarction 
 NSR—normal sinus rhythm 
 RBBB—right bundle branch block 
 VT—ventricular tachycardia 
 WPW—Wolff-Parkinson-White 
 ATLAS OF CARDIAC ARRHYTHMIAS 
 CHAPTER 43 
  I
  II
  III
  II
  aVR
  aVL
  aVF
  V1
  V2
  V3
  V4
  V5
  V6
 Figure 43-1  
 Respiratory sinus arrhythmia, a physiologic fi nding in a healthy young adult. The rate of the sinus pacemaker is relatively slow 
at the beginning of the strip during expiration, then accelerates during inspiration and slows again with expiration. Changes are 
due to cardiac vagal tone modulation with breathing. 
 
CHAPTER 43
Atlas of Cardiac Arrhythmias
527
  I
  II
  III
  II
  aVR
  aVL
  aVF
  V1
  V2
  V3
  V4
  V5
  V6
Figure 43-2 
Sinus tachycardia (110/min) with first-degree AV “block” (conduction delay) with PR interval = 0.28 s. The P wave is visible after 
the ST-T wave in V1−V3 and superimposed on the T wave in other leads. Atrial (nonsinus) tachycardias may produce a similar 
pattern, but the rate is usually faster.
Figure 43-3 
Sinus rhythm (P wave rate about 60/min) with 2:1 AV (second-degree) block causing marked bradycardia (ventricular rate of 
about 30/min). LVH is also present.
  I
  II
  III
  II
  aVR
  aVL
  aVF
  V1
  V2
  V3
  V4
  V5
  V6
SECTION VI
Cardiovascular Atlases
528
  I
  II
  III
  II
  aVR
  aVL
  aVF
  V1
  V2
  V3
  V4
  V5
  V6
Figure 43-5 
Marked junctional bradycardia (25 beats/min). Rate is regular with a flat baseline between narrow QRS complexes, without 
evident P waves. Patient was on atenolol, with possible underlying sick sinus syndrome.
  I
  II
  III
  II
  aVR
  aVL
  aVF
  V1
  V2
  V3
  V4
  V5
  V6
Figure 43-4 
Sinus rhythm (P wave rate about 60/min) with 2:1 (second-degree) AV block yielding a ventricular (pulse) rate of about 30/min. 
Left atrial abnormality. RBBB with left anterior fascicular block. Possible inferior MI.
 
CHAPTER 43
Atlas of Cardiac Arrhythmias
529
  I
  II
  III
  II
  aVR
  aVL
  aVF
  V1
  V2
  V3
  V4
  V5
  V6
Figure 43-7 
Sinus rhythm at a rate of 90/min with advanced second-degree AV block and possible transient complete heart block with 
Lyme carditis.
  I
  II
  III
  II
  aVR
  aVL
  aVF
  V1
  V2
  V3
  V4
  V5
  V6
Figure 43-6 
Sinus rhythm at a rate of 64/min (P wave rate) with third-degree (complete) AV block yielding an effective heart (pulse) rate of 
40/min. The slow, narrow QRS complexes indicate an A-V junctional escape pacemaker. Left atrial abnormality.
SECTION VI
Cardiovascular Atlases
530
  I
  II
  III
  II
  aVR
  aVL
  aVF
  V1
  V2
  V3
  V4
  V5
  V6
Figure 43-8 
Multifocal atrial tachycardia with varying P-wave morphologies and P-P intervals; right atrial overload with peaked 
P waves in II, III, and aVF (with vertical P wave axis); superior QRS axis; slow R-wave progression with delayed transition in 
precordial leads in patient with severe chronic obstructive lung disease.
Figure 43-9 
NSR in a patient with Parkinson’s disease. Tremor artifact, best seen in limb leads. This tremor artifact may sometimes be 
confused with atrial flutter/fibrillation. Borderline voltage criteria for LVH are present.
  I
  II
  III
  II
  aVR
  aVL
  aVF
  V1
  V2
  V3
  V4
  V5
  V6
 
CHAPTER 43
Atlas of Cardiac Arrhythmias
531
  I
  II
  III
  II
  aVR
  aVL
  aVF
  V1
  V2
  V3
  V4
  V5
  V6
Figure 43-10 
Atrial tachycardia with atrial rate of about 200/min (note lead V1), 2:1 AV block (conduction), and one premature ventricular 
complex. Also present: LVH with intraventricular conduction delay and slow precordial R-wave progression (cannot rule out 
prior anterior MI).
Figure 43-11 
Atrial tachycardia with 2:1 block. P-wave rate is about 150/min, with ventricular (QRS) rate of about 75/min. The noncon-
ducted (“extra”) P waves just after the QRS complex are best seen in lead V1. Also, note incomplete RBBB and borderline QT 
prolongation.
  I
  II
  III
  II
  aVR
  aVL
  aVF
  V1
  V2
  V3
  V4
  V5
  V6
SECTION VI
Cardiovascular Atlases
532
Figure 43-13 
AV nodal reentrant tachycardia (AVNRT) at a rate of 150/min. Note subtle “pseudo” R waves in lead aVR due to retrograde 
atrial activation, which occurs nearly simultaneous with ventricles in AVNRT. Left-axis deviation consistent with left anterior 
fascicular block (hemiblock) is also present.
  I
  II
  III
  II
  aVR
  aVL
  aVF
  V1
  V2
  V3
  V4
  V5
  V6
Figure 43-12 
Atrial tachycardia (180/min with 2:1 AV block [see lead V1]). LVH by precordial voltage and nonspecific ST-T changes. Slow 
R-wave progression (V1−V4) raises consideration of prior anterior MI.
  I
  II
  III
  II
  aVR
  aVL
  aVF
  V1
  V2
  V3
  V4
  V5
  V6
 
CHAPTER 43
Atlas of Cardiac Arrhythmias
533
  I
  II
  III
  II
  aVR
  aVL
  aVF
  V1
  V2
  V3
  V4
  V5
  V6
Figure 43-14 
Atrial flutter with 2:1 AV conduction. Note atrial flutter waves, partly hidden in the early ST segment, seen, for example, in 
leads II and V1.
  I
  II
  III
  II
  aVR
  aVL
  aVF
  V1
  V2
  V3
  V4
  V5
  V6
Figure 43-15 
Atrial flutter with atrial rate 300/min and variable (predominant 2:1 and 3:1) AV conduction. Typical flutter waves best seen 
in lead II.
SECTION VI
Cardiovascular Atlases
534
  I
  II
  III
  II
  aVR
  aVL
  aVF
  V1
  V2
  V3
  V4
  V5
  V6
Figure 43-17 
AF with LBBB. The ventricular rhythm is erratically irregular. Coarse fibrillatory waves are best seen in lead V1, with a typical 
LBBB pattern.
  I
  II
  III
  II
  aVR
  aVL
  aVF
  V1
  V2
  V3
  V4
  V5
  V6
Figure 43-16 
Wide complex tachycardia. Atrial flutter with 2:1 AV conduction (block) and LBBB, not to be mistaken for VT. Typical atrial 
flutter activity is clearly present in lead II at a cycle rate of about 320/min, with an effective ventricular rate of about 160/min.
 
CHAPTER 43
Atlas of Cardiac Arrhythmias
535
  I
  II
  III
  II
  aVR
  aVL
  aVF
  V1
  V2
  V3
  V4
  V5
  V6
Figure 43-19 
AF with right-axis deviation and LVH. Tracing suggests biventricular hypertrophy in a patient with mitral stenosis and aortic 
valve disease.
  I
  II
  III
  II
  aVR
  aVL
  aVF
  V1
  V2
  V3
  V4
  V5
  V6
Figure 43-18 
AF with complete heart block and a junctional escape mechanism causing a slow regular ventricular response (45/min). The 
QRS complexes show an intraventricular conduction delay with left-axis deviation and LVH. Q-T (U) prolongation is also present.
SECTION VI
Cardiovascular Atlases
536
  I
  II
  III
  II
  aVR
  aVL
  aVF
  V1
  V2
  V3
  V4
  V5
  V6
Figure 43-20 
WPW pre-excitation pattern, with triad of short PR, wide QRS, and delta waves. Polarity of the delta waves (slightly positive in 
leads V1 and V2 and most positive in lead II and lateral chest leads) is consistent with a right-sided bypass tract.
  I
  II
  III
  II
  aVR
  aVL
  aVF
  V1
  V2
  V3
  V4
  V5
  V6
Figure 43-21 
AF in patient with the WPW syndrome and antegrade conduction down the bypass tract leading to a wide complex tachycardia. 
Rhythm is “irregularly irregular” and rate is extremely rapid (about 230/min). Not all beats are pre-excited.
 
CHAPTER 43
Atlas of Cardiac Arrhythmias
537
  I
  II
  III
  II
  aVR
  aVL
  aVF
  V1
  V2
  V3
  V4
  V5
  V6
Figure 43-23 
Prolonged (0.60 s) QT interval in a patient with hereditary long-QT syndrome.
Figure 43-22 
Accelerated idioventricular rhythm (AIVR) originating from the LV and accounting for RBBB morphology. ST elevations in the 
precordial leads from underlying acute MI.
  I
  II
  III
  II
  aVR
  aVL
  aVF
  V1
  V2
  V3
  V4
  V5
  V6
SECTION VI
Cardiovascular Atlases
538
  I
  II
  III
  II
  aVR
  aVL
  aVF
  V1
  V2
  V3
  V4
  V5
  V6
Figure 43-24 
Monomorphic VT at rate of 170/min. The RBBB morphology in V1 and the R:S ratio <1 in V6 are both suggestive of VT. The 
morphology of the VT is suggestive of origin from the left side of the heart, near the base (RBBB with inferior/rightward axis). 
Baseline artifact is present in leads V1−V3.
 Jane A. Leopold  I   Deepak L. Bhatt  I   David P. Faxon 
539
 Percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) is the most 
widely employed coronary revascularization procedure 
worldwide ( Chap. 36 ). It is now applied to patients with 
stable angina, acute coronary syndromes, including unsta-
ble angina and non-ST-segment elevation myocardial 
infarction (NSTEMI), and as a primary treatment strategy 
in patients with ST-segment elevation myocardial infarc-
tion (STEMI). PCI is also applicable to patients with 
either single- or multivessel disease. 
 In this chapter, the use of PCI will be illustrated in a 
variety of commonly encountered clinical and anatomic 
situations such as chronic total occlusion of a coronary 
artery, bifurcation disease, acute STEMI, saphenous vein 
graft disease, left main coronary artery disease, multives-
sel disease, and stent thrombosis. In addition, the use of 
interventional techniques to treat structural heart disease 
will be shown, including closure of an atrial septal defect 
(ASD) and percutaneous aortic valve implantation; the 
latter is approved in Europe but is under active investi-
gation in clinical trials in the United States and not yet 
approved for use. 
 CASE 1: CHRONIC TOTAL OCCLUSION 
 ( Videos 44-1 to  44-7 can be accessed at the following link: 
http://www.mhprofessional.com/mediacenter/ )
•  An 81-year-old man with angina, NYHA class IV 
congestive heart failure and inferior-apical-posterior 
ischemia on an exercise technetium-99m scan. 
•  Diagnostic cardiac catheterization revealed a left 
dominant system with a totally occluded left circum-
fl ex (LCx) artery. The distal LCx fi lled via collaterals 
from the left anterior descending (LAD) artery, indi-
cating chronicity of the total occlusion. 
 ATLAS OF PERCUTANEOUS 
REVASCULARIZATION 
 CHAPTER 44 
 Video 44-1  Baseline left coronary angiogram shows an 
occluded LCx with left-to-left collaterals originating from LAD 
septal vessels. 
 Video 44-2  Attempts to cross the total occlusion in the 
LCx using a hydrophilic wire and an antegrade approach 
were not successful, with the wire tracking to the right of the 
trajectory. 
 Video 44-3  The LAD septal collateral is accessed with a 
guidewire and directed toward the distal LCx to cross the 
total occlusion retrograde. 
Video 44-4  The total occlusion is crossed retrograde. The 
wire is snared in the guide, exteriorized, and used to provide 
antegrade access to the LCx. 
Video 44-5  Antegrade fl ow in the LCx is restored after 
balloon infl ation. 
Video 44-6  Following stenting of the total occlusion, blood 
fl ow in the distal vessel is improved and a second signifi cant 
stenosis is seen. 
 Video 44-7  Final result after LCx stenting. 
 SUmmARy 
•  Approximately 15–30% of all patients referred for car-
diac catheterization will have a chronic total occlu-
sion (CTO) of a coronary artery. 
•  CTO often leads to a surgical referral for complete 
revascularization. 
•  Incomplete revascularization due to an untreated 
CTO is associated with an increased mortality rate 
(Hazard Ratio = 1.36, 95% CI = 1.12–1.66,  p < 
0.05). 
•  Successful PCI of a CTO leads to a 3.8–8.4% absolute 
reduction in mortality, symptom relief, and improved 
left ventricular function. 
SECTION VI
Cardiovascular Atlases
540
• Newer techniques, such as the retrograde approach 
to crossing total occlusions, are useful when the ante-
grade approach fails, or is not feasible, and there are 
well-developed collateral vessels.
(Case contributed with permission by Dr. Frederick G. P. 
Welt.)
CASE 2: BIFURCATION STENTING
(Fig. 44-1; Videos 44-8 to 44-16 can be accessed at 
the following link: http://www.mhprofessional.com/
mediacenter/)
• A 52-year-old man with an acute coronary syn-
drome and a troponin I = 0.18 (upper limit normal 
≥0.04).
• Diagnostic cardiac catheterization showed single-
vessel coronary artery disease with a significant steno-
sis in the mid-LAD and a bifurcation lesion involving 
a large diagonal branch.
Video 44-8  Baseline angiogram of the left coronary circula-
tion shows the significant stenosis in the mid-LAD and the 
bifurcation lesion involving a large diagonal branch.
Video 44-9  Both vessels are accessed with guidewires and 
pretreated with balloon angioplasty.
Video 44-10  Result after balloon angioplasty.
Video 44-11  Stent being positioned in the LAD.
Video 44-12  LAD post-stent result.
Video 44-13  Stent deployed in diagonal branch through the 
stent struts in the LAD using the “culotte” technique.
Video 44-14  Diagonal branch post-stent result.
Video 44-15  Simultaneous inflation of two 2.5-mm “kissing” 
balloons.
Video 44-16  Final postbifurcation stenting result.
Summary
• Approximately 15–20% of PCIs will involve the 
treatment of bifurcation lesions.
• Bifurcation lesions require consideration of PCI strat-
egies that protect side-branch patency.
• There are both one-stent and two-stent techniques 
to treat bifurcation lesions; the selection of technique 
depends upon anatomic considerations, including 
plaque burden, angle of side-branch take-off, plaque 
shift during angioplasty, and side-branch distribution.
• Rates of target lesion revascularization and stent 
thrombosis are similar between one-stent and two-
stent procedures.
CASE 3: INFERIOR MYOCARDIAL 
INFARCTION—THROMBUS AND 
MANUAL THROMBECTOMY
(Figs. 44-2 to 44-4; Videos 44-17 to 44-22 can be 
accessed at the following link: http://www.mhprofessional 
.com/mediacenter/) 
• A 59-year-old man presented to the emergency room 
with 2 h of severe midsternal chest pressure.
Bifurcation
lesion
Stent+PTCA
Stent+stent
(“T stenting”)
Stent+stent
(“reverse-T”)
Stent+stent
(“Culotte”) 
Stent+stent
(“Y” or “V”) 
Stent+stent
(“Crush”)
Stent+stent
(“Kissing”)
Main
vessel
Side-
branch
No stent
coverage
No stent
coverage
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
“V”
Figure 44-1 
Schematic representation of 1-stent and 2-stent techniques 
to treat bifurcation lesions. PTCA, Percutaneous transluminal 
coronary angioplasty. (Reprinted with permission from 
SK Sharma, A Kini: Cardiol Clin 24:233, 2006.) 
 
CHAPTER 44
Atlas of Percutaneous Revascularization
541
• His systolic blood pressure was 100 mmHg and he 
was tachycardic in sinus rhythm with a heart rate of 
90–100 bpm.
• His initial ECG showed inferior ST-segment eleva-
tions with lateral ST-segment depressions.
• He was referred emergently to the cardiac catheter-
ization laboratory for primary PCI.
Video 44-17  The right coronary artery (RCA) is totally 
occluded with filling defects in the vessel after contrast 
injection, indicating thrombus is present in the vessel.
Video 44-18  An angioplasty wire is threaded through the 
thrombotic lesion, but this does not restore blood flow to 
the distal vessel.
Video 44-19  Result after manual thrombectomy and throm-
bus extraction. The “culprit” ruptured plaque and residual 
thrombus are now apparent in the vessel.
Video 44-20  After balloon angioplasty and stenting, thrombus 
is still present.
Video 44-21  After repeat manual thrombectomy and expansion 
of the stent, the thrombus is no longer present.
Video 44-22  Final result.
Summary
• An acute STEMI occurs following plaque rupture that 
promotes thrombotic occlusion of a coronary artery.
• Despite successful revascularization of the epicardial 
coronary artery, microemboli liberated during balloon 
angioplasty and stenting may lead to persistent micro-
vascular dysfunction. When present, microvascular 
dysfunction is associated with a larger infarct size, heart 
failure, malignant ventricular arrhythmias, and death.
• Manual thrombectomy is used to aspirate or remove 
thrombus in the vessel and limit distal embolization 
during angioplasty and stenting.
• Manual thrombectomy in primary PCI is associated 
with improved myocardial perfusion and a reduction 
in mortality.
• Adjunctive antiplatelet and antithrombin agents are 
important to aid in the resolution of intracoronary 
thrombus.
CASE 4: SAPHENOUS VEIN GRAFT 
INTERVENTION WITH DISTAL 
PROTECTION
(Fig. 44-5; Videos 44-23 to 44-26 can be accessed 
at the following link: http://www.mhprofessional.com/
mediacenter/) 
• A 62-year-old man with a history of chronic stable 
angina.
Figure 44-2 
Preprocedure ECG showing inferior ST-segment elevations 
and lateral ST-segment depressions.
Figure 44-3 
Example of an organized red thrombus retrieved by manual 
thrombectomy. (Reprinted with permission from C Trani et al: 
J Invasive Cardiol 19:E317, 2007.)
Figure 44-4 
Postprocedure ECG showing resolution of ST-segment 
elevations.
SECTION VI
Cardiovascular Atlases
542
Video 44-25  Angioplasty balloon inflation with the distal 
protection device in place.
Video 44-26  Final result after stent placement.
Summary
• Saphenous vein grafts have a failure rate of up to 20% 
after 1 year and as high as 50% by 5 years.
• Graft failure (>1 month) results from intimal hyper-
plasia and atherosclerosis.
• Saphenous vein graft PCI is associated with distal 
embolization of atherosclerotic debris and micro-
thrombi, leading to microvascular occlusion, reduced 
antegrade blood flow (the “no-reflow” phenom-
enon), and myocardial infarction.
• Embolic distal protection devices decrease the risk 
of distal embolization, as well as the incidence of 
no-reflow and myocardial infarction associated with 
saphenous vein graft interventions.
CASE 5: UNPROTECTED LEFT MAIN PCI 
IN A HIGH-RISK PATIENT
(Figs. 44-6 and 44-7; Videos 44-27 to 44-34 can be 
accessed at the following link: http://www.mhprofessional 
.com/mediacenter/) 
• An 89-year-old woman presented with an NSTEMI 
associated with 5-mm ST-segment depression in the 
apical leads occurring 2 weeks after hospitalization for 
an NSTEMI that was treated conservatively.
• A four-vessel coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) 
surgery was performed 17 years earlier with a left inter-
nal mammary artery graft to the LAD, a right internal 
mammary artery graft to the RCA, a saphenous vein 
graft to the first obtuse marginal branch, and a saphe-
nous vein graft to the first diagonal branch.
• The patient had a recent increase in angina with exer-
tion and was found to have lateral ischemia on an 
exercise technetium-99m scan.
• Diagnostic cardiac catheterization revealed a signifi-
cant stenosis in the body of the saphenous vein graft 
to the first obtuse marginal branch.
Video 44-23  Saphenous vein graft to a first obtuse 
marginal branch with an 80% eccentric stenosis in the 
midgraft.
Video 44-24  A distal protection device is deployed past the 
lesion.
Figure 44-5 
Distal protection device showing captured atherosclerotic 
debris liberated by initial balloon dilation. (Reprinted with per-
mission from RA Aqel et al: J Invasive Cardiol 19:E104, 2007.)
I
aVR
V1
V4
II
III
VI
aVL
aVF
V2
V3
V6
V5
Figure 44-6 
During chest pain, the ECG showed diffuse ST-segment depression of up to 5 mm in the inferior and lateral leads.
 
CHAPTER 44
Atlas of Percutaneous Revascularization
543
• Chronic obstructive lung disease, elderly age, and the 
patient’s refusal to consider cardiac surgery restricted 
the choice of therapeutic options to medical and/or 
percutaneous interventions.
• Diagnostic catheterization revealed a left dominant 
circulation with a heavily calcified 80% distal left 
main coronary artery stenosis extending into the LAD 
and into the proximal LCx coronary arteries. A 70% 
proximal LAD lesion was also present.
• After consultation with the patient, family, and a car-
diac surgeon, PCI was performed with intraaortic 
balloon pump support and a temporary pacemaker in 
the right ventricle.
Video 44-27  Baseline left coronary artery injection in right 
anterior oblique (RAO) cranial projection shows a high-grade 
calcified stenosis in the left main coronary artery and a 
significant stenosis in the proximal LAD.
Video 44-28  In the left anterior oblique (LAO) caudal view, 
the left main coronary artery lesion can be seen to extend 
into the ostia of both the LCx and the LAD.
Video 44-29  Guidewires were placed into both the LCx and 
LAD. After the left main coronary artery and LCx are dilated 
with balloon angioplasty, the proximal LAD is dilated and a 
long drug-eluting stent is placed to cover a lesion dissection 
that occurred with wiring of the vessel.
Video 44-30  The bifurcation lesion in the left main coronary 
artery extending into the LCx and LAD ostia is treated using a 
“culotte” technique. First, a drug-eluting stent is placed in the 
left main coronary artery and into the proximal LCx.
Video 44-31  Next, the LAD wire is removed and passed 
through the stent into the distal LAD. A second drug-eluting 
stent is deployed through the struts of the left main coronary 
artery/LCx stent.
Video 44-32  Following rewiring of the LCx, both stents are 
redilated simultaneously (“kissing” balloons).
Video 44-33  The final result in the LAO caudal view.
Video 44-34  The final result in the RAO cranial view showing 
patent left main, LCx, and LAD coronary arteries.
Summary
• Left main coronary artery disease occurs in 5–10% 
of patients with symptomatic coronary artery 
disease.
• In patients with left main coronary artery disease, 
revascularization with CABG has been shown to 
decrease mortality significantly over 5–10 years of 
follow-up.
• PCI with drug-eluting stents in selected cases has been 
shown to have equal in-hospital and 1-year death and 
myocardial infarction rates as compared to CABG in 
the Synergy between PCI with Taxus and Cardiac 
Surgery (SYNTAX) trial. Long-term outcome dif-
ferences between the two treatment strategies are not 
known.
• Indications for PCI of left main coronary artery 
lesions are high-risk surgical patients and patients 
III
VI
II
I
aVF
aVL
aVR
V3
V2
V1
V6
V5
V4
Figure 44-7 
Following resolution of the chest pain, the ST-segment depression is less marked.
SECTION VI
Cardiovascular Atlases
544
Summary
• Multivessel PCI is performed commonly and may be done 
in one setting or staged with two or more procedures.
• Acute and long-term studies of multivessel PCI have 
shown comparable rates of death and myocardial 
infarction when compared to CABG but a higher 
incidence of repeat revascularization as a result of 
restenosis associated with PCI.
• In the randomized Bypass Angioplasty Revascular-
ization Investigation (BARI) trial, diabetic patients 
treated with PCI had a worse long-term mortality 
than diabetic patients treated with CABG. However, 
the BARI registry found that in selected diabetic 
patients with favorable anatomy, PCI can result in 
outcomes equal to that observed with CABG.
CASE 7: VERY LATE STENT 
THROMBOSIS OF A PROXIMAL  
LAD DRUG-ELUTING STENT
(Figs. 44-8 and 44-9; Videos 44-43 to 44-46 can be 
accessed at the following link: http://www.mhprofessional 
.com/mediacenter/) 
• A 62-year-old man had a drug-eluting stent placed 
in a proximal LAD lesion to treat severe angina. He 
received dual antiplatelet therapy with aspirin and 
with protected left main coronary artery disease 
(i.e., prior CABG with patent bypass grafts). Patients 
who are good candidates for bypass surgery may also 
undergo a stenting procedure, but discussion with 
the patient, the interventional cardiologist, and the 
cardiac surgeon should be undertaken to deter-
mine the best treatment option in an individual 
case.
• Outcomes are better for patients with an isolated 
lesion in the ostium and body of the left main coro-
nary artery where a single stent can be placed com-
pared to bifurcation lesions that involve the ostium of 
the LAD and LCx.
CASE 6: MULTIVESSEL PCI  
IN A DIABETIC PATIENT
(Videos 44-35 to 44-42 can be accessed at the follow-
ing link: http://www.mhprofessional.com/mediacenter/) 
• A 58-year-old man presented with an NSTEMI.
• The patient has hyperlipidemia and type 2 diabetes 
mellitus treated with oral hypoglycemic agents.
• Diagnostic catheterization revealed two-vessel dis-
ease with a total occlusion of the second obtuse mar-
ginal branch that was felt to be responsible for the 
patient’s symptoms (culprit lesion). In addition, there 
was a high-grade stenosis in a large ramus intermedius 
branch and the RCA had a significant stenosis in the 
midsegment of the vessel.
Video 44-35  Baseline angiogram of the left coronary circula-
tion in the RAO view shows the total occlusion of the second 
obtuse marginal branch with delayed retrograde filling via 
collateral vessels and a high-grade stenosis in the ramus 
intermedius.
Video 44-36  A guidewire is passed through the total 
occlusion and the lesion is pretreated with balloon 
angioplasty.
Video 44-37  Following placement of a drug-eluting stent in 
the lesion, the vessel is widely patent. A third obtuse mar-
ginal vessel, not previously seen, now fills faintly (TIMI 1 flow) 
with contrast but was not treated.
Video 44-38  The ramus intermedius lesion was crossed 
with a guidewire and pretreated with balloon angioplasty.
Video 44-39  A drug-eluting stent is placed across the 
ramus lesion and deployed. The final result shows no resid-
ual stenosis in either the ramus or second obtuse marginal 
vessels.
Video 44-40  Baseline angiogram of the RCA shows a high-
grade lesion in the midsegment of the vessel.
Video 44-41  The lesion was pretreated with balloon dilation 
followed by stent deployment.
Video 44-42  The final result shows no residual stenosis in 
the mid-RCA.
Figure 44-8 
Optical coherence tomography image following initial bal-
loon dilation. Residual thrombus that is adherent to the stent 
struts is seen. (Reprinted with permission from AF Schinkel 
et al: JACC Cardiovasc Interv 1:449, 2008.)
 
CHAPTER 44
Atlas of Percutaneous Revascularization
545
clopidogrel for 1 year and then discontinued clopi-
dogrel per protocol.
• He remained asymptomatic until 15 months after 
the initial stent placement, when he presented 
with severe chest pain due to an acute anterior 
STEMI.
• He was taken to the catheterization laboratory within 
70 min of presentation and his initial angiogram 
showed a total occlusion of the proximal LAD 
stent.
Video 44-43  Baseline angiogram showing a total occlusion 
of the proximal LAD within the drug-eluting stent and a sig-
nificant stenosis at the origin of the LCx.
Video 44-44  The LAO view shows the LCx stenosis with a 
filling defect, indicating that thrombus is present in the vessel 
lumen.
Video 44-45  The LAD lesion was crossed with a guidewire, 
which resulted in slow filling of the mid-LAD (TIMI 2 flow), 
and revealed thrombus filling the stent.
Video 44-46  The final result after LAD and LCx stenting. 
The LAD lesion was pretreated with balloon angioplasty and 
a bare metal stent was deployed to cover the proximal lesion. 
The LCx ostial lesion was dilated with balloon angioplasty and 
a bare metal stent was placed using a “V- stenting” technique.
Summary
• Stent thrombosis is an infrequent (1–2%) but serious 
complication of stent placement. It occurs most com-
monly within the first month, but rarely, as late as 1 
year (0.2–0.6%) with bare metal stents. Very late stent 
thrombosis (VLST), which occurs after 1 year, is very 
rare with bare metal stents but can occur with drug-
eluting stents.
• Premature discontinuation of dual antiplatelet therapy 
is the most common cause of early and late stent throm­
bosis; however, the etiology of VLST is not clear.
• The majority of patients with stent thrombosis pres-
ent with acute coronary syndromes or STEMI; 
this presentation is associated with a high mortality 
rate (10%).
• Treatment is immediate PCI with balloon angioplasty 
or restenting.
CASE 8: TRANSCATHETER AORTIC 
VALVE IMPLANTATION
(Figs. 44-10 to 44-14; Videos 44-47 to 44-50 can be 
accessed at the following link: http://www.mhprofessional 
.com/mediacenter/)
• A 75-year-old woman with symptomatic aortic ste-
nosis and a valve area of 0.58 cm2 by transthoracic 
echocardiogram.
• Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (FEV1 = .54) 
and other comorbidities contributed to an unacceptably 
high cardiac surgical risk (calculated logistic Euroscore 
= 29.57%) for aortic valve replacement.
• She was referred for transcatheter aortic valve implan-
tation (TAVI) as part of a clinical trial.
Video 44-47  Aortogram shows patent coronary arteries and 
minimal aortic insufficiency.
Video 44-48  Balloon valvuloplasty is performed with rapid 
ventricular pacing at 180 bpm.
Video 44-49  A 26-mm Edwards-SAPIEN valve is positioned 
using fluoroscopic and transesophageal echo guidance and 
deployed.
Video 44-50  Aortogram after valve deployment shows a 
functional valve with mild aortic insufficiency and without 
impingement of the coronary ostia.
Figure 44-9 
Pathologic specimen of late stent thrombosis obtained at 
autopsy. Thrombus is seen filling the LAD vessel lumen and 
extending into a diagonal branch (LD). Stent struts occupied 
the space denoted by asterisk (*) (left). A magnified view of 
the vessel reveals thrombus around the stent strut and neo-
intima formation (arrow) (right). (Reprinted with permission 
from A Farb et al: Circulation 108:1701, 2003.)
SECTION VI
Cardiovascular Atlases
546
Figure 44-11 
Hemodynamically significant aortic (AO) stenosis. Simultane-
ous recording of AO and left ventricle (LV) pressures shows an 
82-mmHg peak-to-peak gradient and a 63.3-mmHg mean gradi-
ent between the LV (154/9 mmHg) and AO (72/29 mmHg) pres-
sures. This is consistent with an aortic valve area of 0.58 cm2.
Figure 44-12 
After balloon valvuloplasty, the LV–AO mean pressure gradi-
ent decreased to 37.3 mmHg, indicating that the aortic valve 
area increased to 0.95 cm2.
Figure 44-13 
The Edwards SAPIEN Transcatheter Heart Valve. (Reprinted 
with permission from A Zajarias and A Cribier: JACC 
53:1829, 2009.)
Figure 44-14 
Once the valve was deployed, the pressure gradient between 
the LV and AO decreased to 11.6 mmHg and the functional 
valve area is 1.34 cm2.
A
Figure 44-10 
Transesophageal echocardiogram shows a calcified trileaf-
let aortic valve (A) with reduced leaflet excursion and a nar-
rowed orifice in peak systole (B).
B
 
CHAPTER 44
Atlas of Percutaneous Revascularization
547
Summary
• The prevalence of calcific aortic stenosis is 2–3% in 
individuals aged ≥75 years.
• Symptomatic aortic stenosis is associated with an 
average survival of 2–3 years and an increased risk 
of sudden death; aortic valve replacement improves 
both symptoms and survival.
• In high-risk patients with severe aortic stenosis who 
are not surgical candidates, 1-year and 5-year survival 
rates are ∼62% and 38%, respectively.
• Transcatheter aortic valve implantation (TAVI) is 
approved in Europe and being evaluated in the United 
States in clinical trials as an alternative to surgical aortic 
valve replacement in high-risk patients.
(Case contributed with permission by Dr. Andrew C. Eisenhauer.)
CASE 9: ATRIAL SEPTAL DEFECT 
CLOSURE
(Figs. 44-15 to 44-19; Videos 44-51 to 44-53 can be 
accessed at the following link: http://www.mhprofessional 
.com/mediacenter/)
• A 48-year-old woman with increased shortness of 
breath, exercise intolerance, and an 18-mm secundum 
ASD.
• Echocardiogram showed a dilated right atrium (RA) 
and right ventricle (RV) with evidence of right ven-
tricular volume overload.
• A shunt ratio (Qp/Qs) of 2.3:1 was determined at 
cardiac catheterization.
• Based on her symptoms, evidence of right-side 
chamber dilation, and a moderately sized atrial septal 
defect, the patient was referred for percutaneous clo-
sure of the ASD.
Video 44-51  A sizing balloon is placed across the ASD.
Video 44-52  An Amplatzer septal occluder is being posi-
tioned across the ASD.
Video 44-53  The two discs of the device in place across 
the ASD.
Summary
• Unrepaired ASDs lead to signs and symptoms of 
increased pulmonary blood flow and right heart fail-
ure; dyspnea, exercise intolerance, fatigue, palpitations 
and atrial arrhythmias, and pulmonary infections.
• Percutaneous closure of an ASD may be recom-
mended for individuals with a secundum ASD and 
evidence of RA and RV enlargement with or with-
out symptoms.
• Percutaneous closure is contraindicated in patients 
with irreversible pulmonary arterial hypertension and 
no left-to-right shunt. It is not recommended for 
Figure 44-16 
Three-dimensional echocardiographic reconstruction of the 
secundum ASD. The ASD is round and has an acceptable 
margin of tissue to seat a septal occluder device.
A
B
Figure 44-15 
Transesophageal echocardiogram of a secundum ASD. The 
ASD is seen as “dropout” in the interatrial septum between 
the left atrium (LA) and RA (A). Doppler color flow imaging 
shows blue in the RA consistent with left-to-right flow (B).
SECTION VI
Cardiovascular Atlases
548
Figure 44-19 
Postprocedure lateral chest x-ray showing the Amplatzer 
septal occluder in place.
Figure 44-17 
Transesophageal echocardiogram showing sizing balloon (A) and no flow (B) across the atrial septal defect.
A
B
Figure 44-18 
Amplatzer septal occluder in place (A). There is no blood flow across the device (B).
A
B
closure of sinus venosus, coronary sinus, or primum 
ASDs.
• After the atrial septal occluder device is placed, patients 
are treated with antiplatelet agents and use antibi-
otic prophylaxis for certain procedures for 6 months. 
Follow-up echocardiograms to assess for device migra-
tion or erosion, residual shunting, thrombus or peri-
cardial effusion are recommended at 1 day, 1 month, 
6 months, 1 year, and periodically thereafter.
(Case contributed with permission by Dr. Andrew C. 
Eisenhauer.)
 Alexander Kratz  I   Michael A. Pesce  I   Robert C. Basner  
I   Andrew J. Einstein 
549
 LABORATORY VALUES OF CLINICAL 
IMPORTANCE 
 appenDiX  
Table 1 
 Hematology and Coagulation 
analyte
SpeCimen
Si unitS
Conventional unitS
Activated clotting time
WB
70–180 s
70–180 s
Activated protein C resistance (factor V Leiden)
P
Not applicable
Ratio >2.1
ADAMTS13 activity
P
≥0.67
≥67%
ADAMTS13 inhibitor activity
P
Not applicable
≤0.4 U
ADAMTS13 antibody
P
Not applicable
≤18 U
Alpha 2 antiplasmin
P
0.87–1.55
87–155%
Antiphospholipid antibody panel
 PTT-LA (lupus anticoagulant screen)
P
Negative
Negative
 Platelet neutralization procedure
P
Negative
Negative
 Dilute viper venom screen
P
Negative
Negative
 Anticardiolipin antibody
S
  IgG
0–15 arbitrary units
0–15 GPL
  IgM
0–15 arbitrary units
0–15 MPL
 This Appendix contains tables of reference values for 
laboratory tests, special analytes, and special function 
tests. A variety of factors can inﬂ uence reference values. 
Such variables include the population studied, the dura-
tion and means of specimen transport, laboratory meth-
ods and instrumentation, and even the type of container 
used for the collection of the specimen. The reference 
or “normal” ranges given in this appendix may there-
fore not be appropriate for all laboratories, and these 
values should only be used as general guidelines. When-
ever possible, reference values provided by the labora-
tory performing the testing should be utilized in the 
interpretation of laboratory data. Values supplied in 
this Appendix reﬂ ect typical reference ranges in adults. 
Pediatric reference ranges may vary signiﬁ cantly from 
adult values. 
 In preparing the Appendix, the authors have taken 
into account the fact that the system of international 
units (SI, système international d’unités) is used in most 
countries and in some medical journals. However, 
clinical laboratories may continue to report values in 
“traditional” or conventional units. Therefore, both 
systems are provided in the Appendix. The dual system 
is also used in the text except for (1) those instances in 
which the numbers remain the same but only the ter-
minology is changed (mmol/L for meq/L or IU/L for 
mIU/mL), when only the SI units are given; and (2) 
most pressure measurements (e.g., blood and cerebrospi-
nal ﬂ uid pressures), when the traditional units (mmHg, 
mmH 2 O) are used. In all other instances in the text the 
SI unit is followed by the traditional unit in parentheses.
 RefeRence Values foR 
laBoRatoRy tests 
(continued)
APPENDIX
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
550
Table 1 
Hematology and Coagulation (CONtinued)
Analyte
Specimen
SI Units
Conventional Units
Antithrombin III
P
  Antigenic
220–390 mg/L
22–39 mg/dL
  Functional
0.7–1.30 U/L
70–130%
Anti-Xa assay (heparin assay)
P
  Unfractionated heparin
0.3–0.7 kIU/L
0.3–0.7 IU/mL
  Low-molecular-weight heparin
0.5–1.0 kIU/L
0.5–1.0 IU/mL
  Danaparoid (Orgaran)
0.5–0.8 kIU/L
0.5–0.8 IU/mL
Autohemolysis test
WB
0.004–0.045
0.4–4.50%
Autohemolysis test with glucose
WB
0.003–0.007
0.3–0.7%
Bleeding time (adult)
<7.1 min
<7.1 min
Bone marrow: See Table 7
Clot retraction
WB
0.50–1.00/2 h
50–100%/2 h
Cryofibrinogen
P
Negative
Negative
D-dimer
P
220–740 ng/mL FEU
220–740 ng/mL FEU
Differential blood count
WB
Relative counts:
  Neutrophils
0.40–0.70
40–70%
  Bands
0.0–0.05
0–5%
  Lymphocytes
0.20–0.50
20–50%
  Monocytes
0.04–0.08
4–8%
  Eosinophils
0.0–0.6
0–6%
  Basophils
0.0–0.02
0–2%
Absolute counts:
  Neutrophils
1.42–6.34 × 109/L
1420–6340/mm3
  Bands
0–0.45 × 109/L
0–450/mm3
  Lymphocytes
0.71–4.53 × 109/L
710–4530/mm3
  Monocytes
0.14–0.72 × 109/L
140–720/mm3
  Eosinophils
0–0.54 × 109/L
0–540/mm3
  Basophils
0–0.18 × 109/L
0–180/mm3
Erythrocyte count
WB
  Adult males
4.30–5.60 × 1012/L
4.30–5.60 × 106/mm3
  Adult females
4.00–5.20 × 1012/L
4.00–5.20 × 106/mm3
Erythrocyte life span
WB
  Normal survival
120 days
120 days
  Chromium labeled, half-life (t1/2)
25–35 days
25–35 days
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate
WB
  Females
0–20 mm/h
0–20 mm/h
  Males
0–15 mm/h
0–15 mm/h
Euglobulin lysis time
P
7200–14,400 s
120–240 min
Factor II, prothrombin
P
0.50–1.50
50–150%
Factor V
P
0.50–1.50
50–150%
Factor VII
P
0.50–1.50
50–150%
Factor VIII
P
0.50–1.50
50–150%
Factor IX
P
0.50–1.50
50–150%
Factor X
P
0.50–1.50
50–150%
Factor XI
P
0.50–1.50
50–150%
Factor XII
P
0.50–1.50
50–150 %
Factor XIII screen
P
Not applicable
Present
Factor inhibitor assay
P
<0.5 Bethesda Units
<0.5 Bethesda Units
Fibrin(ogen) degradation products
P
0–1 mg/L
0–1 μg/mL
Fibrinogen
P
2.33–4.96 g/L
233–496 mg/dL
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (erythrocyte)
WB
<2400 s
<40 min
Ham’s test (acid serum)
WB
Negative
Negative
(continued)
 
APPENDIX 
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
551
Table 1 
Hematology and Coagulation (CONtinued)
Analyte
Specimen
SI Units
Conventional Units
Hematocrit
WB
  Adult males
0.388–0.464
38.8–46.4
  Adult females
0.354–0.444
35.4–44.4
Hemoglobin
  Plasma
P
6–50 mg/L
0.6–5.0 mg/dL
  Whole blood:
WB
    Adult males
133–162 g/L
13.3–16.2 g/dL
    Adult females
120–158 g/L
12.0–15.8 g/dL
Hemoglobin electrophoresis
WB
  Hemoglobin A
0.95–0.98
95–98%
  Hemoglobin A2
0.015–0.031
1.5–3.1%
  Hemoglobin F
0–0.02
0–2.0%
  Hemoglobins other than A, A2, or F
Absent
Absent
Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia antibody
P
Negative
Negative
Immature platelet fraction (IPF)
WB
0.011–0.061
1.1–6.1%
Joint fluid crystal
JF
Not applicable
No crystals seen
Joint fluid mucin
JF
Not applicable
Only type I mucin present
Leukocytes
  Alkaline phosphatase (LAP)
WB
0.2–1.6 μkat/L
13–100 μ/L
  Count (WBC)
WB
3.54–9.06 × 109/L
3.54–9.06 × 103/mm3
Mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH)
WB
26.7–31.9 pg/cell
26.7–31.9 pg/cell
Mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration (MCHC)
WB
323–359 g/L
32.3–35.9 g/dL
Mean corpuscular hemoglobin of reticulocytes (CH)
WB
24–36 pg
24–36 pg
Mean corpuscular volume (MCV)
WB
79–93.3 fL
79–93.3 μm3
Mean platelet volume (MPV)
WB
9.00–12.95 fL
9.00–12.95
Osmotic fragility of erythrocytes
WB
  Direct
0.0035–0.0045
0.35–0.45%
  Indirect
0.0030–0.0065
0.30–0.65%
Partial thromboplastin time, activated
P
26.3–39.4 s
26.3–39.4 s
Plasminogen
P
  Antigen
84–140 mg/L
8.4–14.0 mg/dL
  Functional
0.70–1.30
70–130%
Plasminogen activator inhibitor 1
P
4–43 μg/L
4–43 ng/mL
Platelet aggregation
PRP
Not applicable
>65% aggregation in 
response to adenosine 
diphosphate, epinephrine, 
collagen, ristocetin, and ara-
chidonic acid
Platelet count
WB
165–415 × 109/L
165–415 × 103/mm3
Platelet, mean volume
WB
6.4–11 fL
6.4–11.0 μm3
Prekallikrein assay
P
0.50–1.5
50–150%
Prekallikrein screen
P
No deficiency detected
Protein C
P
  Total antigen
0.70–1.40
70–140%
  Functional
0.70–1.30
70–130%
Protein S
P
  Total antigen
0.70–1.40
70–140%
  Functional
0.65–1.40
65–140%
  Free antigen 
0.70–1.40
70–140%
Prothrombin gene mutation G20210A
WB
Not applicable
Not present
Prothrombin time
P
12.7–15.4 s
12.7–15.4 s
(continued)
APPENDIX
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
552
Table 1 
Hematology and Coagulation (CONtinued)
Analyte
Specimen
SI Units
Conventional Units
Protoporphyrin, free erythrocyte
WB
0.28–0.64 μmol/L of 
red blood cells
16–36 μg/dL of red blood 
cells
Red cell distribution width
WB
<0.145
<14.5%
Reptilase time
P
16–23.6 s
16–23.6 s
Reticulocyte count
WB
  Adult males
0.008–0.023 red cells
0.8–2.3% red cells
  Adult females
0.008–0.020 red cells
0.8–2.0% red cells
Reticulocyte hemoglobin content
WB
>26 pg/cell
>26 pg/cell
Ristocetin cofactor (functional von Willebrand factor)
P
  Blood group O
0.75 mean of normal
75% mean of normal
  Blood group A
1.05 mean of normal
105% mean of normal
  Blood group B
1.15 mean of normal
115% mean of normal
  Blood group AB 
1.25 mean of normal
125% mean of normal
Serotonin release assay
S
<0.2 release
<20% release
Sickle cell test
WB
Negative
Negative
Sucrose hemolysis
WB
<0.1
<10% hemolysis
Thrombin time
P
15.3–18.5 s
15.3–18.5 s
Total eosinophils
WB
150–300 × 106/L
150–300/mm3
Transferrin receptor
S, P
9.6–29.6 nmol/L
9.6–29.6 nmol/L
Viscosity
  Plasma
P
1.7–2.1
1.7–2.1
  Serum
S
1.4–1.8
1.4–1.8
von Willebrand factor (vWF) antigen (factor VIII:R  
antigen)
  Blood group O
0.75 mean of normal
75% mean of normal
  Blood group A
1.05 mean of normal
105% mean of normal
  Blood group B
1.15 mean of normal
115% mean of normal
  Blood group AB 
1.25 mean of normal
125% mean of normal
von Willebrand factor multimers
P
Normal distribution
Normal distribution
White blood cells: see “Leukocytes”
Abbreviations: JF, joint fluid; P, plasma; PRP, platelet-rich plasma; S, serum; WB, whole blood.
Table 2 
Clinical Chemistry and Immunology
Analyte
Specimen
SI Units
Conventional Units
Acetoacetate
P
49–294 μmol/L
0.5–3.0 mg/dL
Adrenocorticotropin (ACTH)
P
1.3–16.7 pmol/L
6.0–76.0 pg/mL
Alanine aminotransferase (ALT, SGPT)
S
0.12–0.70 μkat/L
7–41 U/L
Albumin
S
40–50 g/L
4.0–5.0 mg/dL
Aldolase
S
26–138 nkat/L
1.5–8.1 U/L
Aldosterone (adult)
  Supine, normal sodium diet
S, P
<443 pmol/L
<16 ng/dL
  Upright, normal
S, P
111–858 pmol/L
4–31 ng/dL
Alpha fetoprotein (adult)
S
0–8.5 μg/L
0–8.5 ng/mL
Alpha1 antitrypsin
S
1.0–2.0 g/L
100–200 mg/dL
Ammonia, as NH3
P
11–35 μmol/L
19–60 μg/dL
Amylase (method dependent)
S
0.34–1.6 μkat/L
20–96 U/L
(continued)
 
APPENDIX 
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
553
Table 2 
Clinical Chemistry and Immunology (CONTINUED)
Analyte
Specimen
SI Units
Conventional Units
Androstendione (adult)
S
  Males
0.81–3.1 nmol/L
23–89 ng/dL
  Females
    Premenopausal
0.91–7.5 nmol/L
26–214 ng/dL
    Postmenopausal
0.46–2.9 nmol/L
13–82 ng/dL
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE)
S
0.15–1.1 μkat/L
9–67 U/L
Anion gap
S
7–16 mmol/L
7–16 mmol/L
Apolipoprotein A-1
  Male
  Female
S
0.94–1.78 g/L
1.01–1.99 g/L
94–178 mg/dL
101–199 mg/dL
Apolipoprotein B
  Male
  Female
S
0.55–1.40 g/L
0.55–1.25 g/L
55–140 mg/dL
55–125 mg/dL
Arterial blood gases
  [HCO3
–]
  Pco2
  pH
  Po2
WB
22–30 mmol/L
4.3–6.0 kPa
7.35–7.45
9.6–13.8 kPa
22–30 meq/L
32–45 mmHg
7.35–7.45
72–104 mmHg
Aspartate aminotransferase (AST, SGOT)
S
0.20–0.65 μkat/L
12–38 U/L
Autoantibodies
  Anti-centromere antibody IgG
  Anti-double-strand (native) DNA
  Anti-glomerular basement membrane antibodies
    Qualitative IgG, IgA
    Quantitative IgG antibody
  Anti-histone antibodies
  Anti-Jo-1 antibody
  Anti-mitochondrial antibody
    Anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic autoantibodies
    Serine proteinase 3 antibodies
    Myeloperoxidase antibodies
  Antinuclear antibody
  Anti-parietal cell antibody
  Anti-RNP antibody
  Anti-Scl 70 antibody
  Anti-Smith antibody
  Anti-smooth muscle antibody
  Anti-SSA antibody
  Anti-SSB antibody
  Anti-thyroglobulin antibody
  Anti-thyroid peroxidase antibody
S
≤29 AU/mL
<25 IU/L
Negative
≤19 AU/mL
<1.0 U
≤29 AU/mL
Not applicable
Not applicable
≤19 AU/mL
≤19 AU/mL
Not applicable
Not applicable
Not applicable
Not applicable
Not applicable
Not applicable
Not applicable
Not applicable
<40 kIU/L
<35 kIU/L
≤29 AU/mL
<25 IU/L
Negative
≤19 AU/mL
<1.0 U
≤29 AU/mL
<20 Units
<1:20
≤19 AU/mL
≤19 AU/mL
Negative at 1:40
None detected
<1.0 U
<1.0 U
<1.0 U
<1.0 U
<1.0 U
Negative
<40 IU/mL
<35 IU/mL
B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP)
P
Age and gender specific: 
<100 ng/L
Age and gender specific:  
<100 pg/mL
Bence Jones protein, serum qualitative
S
Not applicable
None detected
Bence Jones protein, serum quantitative
  Free kappa
  Free lambda
K/L ratio
S
3.3–19.4 mg/L
5.7–26.3 mg/L
0.26–1.65
0.33–1.94 mg/dL
0.57–2.63 mg/dL
0.26–1.65
Beta-2-microglobulin
S
1.1–2.4 mg/L
1.1–2.4 mg/L
Bilirubin
  Total
  Direct
  Indirect
S
5.1–22 μmol/L
1.7–6.8 μmol/L
3.4–15.2 μmol/L
0.3–1.3 mg/dL
0.1–0.4 mg/dL
0.2–0.9 mg/dL
(continued)
APPENDIX
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
554
Table 2 
Clinical Chemistry and Immunology (CONTINUED)
Analyte
Specimen
SI Units
Conventional Units
C peptide
S
0.27–1.19 nmol/L
0.8–3.5 ng/mL
C1-esterase-inhibitor protein
S
210–390 mg/L
21–39 mg/dL
CA 125
S
<35 kU/L
<35 U/mL
CA 19-9
S
<37 kU/L
<37 U/mL
CA 15-3
S
<33 kU/L
<33 U/mL
CA 27-29
S
0–40 kU/L
0–40 U/mL
Calcitonin
  Male
  Female
S
0–7.5 ng/L
0–5.1 ng/L
0–7.5 pg/mL
0–5.1 pg/mL
Calcium
S
2.2–2.6 mmol/L
8.7–10.2 mg/dL
Calcium, ionized
WB
1.12–1.32 mmol/L
4.5–5.3 mg/dL
Carbon dioxide content (TCO2)
P (sea level)
22–30 mmol/L
22–30 meq/L
Carboxyhemoglobin (carbon monoxide content)
  Nonsmokers
  Smokers
  Loss of consciousness and death
WB
0.0–0.015
0.04–0.09
>0.50
0–1.5%
4–9%
>50%
Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA)
  Nonsmokers
  Smokers
S
0.0–3.0 μg/L
0.0–5.0 μg/L
0.0–3.0 ng/mL
0.0–5.0 ng/mL
Ceruloplasmin
S
250–630 mg/L
25–63 mg/dL
Chloride
S
102–109 mmol/L
102–109 meq/L
Cholesterol: see Table 5
Cholinesterase
S
5–12 kU/L
5–12 U/mL
Chromogranin A
S
0–50 μg/L
0–50 ng/mL
Complement
  C3
  C4
  Complement total
S
0.83–1.77 g/L
0.16–0.47 g/L
60–144 CAE units
83–177 mg/dL
16–47 mg/dL
60–144 CAE units
Cortisol
  Fasting, 8 a.m.–12 noon
  12 noon–8 p.m.
  8 p.m.–8 a.m.
S
138–690 nmol/L
138–414 nmol/L
0–276 nmol/L
5–25 μg/dL
5–15 μg/dL
0–10 μg/dL
C-reactive protein
S
<10 mg/L
<10 mg/L
C-reactive protein, high sensitivity
S
Cardiac risk
  Low: <1.0 mg/L
  Average: 1.0–3.0 mg/L
  High: >3.0 mg/L
Cardiac risk
  Low: <1.0 mg/L
  Average: 1.0–3.0 mg/L
  High: >3.0 mg/L
Creatine kinase (total)
  Females
  Males
S
0.66–4.0 μkat/L
0.875.0 μkat/L
39–238 U/L
51–294 U/L
Creatine kinase-MB
  Mass
  Fraction of total activity (by electrophoresis)
S
0.0–5.5 μg/L
0–0.04
0.0–5.5 ng/mL
0–4.0%
Creatinine
  Female
  Male
S
44–80 μmol/L
53–106 μmol/L
0.5–0.9 mg/dL
0.6–1.2 mg/dL
Cryoglobulins
S
Not applicable
None detected
Cystatin C
S
0.5–1.0 mg/L
0.5–1.0 mg/L
(continued)
 
APPENDIX 
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
555
Table 2 
Clinical Chemistry and Immunology (CONTINUED)
Analyte
Specimen
SI Units
Conventional Units
Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) (adult)
  Male
  Female
S
6.2–43.4 nmol/L
4.5–34.0 nmol/L
180–1250 ng/dL
130–980 ng/dL
Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) sulfate
  Male (adult)
  Female (adult, premenopausal)
  Female (adult, postmenopausal)
S
100–6190 μg/L
120–5350 μg/L
300–2600 μg/L
10–619 μg/dL
12–535 μg/dL
30–260 μg/dL
11-Deoxycortisol (adult) (compound S)
S
0.34–4.56 nmol/L
12–158 ng/dL
Dihydrotestosterone
  Male
  Female
S, P
1.03–2.92 nmol/L
0.14–0.76 nmol/L
30–85 ng/dL
4–22 ng/dL
Dopamine
P
0–130 pmol/L
0–20 pg/mL
Epinephrine
  Supine (30 min)
  Sitting
  Standing (30 min)
P
<273 pmol/L
<328 pmol/L
<491 pmol/L
<50 pg/mL
<60 pg/mL
<90 pg/mL
Erythropoietin
S
4–27 U/L
4–27 U/L
Estradiol
  Female
    Menstruating:
      Follicular phase
      Midcycle peak
      Luteal phase
    Postmenopausal
  Male
S, P
74–532 pmol/L
411–1626 pmol/L
74–885 pmol/L
217 pmol/L
74 pmol/L
<20–145 pg/mL
112–443 pg/mL
<20–241 pg/mL
<59 pg/mL
<20 pg/mL
Estrone
  Female
    Menstruating:
      Follicular phase
      Luteal phase
    Postmenopausal
  Male
S, P
<555 pmol/L
<740 pmol/L
11–118 pmol/L
33–133 pmol/L
<150 pg/mL
<200 pg/mL
3–32 pg/mL
9–36 pg/mL
Fatty acids, free (nonesterified)
P
0.1–0.6 mmol/L
2.8–16.8 mg/dL
Ferritin
  Female
  Male
S
10–150 μg/L
29–248 μg/L
10–150 ng/mL
29–248 ng/mL
Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH)
  Female
    Menstruating:
      Follicular phase
      Ovulatory phase
      Luteal phase
    Postmenopausal
  Male
S, P
3.0–20.0 IU/L
9.0–26.0 IU/L
1.0–12.0 IU/L
18.0–153.0 IU/L
1.0–12.0 IU/L
3.0–20.0 mIU/mL
9.0–26.0 mIU/mL
1.0–12.0 mIU/mL
18.0–153.0 mIU/mL
1.0–12.0 mIU/mL
Fructosamine
S
<285 umol/L
<285 umol/L
Gamma glutamyltransferase
S
0.15–0.99 μkat/L
9–58 U/L
Gastrin
S
<100 ng/L
<100 pg/mL
Glucagon
P
40–130 ng/L
40–130 pg/mL
(continued)
APPENDIX
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
556
Table 2 
Clinical Chemistry and Immunology (CONTINUED)
Analyte
Specimen
SI Units
Conventional Units
Glucose
Glucose (fasting)
  Normal
  Increased risk for diabetes
  Diabetes mellitus
WB
P
3.6–5.3 mmol/L
4.2–5.6 mmol/L
5.6–6.9 mmol/L
Fasting >7.0 mmol/L
A 2-hour level of >11.1 
mmol/L during an oral 
glucose tolerance test
A random glucose level of 
≥11.1 mmol/L in patients 
with symptoms of hyper-
glycemia
65–95 mg/dL
75–100 mg/dL
100–125 mg/dL
Fasting >126 mg/dL
A 2-hour level of ≥200 mg/dL 
during an oral glucose  
tolerance test
A random glucose level of 
≥200 mg/dL in patients with 
symptoms of hyperglycemia
Growth hormone
S
0–5 μg/L
0–5 ng/mL
Hemoglobin A1c
  Pre-diabetes
  Diabetes mellitus
WB
0.04–0.06 HgB fraction
0.057–0.064 HgB fraction
A hemoglobin A1c level 
of ≥0.065 Hgb fraction 
as suggested by the  
American Diabetes 
Association
4.0–5.6%
5.7–6.4%
A hemoglobin A1c level of 
≥6.5% as suggested by 
the American Diabetes  
Association
Hemoglobin A1c with estimated average glucose 
(eAg)
WB
eAg mmoL/L = 1.59 × 
HbA1c − 2.59
eAg (mg/dL) = 28.7 × HbA1c 
− 46.7
High-density lipoprotein (HDL) (see Table 5)
Homocysteine
P
4.4–10.8 μmol/L
4.4–10.8 μmol/L
Human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG)
  Nonpregnant female
  1–2 weeks postconception
  2–3 weeks postconception
  3–4 weeks postconception
  4–5 weeks postconception
  5–10 weeks postconception
  10–14 weeks post conception
  Second trimester
  Third trimester
S
<5 IU/L
9–130 IU/L
75–2600 IU/L
850–20,800 IU/L
4000–100,200 IU/L
11,500–289,000 IU/L
18,300–137,000 IU/L
1400–53,000 IU/L
940–60,000 IU/L
<5 mIU/mL
9–130 mIU/mL
75–2600 mIU/mL
850–20,800 mIU/mL
4000–100,200 mIU/mL
11,500–289,000 mIU/mL
18,300–137,000 mIU/mL
1400–53,000 mIU/mL
940–60,000 mIU/mL
b-Hydroxybutyrate
P
60–170 μmol/L
0.6–1.8 mg/dL
17-Hydroxyprogesterone (adult)
  Male
  Female
    Follicular phase
    Luteal phase
S
<4.17 nmol/L
0.45–2.1 nmol/L
1.05–8.7 nmol/L
<139 ng/dL
15–70 ng/dL
35–290 ng/dL
Immunofixation
S
Not applicable
No bands detected
Immunoglobulin, quantitation (adult)
  IgA
  IgD
  IgE
  IgG
    IgG1
    IgG2
    IgG3
    IgG4
  IgM
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
0.70–3.50 g/L
0–140 mg/L
1–87 kIU/L
7.0–17.0 g/L
2.7–17.4 g/L
0.3–6.3 g/L
0.13–3.2 g/L
0.11–6.2 g/L
0.50–3.0 g/L
70–350 mg/dL
0–14 mg/dL
1–87 IU/mL
700–1700 mg/dL
270–1740 mg/dL
30–630 mg/dL
13–320 mg/dL
11–620 mg/dL
50–300 mg/dL
Insulin
S, P
14.35–143.5 pmol/L
2–20 μU/mL
Iron
S
7–25 μmol/L
41–141 μg/dL
(continued)
 
APPENDIX 
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
557
Table 2 
Clinical Chemistry and Immunology (CONTINUED)
Analyte
Specimen
SI Units
Conventional Units
Iron-binding capacity
S
45–73 μmol/L
251–406 μg/dL
Iron-binding capacity saturation
S
0.16–0.35
16–35%
Ischemia modified albumin
S
<85 kU/L
<85 U/mL
Joint fluid crystal
JF
Not applicable
No crystals seen
Joint fluid mucin
JF
Not applicable
Only type I mucin present
Ketone (acetone)
S
Negative
Negative
Lactate
P, arterial
P, venous
0.5–1.6 mmol/L
0.5–2.2 mmol/L
4.5–14.4 mg/dL
4.5–19.8 mg/dL
Lactate dehydrogenase
S
2.0–3.8 μkat/L
115–221 U/L
Lipase
S
0.51–0.73 μkat/L
3–43 U/L
Lipids: see Table 5
Lipoprotein (a)
S
0–300 mg/L
0–30 mg/dL
Low-density lipoprotein (LDL) (see Table 5)
Luteinizing hormone (LH)
  Female
    Menstruating:
      Follicular phase
      Ovulatory phase
      Luteal phase
  Postmenopausal
  Male
S, P
2.0–15.0 U/L
22.0–105.0 U/L
0.6–19.0 U/L
16.0–64.0 U/L
2.0–12.0 U/L
2.0–15.0 mIU/mL
22.0–105.0 mIU/mL
0.6–19.0 mIU/mL
16.0–64.0 mIU/mL
2.0–12.0 mIU/mL
Magnesium
S
0.62–0.95 mmol/L
1.5–2.3 mg/dL
Metanephrine
P
<0.5 nmol/L
<100 pg/mL
Methemoglobin
WB
0.0–0.01
0–1%
Myoglobin
  Male
  Female
S
20–71 μg/L
25–58 μg/L
20–71 μg/L
25–58 μg/L
Norepinephrine
  Supine (30 min)
  Sitting
  Standing (30 min)
P
650–2423 pmol/L
709–4019 pmol/L
739–4137 pmol/L
110–410 pg/mL
120–680 pg/mL
125–700 pg/mL
N-telopeptide (cross-linked), NTx
  Female, premenopausal
  Male
  BCE = bone collagen equivalent
S
6.2–19.0 nmol BCE
5.4–24.2 nmol BCE
6.2–19.0 nmol BCE
5.4–24.2 nmol BCE
NT-Pro BNP
S, P
<125 ng/L up to 75 years
<450 ng/L >75 years
<125 pg/mL up to 75 years
<450 pg/mL >75 years
5′ Nucleotidase
S
0.00–0.19 μkat/L
0–11 U/L
Osmolality
P
275–295 mOsmol/kg 
serum water
275–295 mOsmol/kg serum 
water
Osteocalcin
S
11–50 μg/L
11–50 ng/mL
Oxygen content
  Arterial (sea level)
  Venous (sea level)
WB
17–21
10–16
17–21 vol%
10–16 vol%
Oxygen saturation (sea level)
  Arterial
  Venous, arm
WB
Fraction:
0.94–1.0
0.60–0.85
Percent:
94–100%
60–85%
Parathyroid hormone (intact)
S
8–51 ng/L
8–51 pg/mL
(continued)
APPENDIX
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
558
Table 2 
Clinical Chemistry and Immunology (CONTINUED)
Analyte
Specimen
SI Units
Conventional Units
Phosphatase, alkaline
S
0.56–1.63 μkat/L
33–96 U/L
Phosphorus, inorganic
S
0.81–1.4 mmol/L
2.5–4.3 mg/dL
Potassium
S
3.5–5.0 mmol/L
3.5–5.0 meq/L
Prealbumin
S
170–340 mg/L
17–34 mg/dL
Procalcitonin
S
<0.1 μg/L
<0.1 ng/mL
Progesterone
  Female: Follicular
  Midluteal
  Male
S, P
<3.18 nmol/L
9.54–63.6 nmol/L
<3.18 nmol/L
<1.0 ng/mL
3–20 ng/mL
<1.0 ng/mL
Prolactin
  Male
  Female
S
53–360 mg/L
40–530 mg/L
2.5–17 ng/mL
1.9–25 ng/mL
Prostate-specific antigen (PSA)
S
0.0–4.0 μg/L
0.0–4.0 ng/mL
Prostate-specific antigen, free
S
With total PSA between 
4 and 10 μg/L and when 
the free PSA is:
>0.25 decreased risk of 
prostate cancer
<0.10 increased risk of 
prostate cancer
With total PSA between 4 and 
10 ng/mL and when the free 
PSA is:
>25% decreased risk of 
prostate cancer
<10% increased risk of 
prostate cancer
Protein fractions:
  Albumin
  Globulin
  Alpha1
  Alpha2
  Beta
  Gamma
S
35–55 g/L
20–35 g/L
2–4 g/L
5–9 g/L
6–11 g/L
7–17 g/L
3.5–5.5 g/dL (50–60%)
2.0–3.5 g/dL (40–50%)
0.2–0.4 g/dL (4.2–7.2%)
0.5–0.9 g/dL (6.8–12%)
0.6–1.1 g/dL (9.3–15%)
0.7–1.7 g/dL (13–23%)
Protein, total
S
67–86 g/L
6.7–8.6 g/dL
Pyruvate
P
40–130 μmol/L
0.35–1.14 mg/dL
Rheumatoid factor
S
<15 kIU/L
<15 IU/mL
Serotonin
WB
0.28–1.14 umol/L
50–200 ng/mL
Serum protein electrophoresis
S
Not applicable
Normal pattern
Sex hormone–binding globulin (adult)
  Male
  Female
S
11–80 nmol/L
30–135 nmol/L
11–80 nmol/L
30–135 nmol/L
Sodium
S
136–146 mmol/L
136–146 meq/L
Somatomedin-C (IGF-1) (adult)
  16 years
  17 years
  18 years
  19 years
  20 years
  21–25 years
  26–30 years
  31–35 years
  36–40 years
  41–45 years
  46–50 years
  51–55 years
  56–60 years
  61–65 years
S
226–903 μg/L
193–731 μg/L
163–584 μg/L
141–483 μg/L
127–424 μg/L
116–358 μg/L
117–329 μg/L
115–307 μg/L
119–204 μg/L
101–267 μg/L
94–252 μg/L
87–238 μg/L
81–225 μg/L
75–212 μg/L
226–903 ng/mL
193–731 ng/mL
163–584 ng/mL
141–483 ng/mL
127–424 ng/mL
116–358 ng/mL
117–329 ng/mL
115–307 ng/mL
119–204 ng/mL
101–267 ng/mL
94–252 ng/mL
87–238 ng/mL
81–225 ng/mL
75–212 ng/mL
(continued)
 
APPENDIX 
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
559
Table 2 
Clinical Chemistry and Immunology (CONTINUED)
Analyte
Specimen
SI Units
Conventional Units
  66–70 years
  71–75 years
  76–80 years
  81–85 years
69–200 μg/L
64–188 μg/L
59–177 μg/L
55–166 μg/L
69–200 ng/mL
64–188 ng/mL
59–177 ng/mL
55–166 ng/mL
Somatostatin
P
<25 ng/L
<25 pg/mL
Testosterone, free
  Female, adult
  Male, adult
S
10.4–65.9 pmol/L
312–1041 pmol/L
3–19 pg/mL
90–300 pg/mL
Testosterone, total,
  Female
  Male
S
0.21–2.98 nmol/L
9.36–37.10 nmol/L
6–86 ng/dL
270–1070 ng/dL
Thyroglobulin
S
1.3–31.8 μg/L
1.3–31.8 ng/mL
Thyroid-binding globulin
S
13–30 mg/L
1.3–3.0 mg/dL
Thyroid-stimulating hormone
S
0.34–4.25 mIU/L
0.34–4.25 μIU/mL
Thyroxine, free (fT4)
S
9.0–16 pmol/L
0.7–1.24 ng/dL
Thyroxine, total (T4)
S
70–151 nmol/L
5.4–11.7 μg/dL
Thyroxine index (free)
S
6.7–10.9
6.7–10.9
Transferrin
S
2.0–4.0 g/L
200–400 mg/dL
Triglycerides (see Table 5)
S
0.34–2.26 mmol/L
30–200 mg/dL
Triiodothyronine, free (fT3)
S
3.7–6.5 pmol/L
2.4–4.2 pg/mL
Triiodothyronine, total (T3)
S
1.2–2.1 nmol/L
77–135 ng/dL
Troponin I (method dependent)
  99th percentile of a healthy population
S, P
0–0.04 μg/L
0–0.04 ng/mL
Troponin T
  99th percentile of a healthy population
S, P
0–0.01 μg/L
0–0.01 ng/mL
Urea nitrogen
S
2.5–7.1 mmol/L
7–20 mg/dL
Uric acid
  Females
  Males
S
0.15–0.33 mmol/L
0.18–0.41 mmol/L
2.5–5.6 mg/dL
3.1–7.0 mg/dL
Vasoactive intestinal polypeptide
P
0–60 ng/L
0–60 pg/mL
Zinc protoporphyrin
WB
0–400 μg/L
0–40 μg/dL
Zinc protoporphyrin (ZPP)-to-heme ratio
WB
0–69 μmol ZPP/mol heme 0–69 μmol ZPP/mol heme
Abbreviations: P, plasma; S, serum; WB, whole blood.
APPENDIX
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
560
Table 3
Toxicology and Therapeutic Drug Monitoring
Therapeutic Range
Toxic Level
Drug
SI Units
Conventional Units
SI Units
Conventional Units
Acetaminophen
66–199 μmol/L
10–30 μg/mL
>1320 μmol/L
>200 μg/mL
Amikacin
  Peak
  Trough
34–51 μmol/L
0–17 μmol/L
20–30 μg/mL
0–10 μg/mL
>60 μmol/L
>17 μmol/L
>35 μg/mL
>10 μg/mL
Amitriptyline/nortriptyline  
(total drug)
430–900 nmol/L
120–250 ng/mL
>1800 nmol/L
>500 ng/mL
Amphetamine
150–220 nmol/L
20–30 ng/mL
>1500 nmol/L
>200 ng/mL
Bromide
  Mild toxicity
  Severe toxicity
  Lethal
9.4–18.7 mmol/L
75–150 mg/dL
>18.8 mmol/L
6.4–18.8 
mmol/L
>18.8 mmol/L
>37.5 mmol/L
>150 mg/dL
51–150 mg/dL
>150 mg/dL
>300 mg/dL
Caffeine
25.8–103 μmol/L
5–20 μg/mL
>206 μmol/L
>40 μg/mL
Carbamazepine
17–42 μmol/L
4–10 μg/mL
>85 μmol/L
>20 μg/mL
Chloramphenicol
  Peak
  Trough
31–62 μmol/L
15–31 μmol/L
10–20 μg/mL
5–10 μg/mL
>77 μmol/L
>46 μmol/L
>25 μg/mL
>15 μg/mL
Chlordiazepoxide
1.7–10 μmol/L
0.5–3.0 μg/mL
>17 μmol/L
>5.0 μg/mL
Clonazepam
32–240 nmol/L
10–75 ng/mL
>320 nmol/L
>100 ng/mL
Clozapine
0.6–2.1 μmol/L
200–700 ng/mL
>3.7 μmol/L
>1200 ng/mL
Cocaine
>3.3 μmol/L
>1.0 μg/mL
Codeine
43–110 nmol/mL
13–33 ng/mL
>3700 nmol/mL
>1100 ng/mL (lethal)
Cyclosporine
  Renal transplant
    0–6 months
    6–12 months after transplant
    >12 months
  Cardiac transplant
    0–6 months
    6–12 months after transplant
    >12 months
208–312 nmol/L
166–250 nmol/L
83–125 nmol/L
208–291 nmol/L
125–208 nmol/L
83–125 nmol/L
250–375 ng/mL
200–300 ng/mL
100–150 ng/mL
250–350 ng/mL
150–250 ng/mL
100–150 ng/mL
>312 nmol/L
>250 nmol/L
>125 nmol/L
>291 nmol/L
>208 nmol/L
>125 nmol/L
>375 ng/mL
>300 ng/mL
>150 ng/mL
>350 ng/mL
>250 ng/mL
150 ng/mL
  Lung transplant 
    0–6 months
  Liver transplant
    Initiation
    Maintenance
250–374 nmol/L
208–291 nmol/L
83–166 nmol/L
300–450 ng/mL
250–350 ng/mL
100–200 ng/mL
>374 nmol/L
>291 nmol/L
>166 nmol/L
>450 ng/mL
>350 ng/mL
>200 ng/mL
Desipramine
375–1130 nmol/L
100–300 ng/mL
>1880 nmol/L
>500 ng/mL
Diazepam (and metabolite)
  Diazepam
  Nordiazepam
0.7–3.5 μmol/L
0.4–6.6 μmol/L
0.2–1.0 μg/mL
0.1–1.8 μg/mL
>7.0 μmol/L
>9.2 μmol/L
>2.0 μg/mL
>2.5 μg/mL
Digoxin
0.64–2.6 nmol/L
0.5–2.0 ng/mL
>5.0 nmol/L
>3.9 ng/mL
Disopyramide
5.3–14.7 μmol/L
2–5 μg/mL
>20.6 μmol/L
>7 μg/mL
Doxepin and nordoxepin
  Doxepin
  Nordoxepin
0.36–0.98 μmol/L
0.38–1.04 μmol/L
101–274 ng/mL
106–291 ng/mL
>1.8 μmol/L
>1.9 μmol/L
>503 ng/mL
>531 ng/mL
Ethanol
  Behavioral changes
  Legal limit
  Critical with acute exposure
>4.3 mmol/L
≥17 mmol/L
>54 mmol/L
>20 mg/dL
≥80 mg/dL
>250 mg/dL
Ethylene glycol
  Toxic
  Lethal
>2 mmol/L
>20 mmol/L
>12 mg/dL
>120 mg/dL
(continued)
 
APPENDIX 
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
561
Table 3
Toxicology and Therapeutic Drug Monitoring (CONTINUED)
Therapeutic Range
Toxic Level
Drug
SI Units
Conventional Units
SI Units
Conventional Units
Ethosuximide
280–700 μmol/L
40–100 μg/mL
>700 μmol/L
>100 μg/mL
Everolimus
3.13–8.35 nmol/L
3–8 ng/mL
>12.5 nmol/L
>12 ng/mL
Flecainide
0.5–2.4 μmol/L
0.2–1.0 μg/mL
>3.6 μmol/L
>1.5 μg/mL
Gentamicin
  Peak
  Trough
10–21 μmol/mL
0–4.2 μmol/mL
5–10 μg/mL
0–2 μg/mL
>25 μmol/mL
>4.2 μmol/mL
>12 μg/mL
>2 μg/mL
Heroin (diacetyl morphine)
>700 μmol/L
>200 ng/mL (as morphine)
Ibuprofen
49–243 μmol/L
10–50 μg/mL
>970 μmol/L
>200 μg/mL
Imipramine (and metabolite)
  Desimipramine
  Total imipramine + 
  desimipramine
375–1130 nmol/L
563–1130 nmol/L
100–300 ng/mL
150–300 ng/mL
>1880 nmol/L
>1880 nmol/L
>500 ng/mL
>500 ng/mL
Lamotrigine
11.7–54.7 μmol/L
3–14 μg/mL
>58.7 μmol/L
>15 μg/mL
Lidocaine
5.1–21.3 μmol/L
1.2–5.0 μg/mL
>38.4 μmol/L
>9.0 μg/mL
Lithium
0.5–1.3 mmol/L
0.5–1.3 meq/L
>2 mmol/L
>2 meq/L
Methadone
1.0–3.2 μmol/L
0.3–1.0 μg/mL
>6.5 μmol/L
>2 μg/mL
Methamphetamine
0.07–0.34 μmol/L
0.01–0.05 μg/mL
>3.35 μmol/L
>0.5 μg/mL
Methanol
>6 mmol/L
>20 mg/dL
Methotrexate
  Low-dose
  High-dose (24 h)
  High-dose (48 h)
  High-dose (72 h)
0.01–0.1 μmol/L
<5.0 μmol/L
<0.50 μmol/L
<0.10 μmol/L
0.01–0.1 μmol/L
<5.0 μmol/L
<0.50 μmol/L
<0.10 μmol/L
>0.1 mmol/L
>5.0 μmol/L
>0.5 μmol/L
>0.1 μmol/L
>0.1 mmol/L
>5.0 μmol/L
>0.5 μmol/L
>0.1 μmol/L
Morphine
232–286 μmol/L
65–80 ng/mL
>720 μmol/L
>200 ng/mL
Mycophenolic acid
3.1–10.9 μmol/L
1.0–3.5 ng/mL
>37 μmol/L
>12 ng/mL
Nitroprusside (as thiocyanate)
103–499 μmol/L
6–29 μg/mL
860 μmol/L
>50 μg/mL
Nortriptyline
190–569 nmol/L
50–150 ng/mL
>1900 nmol/L
>500 ng/mL
Phenobarbital
65–172 μmol/L
15–40 μg/mL
>258 μmol/L
>60 μg/mL
Phenytoin
40–79 μmol/L
10–20 μg/mL
>158 μmol/L
>40 μg/mL
Phenytoin, free
  % Free
4.0–7.9 μg/mL
0.08–0.14
1–2 μg/mL
8–14%
>13.9 μg/mL
>3.5 μg/mL
Primidone and metabolite
  Primidone
  Phenobarbital
23–55 μmol/L
65–172 μmol/L
5–12 μg/mL
15–40 μg/mL
>69 μmol/L
>215 μmol/L
>15 μg/mL
>50 μg/mL
Procainamide
  Procainamide
  NAPA (N-acetylprocainamide)
17–42 μmol/L
22–72 μmol/L
4–10 μg/mL
6–20 μg/mL
>43 μmol/L
>126 μmol/L
>10 μg/mL
>35 μg/mL
Quinidine
6.2–15.4 μmol/L
2.0–5.0 μg/mL
>19 μmol/L
>6 μg/mL
Salicylates
145–2100 μmol/L
2–29 mg/dL
>2900 μmol/L
>40 mg/dL
Sirolimus (trough level) 
  Kidney transplant
4.4–15.4 nmol/L
4–14 ng/mL
>16 nmol/L
>15 ng/mL
Tacrolimus (FK506) (trough)
  Kidney and liver
    Initiation
    Maintenance
  Heart
    Initiation
    Maintenance
12–19 nmol/L
6–12 nmol/L
19–25 nmol/L
6–12 nmol/L
10–15 ng/mL
5–10 ng/mL
15–20 ng/mL
5–10 ng/mL
>25 nmol/L
>25 nmol/L
>20 ng/mL
>20 ng/mL
(continued)
APPENDIX
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
562
Table 3
Toxicology and Therapeutic Drug Monitoring (CONTINUED)
Therapeutic Range
Toxic Level
Drug
SI Units
Conventional Units
SI Units
Conventional Units
Theophylline
56–111 μg/mL
10–20 μg/mL
>168 μg/mL
>30 μg/mL
Thiocyanate
  After nitroprusside infusion
  Nonsmoker
  Smoker
103–499 μmol/L
17–69 μmol/L
52–206 μmol/L
6–29 μg/mL
1–4 μg/mL
3–12 μg/mL
860 μmol/L
>50 μg/mL
Tobramycin
  Peak
  Trough
11–22 μg/L
0–4.3 μg/L
5–10 μg/mL
0–2 μg/mL
>26 μg/L
>4.3 μg/L
>12 μg/mL
>2 μg/mL
Valproic acid
346–693 μmol/L
50–100 μg/mL
>693 μmol/L
>100 μg/mL
Vancomycin
  Peak
  Trough
14–28 μmol/L
3.5–10.4 μmol/L
20–40 μg/mL
5–15 μg/mL
>55 μmol/L
>14 μmol/L
>80 μg/mL
>20 μg/mL
Table 4 
Vitamins and Selected Trace Minerals
Reference Range
Specimen
Analyte
SI Units
Conventional Units
Aluminum
S
<0.2 μmol/L
<5.41 μg/L
Arsenic
WB
0.03–0.31 μmol/L
2–23 μg/L
Cadmium
WB
<44.5 nmol/L
<5.0 μg/L
Coenzyme Q10 (ubiquinone)
P
433–1532 μg/L
433–1532 μg/L
β-Carotene
S
0.07–1.43 μmol/L
4–77 μg/dL
Copper
S
11–22 μmol/L
70–140 μg/dL
Folic acid
RC
340–1020 nmol/L cells
150–450 ng/mL cells
Folic acid
S
12.2–40.8 nmol/L
5.4–18.0 ng/mL
Lead (adult)
S
<0.5 μmol/L
<10 μg/dL
Mercury
WB
3.0–294 nmol/L
0.6–59 μg/L
Selenium
S
0.8–2.0 umol/L
63–160 μg/L
Vitamin A
S
0.7–3.5 μmol/L
20–100 μg/dL
Vitamin B1 (thiamine)
S
0–75 nmol/L
0–2 μg/dL
Vitamin B2 (riboflavin)
S
106–638 nmol/L
4–24 μg/dL
Vitamin B6
P
20–121 nmol/L
5–30 ng/mL
Vitamin B12
S
206–735 pmol/L
279–996 pg/mL
Vitamin C (ascorbic acid)
S
23–57 μmol/L
0.4–1.0 mg/dL
Vitamin D3,1,25-dihydroxy, total
S, P
36–180 pmol/L
15–75 pg/mL
Vitamin D3,25-hydroxy, total
P
75–250 nmol/L
30–100 ng/mL
Vitamin E
S
12–42 μmol/L
5–18 μg/mL
Vitamin K
S
0.29–2.64 nmol/L
0.13–1.19 ng/mL
Zinc
S
11.5–18.4 μmol/L
75–120 μg/dL
Abbreviations: P, plasma; RC, red cells; S, serum; WB, whole blood.
 
APPENDIX 
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
563
Table 5 
Classification of LDL, Total, and HDL 
Cholesterol
LDL Cholesterol
  <70 mg/dL
Therapeutic option for very high 
risk patients
  <100 mg/dL
Optimal
  100–129 mg/dL
Near optimal/above optimal
  130–159 mg/dL
Borderline high
  160–189 mg/dL
High
  ≥190 mg/dL
Very high
Total Cholesterol
  <200 mg/dL
Desirable
  200–239 mg/dL
Borderline high
  ≥240 mg/dL
High
HDL Cholesterol
  <40 mg/dL
Low
  ≥60 mg/dL
High
Abbreviations: LDL, low-density lipoprotein; HDL, high-density 
lipoprotein.
Source: Executive summary of the third report of the National 
Cholesterol Education Program (NCEP) expert panel on detec-
tion, evaluation, and treatment of high blood cholesterol in adults 
(adult treatment panel III). JAMA 2001; 285:2486–97. Implications 
of Recent Clinical Trials for the National Cholesterol Education 
Program Adult Treatment Panel III Guidelines. SM Grundy et al for 
the Coordinating Committee of the National Cholesterol Education 
Program: Circulation 110:227, 2004.
Table 6 
Cerebrospinal Fluida
Reference Range
Constituent
SI Units
Conventional 
Units
Osmolarity
292–297 mmol/kg 
water
292–297 
mOsm/L
Electrolytes
  Sodium
137–145 mmol/L
137–145 meq/L
  Potassium
2.7–3.9 mmol/L
2.7–3.9 meq/L
  Calcium
1.0–1.5 mmol/L
2.1–3.0 meq/L
  Magnesium
1.0–1.2 mmol/L
2.0–2.5 meq/L
  Chloride
116–122 mmol/L
116–122 meq/L
  CO2 content
20–24 mmol/L
20–24 meq/L
Pco2
6–7 kPa
45–49 mmHg
pH
7.31–7.34
Glucose
2.22–3.89 mmol/L
40–70 mg/dL
Lactate
1–2 mmol/L
10–20 mg/dL
Total protein:
  Lumbar
0.15–0.5 g/L
15–50 mg/dL
  Cisternal
0.15–0.25 g/L
15–25 mg/dL
  Ventricular
0.06–0.15 g/L
6–15 mg/dL
  Albumin
0.066–0.442 g/L
6.6–44.2 mg/dL
  IgG
0.009–0.057 g/L
0.9–5.7 mg/dL
  IgG indexb
0.29–0.59
  Oligoclonal  
  bands (OGB)
<2 bands not pres-
ent in matched 
serum sample
Ammonia
15–47 μmol/L
25–80 μg/dL
Creatinine
44–168 μmol/L
0.5–1.9 mg/dL
Myelin basic  
protein
<4 μg/L
CSF pressure
50–180 mmH2O
CSF volume 
(adult)
∼150 mL
Red blood cells
0
0
Leukocytes
  Total
0–5 mononuclear 
cells per μL
  Differential
    Lymphocytes
60–70%
    Monocytes
30–50%
    Neutrophils
None
aSince cerebrospinal fluid concentrations are equilibrium values, 
measurements of the same parameters in blood plasma obtained 
at the same time are recommended. However, there is a time lag in 
attainment of equilibrium, and cerebrospinal levels of plasma con-
stituents that can fluctuate rapidly (such as plasma glucose) may 
not achieve stable values until after a significant lag phase.
bIgG index = CSF IgG (mg/dL) × serum albumin (g/dL)/serum IgG 
(g/dL) × CSF albumin (mg/dL).
Reference Values  
for Specific Analytes
APPENDIX
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
564
Table 7A 
Differential Nucleated Cell Counts of Bone 
Marrow Aspiratesa
Observed 
Range (%)
95% Range 
(%)
Mean (%)
Blast cells
0–3.2
0–3.0
1.4
Promyelocytes
3.6–13.2
3.2–12.4
7.8
Neutrophil 
myelocytes
4–21.4
3.7–10.0
7.6
Eosinophil 
myelocytes
0–5.0
0–2.8
1.3
Metamyelocytes
1–7.0
2.3–5.9
4.1
Neutrophils
  Males
  Females
21.0–45.6
29.6–46.6
21.9–42.3
28.8–45.9
32.1
37.4
Eosinophils
0.4–4.2
0.3–4.2
2.2
Eosinophils 
plus eosinophil 
myelocytes
0.9–7.4
0.7–6.3
3.5
Basophils
0–0.8
0–0.4
0.1
Erythroblasts
  Male
  Females
18.0–39.4
14.0–31.8
16.2–40.1
13.0–32.0
28.1
22.5
Lymphocytes
4.6–22.6
6.0–20.0
13.1
Plasma cells
0–1.4
0–1.2
0.6
Monocytes
0–3.2
0–2.6
1.3
Macrophages
0–1.8
0–1.3
0.4
M:E ratio
  Males
  Females
1.1–4.0
1.6–5.4
1.1–4.1
1.6–5.2
2.1
2.8
aBased on bone marrow aspirate from 50 healthy volunteers 
(30 men, 20 women).
Abbreviation: M:E, myeloid to erythroid ratio.
Source: BJ Bain: Br J Haematol 94:206, 1996.
Table 7B 
Bone Marrow Cellularity
Age
Observed 
Range
95% Range
Mean
Under 10 years
59.0–95.1%
72.9–84.7%
78.8%
10–19 years
41.5–86.6%
59.2–69.4%
64.3%
20–29 years
32.0–83.7%
54.1–61.9%
58.0%
30–39 years
30.3–81.3%
41.1–54.1%
47.6%
40–49 years
16.3–75.1%
43.5–52.9%
48.2%
50–59 years
19.7–73.6%
41.2–51.4%
46.3%
60–69 years
16.3–65.7%
40.8–50.6%
45.7%
70–79 years
11.3–47.1%
22.6–35.2%
28.9%
Source: From RJ Hartsock et al: Am J Clin Pathol 1965; 43:326, 
1965.
Table 8 
Stool Analysis
Reference Range
SI Units
Conventional 
Units
Alpha-1- 
antitrypsin
≤540 mg/L
≤54 mg/dL
Amount
0.1–0.2 kg/d
100–200 g/24 h
Coproporphyrin
611–1832 nmol/d
400–1200 μg/24 h
Fat
  Adult
  Adult on  
  fat-free diet
<7 g/d
<4 g/d
Fatty acids
0–21 mmol/d
0–6 g/24 h
Leukocytes
None
None
Nitrogen
<178 mmol/d
<2.5 g/24 h
pH
7.0–7.5
Potassium
14–102 mmol/L
14–102 mmol/L
Occult blood
Negative
Negative
Osmolality
280–325 mOsmol/kg 280–325 mOsmol/kg
Sodium
7–72 mmol/L
7–72 mmol/L
Trypsin
20–95 U/g
Urobilinogen
85–510 μmol/d
50–300 mg/24 h
Uroporphyrins
12–48 nmol/d
10–40 μg/24 h
Water
<0.75
<75%
Source: Modified from: FT Fishbach, MB Dunning III: A Manual of 
Laboratory and Diagnostic Tests, 7th ed. Philadelphia, Lippincott 
Williams & Wilkins, 2004.
 
APPENDIX 
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
565
Table 9
Urine Analysis and Renal Function Tests
Reference Range
SI Units
Conventional Units
Acidity, titratable
20–40 mmol/d
20–40 meq/d
Aldosterone
Normal diet: 6–25 μg/d
Low-salt diet: 17–44 μg/d
High-salt diet: 0–6 μg/d
Normal diet: 6–25 μg/d
Low-salt diet: 17–44 μg/d
High-salt diet: 0–6 μg/d
Aluminum
0.19–1.11 μmol/L
5–30 μg/L
Ammonia
30–50 mmol/d
30–50 meq/d
Amylase
4–400 U/L
Amylase/creatinine clearance ratio  
[(Clam/Clcr) × 100]
1–5
1–5
Arsenic
0.07–0.67 μmol/d
5–50 μg/d
Bence Jones protein, urine, qualitative
Not applicable
None detected
Bence Jones protein, urine, quantitative
  Free Kappa
  Free Lambda
  K/L ratio
1.4–24.2 mg/L
0.2–6.7 mg/L
2.04–10.37
0.14–2.42 mg/dL
0.02–0.67 mg/dL
2.04–10.37
Calcium (10 meq/d or 200 mg/d dietary 
calcium)
<7.5 mmol/d
<300 mg/d
Chloride
140–250 mmol/d
140–250 mmol/d
Citrate
320–1240 mg/d
320–1240 mg/d
Copper
<0.95 μmol/d
<60 μg/d
Coproporphyrins (types I and III)
0–20 μmol/mol creatinine
0–20 μmol/mol creatinine
Cortisol, free
55–193 nmol/d
20–70 μg/d
Creatine, as creatinine
  Female
  Male
<760 μmol/d
<380 μmol/d
<100 mg/d
<50 mg/d
Creatinine
8.8–14 mmol/d
1.0–1.6 g/d
Dopamine
392–2876 nmol/d
60–440 μg/d
Eosinophils
<100 eosinophils/mL
<100 eosinophils/mL
Epinephrine
0–109 nmol/d
0–20 μg/d
Glomerular filtration rate
>60 mL/min/1.73 m2
For African Americans multiply the 
result by 1.21
>60 mL/min/1.73 m2
For African Americans multiply the result by 
1.21
Glucose (glucose oxidase method)
0.3–1.7 mmol/d
50–300 mg/d
5-Hydroindoleacetic acid [5-HIAA]
0–78.8 μmol/d
0–15 mg/d
Hydroxyproline
53–328 μmol/d
53–328 μmol/d
Iodine, spot urine
  WHO classification of iodine deficiency:
    Not iodine deficient
    Mild iodine deficiency
    Moderate iodine deficiency
    Severe iodine deficiency
>100 μg/L
50–100 μg/L
20–49 μg/L
<20 μg/L
>100 μg/L
50–100 μg/L
20–49 μg/L
<20 μg/L
Ketone (acetone)
Negative
Negative
17 Ketosteroids
3–12 mg/d
3–12 mg/d
Metanephrines
  Metanephrine
  Normetanephrine
30–350 μg/d
50–650 μg/d
30–350 μg/d
50–650 μg/d
(continued)
APPENDIX
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
566
Table 9
Urine Analysis and Renal Function Tests (CONTINUED)
Reference Range
SI Units
Conventional Units
Microalbumin
  Normal
  Microalbuminuria
  Clinical albuminuria
0.0–0.03 g/d
0.03–0.30 g/d
>0.3 g/d
0–30 mg/d
30–300 mg/d
>300 mg/d
Microalbumin/creatinine ratio
  Normal
  Microalbuminuria
  Clinical albuminuria
0–3.4 g/mol creatinine
3.4–34 g/mol creatinine
>34 g/mol creatinine
0–30 μg/mg creatinine
30–300 μg/mg creatinine
>300 μg/mg creatinine
β2-Microglobulin
0–160 μg/L
0–160 μg/L
Norepinephrine
89–473 nmol/d
15–80 μg/d
N-telopeptide (cross-linked), NTx
  Female, premenopausal
  Female, postmenopausal
  Male
  BCE = bone collagen equivalent
17–94 nmol BCE/mmol creatinine
26–124 nmol BCE/mmol creatinine
21–83 nmol BCE/mmol creatinine
17–94 nmol BCE/mmol creatinine
26–124 nmol BCE/mmol creatinine
21–83 nmol BCE/mmol creatinine
Osmolality
100–800 mOsm/kg
100–800 mOsm/kg
Oxalate
  Male
  Female
80–500 μmol/d
45–350 μmol/d
7–44 mg/d
4–31 mg/d
pH
5.0–9.0
5.0–9.0
Phosphate (phosphorus) (varies with 
intake)
12.9–42.0 mmol/d
400–1300 mg/d
Porphobilinogen
None
None
Potassium (varies with intake)
25–100 mmol/d
25–100 meq/d
Protein
<0.15 g/d
<150 mg/d
Protein/creatinine ratio
Male: 15–68 mg/g
Female: 10–107 mg/g
Male: 15–68 mg/g
Female: 10–107 mg/g
Sediment
  Red blood cells
  White blood cells
  Bacteria
  Crystals
  Bladder cells
  Squamous cells
  Tubular cells
  Broad casts
  Epithelial cell casts
  Granular casts
  Hyaline casts
  Red blood cell casts
  Waxy casts
  White cell casts
0–2/high-power field
0–2/high-power field
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
0–5/low-power field
None
None
None
Sodium (varies with intake)
100–260 mmol/d
100–260 meq/d
Specific gravity:
  After 12-h fluid restriction
  After 12-h deliberate water intake
>1.025
≤1.003
>1.025
≤1.003
Tubular reabsorption, phosphorus
0.79–0.94 of filtered load
79–94% of filtered load
Urea nitrogen
214–607 mmol/d
6–17 g/d
Uric acid (normal diet)
1.49–4.76 mmol/d
250–800 mg/d
Vanillylmandelic acid (VMA)
<30 μmol/d
<6 mg/d
 
APPENDIX 
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
567
Table 10
Normal Pressures in Heart and Great Vessels
Pressure (mmHg)
Average
Range
Right Atrium
Mean
2.8
1–5
a wave
5.6
2.5–7
c wave
3.8
1.5–6
x wave
1.7
0–5
v wave
4.6
2–7.5
y wave
2.4
0–6
Right Ventricle
Peak systolic
25
17–32
End-diastolic
4
1–7
Pulmonary Artery
Mean
15
9–19
Peak systolic
25
17–32
End-diastolic
9
4–13
Pulmonary Artery Wedge
Mean
9
4.5–13
Left Atrium
Mean
7.9
2–12
a wave
10.4
4–16
v wave
12.8
6–21
Left Ventricle
Peak systolic
130
90–140
End-diastolic
8.7
5–12
Brachial Artery
Mean
85
70–105
Peak systolic
130
90–140
End-diastolic
70
60–90
Source: Reproduced from: MJ Kern The Cardiac Catheterization Handbook, 4th ed. Phil-
adelphia, Mosby, 2003.
Special Function Tests
APPENDIX
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
568
Table 11 
Circulatory Function Tests
Results: Reference Range
Test
SI Units (Range)
Conventional Units (Range)
Arteriovenous oxygen difference
30–50 mL/L
30–50 mL/L
Cardiac output (Fick)
2.5–3.6 L/m2 of body surface 
area per min
2.5–3.6 L/m2 of body surface area per min
Contractility indexes
  Max. left ventricular dp/dt (dp/dt)
220 kPa/s (176–250 kPa/s)
1650 mmHg/s (1320–1880 mmHg/s)
DP when DP = 5.3 kPa
(37.6 ± 12.2)/s
(37.6 ± 12.2)/s
(40 mmHg) (DP, developed LV pressure)
3.32 ± 0.84 end-diastolic volumes 
per second
3.32 ± 0.84 end-diastolic volumes per second
  Mean normalized systolic ejection rate  
  (angiography)
  Mean velocity of circumferential fiber  
  shortening (angiography)
1.83 ± 0.56 circumferences per 
second
1.83 ± 0.56 circumferences per second
Ejection fraction: stroke volume/ 
end-diastolic volume (SV/EDV)
0.67 ± 0.08 (0.55–0.78)
0.67 ± 0.08 (0.55–0.78)
End-diastolic volume
70 ± 20.0 mL/m2 (60–88 mL/m2)
70 ± 20.0 mL/m2 (60–88 mL/m2)
End-systolic volume
25 ± 5.0 mL/m2 (20–33 mL/m2)
25 ± 5.0 mL/m2 (20–33 mL/m2)
Left ventricular work
  Stroke work index
50 ± 20.0 (g·m)/m2 (30–110)
50 ± 20.0 (g·m)/m2 (30–110)
  Left ventricular minute work index
1.8–6.6 [(kg·m)/m2]/min
1.8–6.6 [(kg·m)/m2]/min
  Oxygen consumption index
110–150 mL
110–150 mL
Maximum oxygen uptake
35 mL/min (20–60 mL/min)
35 mL/min (20–60 mL/min)
Pulmonary vascular resistance
2–12 (kPa·s)/L
20–130 (dyn·s)/cm5
Systemic vascular resistance
77–150 (kPa·s)/L
770–1600 (dyn·s)/cm5
Source: E Braunwald et al: Heart Disease, 6th ed. Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders Co., 2001.
 
APPENDIX 
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
569
Table 12
 Normal Echocardiographic Reference Limits and Partition Values in Adults
Women 
Reference 
Range
Mildly 
Abnormal
Moderately 
Abnormal
Severely 
Abnormal
Men 
Reference 
Range
Mildly 
Abnormal
Moderately 
Abnormal
Severely 
Abnormal
Left ventricular dimensions
  Septal thickness, cm
0.6–0.9
1.0–1.2
1.3–1.5
≥1.6
0.6–1.0
1.1–1.3
1.4–1.6
≥1.7
  Posterior wall thickness, cm
0.6–0.9
1.0–1.2
1.3–1.5
≥1.6
0.6–1.0
1.1–1.3
1.4–1.6
≥1.7
  Diastolic diameter, cm
3.9–5.3
5.4–5.7
5.8–6.1
≥6.2
4.2–5.9
6.0–6.3
6.4–6.8
≥6.9
  Diastolic diameter/BSA, cm/m2
2.4–3.2
3.3–3.4
3.5–3.7
≥3.8
2.2–3.1
3.2–3.4
3.5–3.6
≥3.7
  Diastolic diameter/height, cm/m
2.5–3.2
3.3–3.4
3.5–3.6
≥3.7
2.4–3.3
3.4–3.5
3.6–3.7
≥3.8
Left ventricular volumes
  Diastolic, mL
56–104
105–117
118–130
≥131
67–155
156–178
179–201
≥202
  Diastolic/BSA, mL/m2
35–75
76–86
87–96
≥97
35–75
76–86
87–96
≥97
  Systolic, mL
19–49
50–59
60–69
≥70
22–58
59–70
71–82
≥83
  Systolic/BSA, mL/m2
12–30
31–36
37–42
≥43
12–30
31–36
37–42
≥43
Left ventricular mass, 2D method
  Mass, g
66–150
151–171
172–182
≥183
96–200
201–227
228–254
≥255
  Mass/BSA, g/m2
44–88
89–100
101–112
≥113
50–102
103–116
117–130
≥131
Left ventricular function
  Endocardial fractional shortening (%)
27–45
22–26
17–21
≤16
25–43
20–24
15–19
≤14
  Midwall fractional shortening (%)
15–23
13–14
11–12
≤10
14–22
12–13
10–11
≤9
  Ejection fraction, 2D method (%)
≥55
45–54
30–44
≤29
≥55
45–54
30–44
≤29
Right heart dimensions (cm)
  Basal RV diameter
2.0–2.8
2.9–3.3
3.4–3.8
≥3.9
2.0–2.8
2.9–3.3
3.4–3.8
≥3.9
  Mid-RV diameter
2.7–3.3
3.4–3.7
3.8–4.1
≥4.2
2.7–3.3
3.4–3.7
3.8–4.1
≥4.2
  Base-to-apex length
7.1–7.9
8.0–8.5
8.6–9.1
≥9.2
7.1–7.9
8.0–8.5
8.6–9.1
≥9.2
  RVOT diameter above aortic valve
2.5–2.9
3.0–3.2
3.3–3.5
≥3.6
2.5–2.9
3.0–3.2
3.3–3.5
≥3.6
  RVOT diameter above pulmonic valve
1.7–2.3
2.4–2.7
2.8–3.1
≥3.2
1.7–2.3
2.4–2.7
2.8–3.1
≥3.2
  Pulmonary artery diameter below  
  pulmonic valve
1.5–2.1
2.2–2.5
2.6–2.9
≥3.0
1.5–2.1
2.2–2.5
2.6–2.9
≥3.0
Right ventricular size and function in 
4-chamber view
Diastolic area, cm2
11–28
29–32
33–37
≥38
11–28
29–32
33–37
≥38
Systolic area, cm2
7.5–16
17–19
20–22
≥23
7.5–16
17–19
20–22
≥23
Fractional area change, %
32–60
25–31
18–24
≤17
32–60
25–31
18–24
≤17
Atrial sizes
  LA diameter, cm
2.7–3.8
3.9–4.2
4.3–4.6
≥4.7
3.0–4.0
4.1–4.6
4.7–5.2
≥5.3
  LA diameter/BSA, cm/m2
1.5–2.3
2.4–2.6
2.7–2.9
≥3.0
1.5–2.3
2.4–2.6
2.7–2.9
≥3.0
  RA minor axis, cm
2.9–4.5
4.6–4.9
5.0–5.4
≥5.5
2.9–4.5
4.6–4.9
5.0–5.4
≥5.5
  RA minor axis/BSA, cm/m2
1.7–2.5
2.6–2.8
2.9–3.1
≥3.2
1.7–2.5
2.6–2.8
2.9–3.1
≥3.2
(continued)
APPENDIX
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
570
Table 12
 Normal Echocardiographic Reference Limits and Partition Values in Adults (CONTINUED)
Women 
Reference 
Range
Mildly 
Abnormal
Moderately 
Abnormal
Severely 
Abnormal
Men 
Reference 
Range
Mildly 
Abnormal
Moderately 
Abnormal
Severely 
Abnormal
  LA area, cm2
<20
20–30
30–40
≥41
<20
20–30
30–40
≥41
  LA volume, mL
22–52
53–62
63–72
≥73
18–58
59–68
69–78
≥79
  LA volume/BSA, mL/m2
16–28
29–33
34–39
≥40
16–28
29–33
34–39
≥40
Aortic stenosis, classification of severity
  Aortic jet velocity, m/s
2.6–2.9
3.0–4.0
>4.0
2.6–2.9
3.0–4.0
>4.0
  Mean gradient, mmHg
<20
20–40
>40
<20
20–40
>40
  Valve area, cm2
>1.5
1.0–1.5
<1.0
>1.5
1.0–1.5
<1.0
  Indexed valve area, cm2/m2
>0.85
0.60–0.85
<0.6
>0.85
0.60–0.85
<0.6
  Velocity ratio
>0.50
0.25–0.50
<0.25
>0.50
0.25–0.50
<0.25
Mitral stenosis, classification of severity
  Valve area, cm2
>1.5
1.0–1.5
<1.0
>1.5
1.0–1.5
<1.0
  Mean gradient, mmHg
<5
5–10
>10
<5
5–10
>10
  Pulmonary artery pressure, mmHg
<30
30–50
>50
<30
30–50
>50
Aortic regurgitation, indices of severity
  Vena contracta width, cm
<0.30
0.30–0.60
≥0.60
<0.30
0.30–0.60
≥0.60
  Jet width/LVOT width, %
<25
25–64
≥65
<25
25–64
≥65
  Jet CSA/LVOT CSA, %
<5
5–59
≥60
<5
5–59
≥60
  Regurgitant volume, mL/beat
<30
30–59
≥60
<30
30–59
≥60
  Regurgitant fraction, %
<30
30–49
≥50
<30
30–49
≥50
  Effective regurgitant orifice area, cm2
<0.10
0.10–0.29
≥0.30
<0.10
0.10–0.29
≥0.30
Mitral regurgitation, indices of severity
  Vena contracta width, cm
<0.30
0.30–0.69
≥0.70
<0.30
0.30–0.69
≥0.70
  Regurgitant volume, mL/beat
<30
30–59
≥60
<30
30–59
≥60
  Regurgitant fraction, %
<30
30–49
≥50
<30
30–49
≥50
  Effective regurgitant orifice area, cm2
<0.20
0.20–0.39
≥0.40
<0.20
0.20–0.39
≥0.40
Abbreviations: BSA, body surface area; CSA, cross-sectional area; LA, left atrium; LVOT, left ventricular outflow tract; RA, right atrium; RV, right ventricle; RVOT, right ventricular outflow tract; 
2D, 2-dimensional.
Source: Values adapted from: American Society of Echocardiography, Guidelines and Standards. http://www.asecho.org/i4a/pages/index.cfm?pageid=3317. Accessed Feb 23, 2010.
 
APPENDIX 
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
571
Table 13 
Summary of Values Useful in Pulmonary Physiology
Typical Values
Symbol
Man Aged 40, 75 kg, 
175 cm Tall
Woman Aged 40, 60 
kg, 160 cm Tall
Pulmonary Mechanics
Spirometry—volume-time curves
  Forced vital capacity
FVC
5.0 L
3.4 L
  Forced expiratory volume in 1 s
FEV1
4.0 L
2.8 L
  FEV1/FVC
FEV1%
80%
78%
  Maximal midexpiratory flow rate
MMEF (FEF 25–75)
4.1 L/s
3.2 L/s
  Maximal expiratory flow rate
MEFR (FEF 200–1200)
9.0 L/s
6.1 L/s
Spirometry—flow-volume curves
  Maximal expiratory flow at 50% of expired vital  
  capacity
Vmax 50 (FEF 50%)
5.0 L/s
4.0 L/s
  Maximal expiratory flow at 75% of expired vital  
  capacity
Vmax 75 (FEF 75%)
2.1 L/s
2.0 L/s
Resistance to airflow:
  Pulmonary resistance
RL (RL)
<3.0 (cmH2O/s)/L
  Airway resistance
Raw
<2.5 (cmH2O/s)/L
  Specific conductance
SGaw
>0.13 cmH2O/s
Pulmonary compliance
  Static recoil pressure at total lung capacity
Pst TLC
25 ± 5 cmH2O
  Compliance of lungs (static)
CL
0.2 L cmH2O
  Compliance of lungs and thorax
C(L + T)
0.1 L cmH2O
  Dynamic compliance of 20 breaths per minute
C dyn 20
0.25 ± 0.05 L/cmH2O
Maximal static respiratory pressures:
  Maximal inspiratory pressure
MIP
>110 cmH2O
>70 cmH2O
  Maximal expiratory pressure
MEP
>200 cmH2O
>140 cmH2O
Lung Volumes
Total lung capacity
TLC
6.9 L
4.9 L
Functional residual capacity
FRC
3.3 L
2.6 L
Residual volume
RV
1.9 L
1.5 L
Inspiratory capacity
IC
3.7 L
2.3 L
Expiratory reserve volume
ERV
1.4 L
1.1 L
Vital capacity
VC
5.0 L
3.4 L
Gas Exchange (Sea Level)
Arterial O2 tension
Pao2
12.7 ± 0.7 kPa (95 ± 5 mmHg)
Arterial CO2 tension
Paco2
5.3 ± 0.3 kPa (40 ± 2 mmHg)
Arterial O2 saturation
Sao2
0.97 ± 0.02 (97 ± 2%)
Arterial blood pH
pH
7.40 ± 0.02
Arterial bicarbonate
HCO3
–
24 + 2 meq/L
Base excess
BE
0 ± 2 meq/L
Diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide  
(single breath)
DLCO
37 mL CO/min/mmHg 27 mL CO/min/mmHg
Dead space volume
VD
2 mL/kg body wt
Physiologic dead space; dead space-tidal  
volume ratio
VD/VT
  Rest
≤35% VT
  Exercise
≤20% VT
Alveolar-arterial difference for O2
P(A – a)O2
≤2.7 kPa ≤20 kPa (≤24 mmHg)
Source: Based on: AH Morris et al: Clinical Pulmonary Function Testing. A Manual of Uniform Laboratory Procedures, 2nd ed. Salt Lake City, 
Utah, Intermountain Thoracic Society, 1984.
APPENDIX
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
572
Table 14 
Gastrointestinal Tests
Results
Test
SI Units
Conventional Units
Absorption tests
  d-Xylose: after overnight fast, 25 g xylose given in oral 
  aqueous solution
    Urine, collected for following 5 h
25% of ingested dose
25% of ingested dose
    Serum, 2 h after dose
2.0–3.5 mmol/L
30–52 mg/dL
  Vitamin A: a fasting blood specimen is obtained and  
  200,000 units of vitamin A in oil is given orally
Serum level should rise to twice 
fasting level in 3–5 h
Serum level should rise to 
twice fasting level in 3–5 h
Bentiromide test (pancreatic function): 500 mg  
bentiromide (chymex) orally; p-aminobenzoic acid 
(PABA) measured
  Plasma
  Urine
>50% recovered in 6 h
>3.6 (±1.1) μg/mL at 90 min
>50% recovered in 6 h
Gastric juice
  Volume
    24 h
2–3 L
2–3 L
    Nocturnal
600–700 mL
600–700 mL
    Basal, fasting
30–70 mL/h
30–70 mL/h
Reaction
    pH
1.6–1.8
1.6–1.8
    Titratable acidity of fasting juice
4–9 μmol/s
15–35 meq/h
Acid output
  Basal
    Females (mean ± 1 SD)
0.6 ± 0.5 μmol/s
2.0 ± 1.8 meq/h
    Males (mean ± 1 SD)
0.8 ± 0.6 μmol/s
3.0 ± 2.0 meq/h
  Maximal (after SC histamine acid phosphate,  
  0.004 mg/kg body weight, and preceded by 50 mg  
  promethazine, or after betazole, 1.7 mg/kg body  
  weight, or pentagastrin, 6 μg/kg body weight)
    Females (mean ± 1 SD)
4.4 ± 1.4 μmol/s
16 ± 5 meq/h
    Males (mean ± 1 SD)
6.4 ± 1.4 μmol/s
23 ± 5 meq/h
  Basal acid output/maximal acid output ratio
≤0.6
≤0.6
Gastrin, serum
0–200 μg/L
0–200 pg/mL
Secretin test (pancreatic exocrine function): 1 unit/kg  
body weight, IV
  Volume (pancreatic juice) in 80 min
>2.0 mL/kg
>2.0 mL/kg
  Bicarbonate concentration
>80 mmol/L
>80 meq/L
  Bicarbonate output in 30 min
>10 mmol
>10 meq
 
APPENDIX 
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
573
Table 15 
Body Fluids and Other Mass Data
Reference Range
SI Units
Conventional Units
Ascitic fluid: 
Body fluid
  Total volume (lean) of body weight
  Intracellular
  Extracellular
50% (in obese) to 70%
30–40% of body weight
20–30% of body weight
Blood
  Total volume
    Males
69 mL/kg body weight
    Females
65 mL/kg body weight
  Plasma volume
    Males
39 mL/kg body weight
    Females
40 mL/kg body weight
  Red blood cell volume
    Males
30 mL/kg body weight
1.15–1.21 L/m2 of body surface area
    Females
25 mL/kg body weight
0.95–1.00 L/m2 of body surface area
Body mass index
18.5–24.9 kg/m2
18.5–24.9 kg/m2
Table 16
Radiation-Derived Units
Quantity
Measures
Old Unit
SI Unit
Special Name 
for SI Unit 
(Abbreviation)
Conversion
Activity
Rate of radioactive decay
curie (Ci)
Disintegrations per 
second (dps)
becquerel (Bq)
1 Ci = 3.7 × 1010 Bq
1 mCi = 37 MBq
1 Bq = 2.703 × 10–11 Ci
Exposure
Amount of ionizations pro-
duced in dry air by x-rays 
or gamma rays, per unit 
of mass
roentgen (R)
Coulomb per  
kilogram (C/kg)
none
1 C/kg = 3876 R
1 R = 2.58 × 10–4 C/kg
1 mR = 258 pC/kg
Air kerma
Sum of initial energies of 
charged particles liber-
ated by ionizing radiation 
in air, per unit of mass
rad
Joule per kilogram 
(J/kg)
gray (Gy)
1 Gy = 100 rad
1 rad = 0.01 Gy
1 mrad = 10 μGy
Absorbed 
dose
Energy deposited per unit 
of mass in a medium, e.g., 
an organ/tissue
rad
Joule per kilogram 
(J/kg)
gray (Gy)
1 Gy = 100 rad
1 rad = 0.01 Gy
1 mrad = 10 μGy
Equivalent 
dose
Energy deposited per unit 
of mass in a medium, e.g., 
an organ/tissue, weighted 
to reflect type(s) of radia-
tion
rem
Joule per kilogram 
(J/kg)
sievert (Sv)
1 Sv = 100 rem
1 rem = 0.01 Sv
1 mrem = 10 μSv
Effective dose Energy deposited per 
unit of mass in a refer-
ence individual, doubly 
weighted to reflect type(s) 
of radiation and organ(s) 
irradiated
rem
Joule per kilogram 
(J/kg)
sievert (Sv)
1 Sv = 100 rem
1 rem = 0.01 Sv
1 mrem = 10 μSv
Miscellaneous
APPENDIX
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
574
Acknowledgments
The contributions of Drs. Daniel J. Fink, Patrick M. Sluss, 
James L. Januzzi, and Kent B. Lewandrowski to this chapter in 
previous editions of Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine 
are gratefully acknowledged. We also express our gratitude to 
Drs. Amudha Palanisamy and Scott Fink for careful review of 
tables and helpful suggestions.
575
QUESTIONS
REVIEW AND  
SELF-ASSESSMENT
a
DIRECTIONS: Choose the one best response to 
each question.
1.	 A 62-year-old man presents to his physician com-
plaining of shortness of breath. All of the following 
findings are consistent with left ventricular dysfunc-
tion as a cause of the patient’s dyspnea EXCEPT:
A.	Feeling of chest tightness
B.	Nocturnal dyspnea
C.	Orthopnea
D.	Pulsus paradoxus greater than 10 mmHg
E.	Sensation of air hunger
2.	 A 48-year-old man is evaluated for hypoxia of 
unknown etiology. He recently has noticed short-
ness of breath that is worse with exertion and in 
the upright position. It is relieved with lying down. 
On physical examination, he is visibly dyspneic 
with minimal exertion. He is noted to have a rest-
ing oxygen saturation of 89% on room air. When 
lying down, his oxygen saturation increases to 93%. 
His pulmonary examination shows no wheezes or 
crackles. His cardiac examination findings are nor-
mal without murmur. His chest radiograph reports 
a possible 1-cm lung nodule in the right lower 
lobe. On 100% oxygen and in the upright position, 
the patient has an oxygen saturation of 90%. What 
is the most likely cause of the patient’s hypoxia?
A.	Circulatory hypoxia
B.	Hypoventilation
C.	Intracardiac right-to-left shunting
D.	Intrapulmonary right-to-left shunting
E.	Ventilation–perfusion mismatch
3.	 A patient is evaluated in the emergency depart-
ment for peripheral cyanosis. All of the following 
are potential etiologies EXCEPT:
A.	Cold exposure
B.	Deep venous thrombosis
    3.  (Continued)
C.	Methemoglobinemia
D.	Peripheral vascular disease
E.	Raynaud’s phenomenon
4.	 A 35-year-old woman is seen in clinic for evalua-
tion of dyspnea. Which of the following physical 
findings would fit the diagnosis of idiopathic pul-
monary arterial hypertension?
A.	Elevated neck veins, normal S1 and S2, II/VI 
diastolic blowing murmur heard at the right upper 
sternal border
B.	Elevated neck veins; singular, loud S2; II/VI systolic 
murmur left lower sternal border
C.	Elevated neck veins; loud, fixed, split S2; III/VI 
systolic murmur left lower sternal border
D.	Elevated neck veins, expiratory splitting of S2, 
II/VI harsh systolic murmur left upper sternal  
border
E.	Elevated neck veins, barrel chest, prolonged  
expiratory phase
5.	 A 75-year-old woman with widely metastatic non–
small cell lung cancer is admitted to the intensive care 
unit with a systolic blood pressure of 73/25 mmHg. 
She presented complaining of fatigue and worsening 
dyspnea over the last 3–5 days. Her physical exami-
nation shows elevated neck veins. Chest radiograph 
shows a massive, water bottle–shaped heart shadow 
and no new pulmonary infiltrates. Which of the fol-
lowing additional findings is most likely present on 
physical examination?
A.	Fall in systolic blood pressure greater than 10 mmHg 
with inspiration
B.	Lack of fall of the jugular venous pressure with 
inspiration
C.	Late diastolic murmur with opening snap
D.	Pulsus parvus et tardus
E.	Slow y-descent of jugular venous pressure tracing
Charles Wiener    n    Cynthia D. Brown    n    Anna R. Hemnes
aQuestions and answers were taken from Wiener C et al (eds): Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine Self-Assessment and Board Review, 18th ed. New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 2012.
Review and Self-Assessment
576
6.	 A 78-year-old man is admitted to the intensive 
care unit with decompensated heart failure. He 
has long-standing ischemic cardiomyopathy. Elec-
trocardiogram (ECG) shows atrial fibrillation and 
left bundle branch block. Chest radiograph shows 
cardiomegaly and bilateral alveolar infiltrates with 
Kerley’s B-lines. Which of the following is least 
likely to be present on physical examination?
A.	Fourth heart sound
B.	Irregular heart rate
C.	Pulsus alternans
D.	Reversed splitting of the second heart sound
E.	Third heart sound
7.	 A 45-year-old man is admitted to the intensive care 
unit with symptoms of congestive heart failure. He 
is addicted to heroin and cocaine and uses both 
drugs daily via injection. His blood cultures have 
yielded methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus 
in four of four bottles within 12 hours. His vital 
signs show a blood pressure of 110/40 mmHg and 
a heart rate of 132 beats/min. There is a IV/VI dia-
stolic murmur heard along the left sternal border. A 
schematic representation of the carotid pulsation is 
shown in Figure 7. What is the most likely cause 
of the patient’s murmur? 
S4
A2
Dicrotic notch
S1
P2
FIGURE 7
A.	Aortic regurgitation
B.	Aortic stenosis
C.	Mitral stenosis
D.	Mitral regurgitation
E.	Tricuspid regurgitation
8.	 A 72-year-old man seeks evaluation for leg pain 
with ambulation. He describes the pain as an aching 
to crampy pain in the muscles of his thighs. The pain 
subsides within minutes of resting. On rare occasions, 
he has noted numbness of his right foot at rest, and 
pain in his right leg has woken him at night. He has a 
history of hypertension and cerebrovascular disease. 
Four years previously, he had a transient ischemic 
attack and underwent right carotid endarterectomy. 
He currently takes aspirin, irbesartan, hydrochloro-
thiazide, and atenolol on a daily basis. On examina-
tion, he is noted to have diminished dorsalis pedis 
    8.  (Continued)
and posterior tibial pulses bilaterally. The right dor-
sal pedis pulse is faint. There is loss of hair in the 
distal extremities. Capillary refill is approximately 
5 seconds in the right foot and 3 seconds in the 
left foot. Which of the following findings would be 
suggestive of critical ischemia of the right foot?
A.	Ankle-brachial index less than 0.3
B.	Ankle-brachial index less than 0.9
C.	Ankle-brachial index greater than 1.2
D.	Lack of palpable dorsalis pedis pulse
E.	Presence of pitting edema of the extremities
9.	 A 24-year-old man is referred to cardiology after an 
episode of syncope while playing basketball. He has 
no recollection of the event, but he was told that he 
collapsed while running. He awakened lying on the 
ground and suffered multiple contusions as a result of 
the fall. He has always been an active individual but 
recently has developed some chest pain with exertion 
that has caused him to restrict his activity. His father 
died at age 44 while rock climbing. He believes his 
father’s cause of death was sudden cardiac death and 
recalls being told his father had an enlarged heart. 
On examination, the patient has a III/VI mid-systolic 
crescendo-decrescendo murmur. His electrocardio-
gram shows evidence of left ventricular hypertro-
phy. You suspect hypertrophic cardiomyopathy as 
the cause of the patient’s heart disease. Which of the 
following maneuvers would be expected to cause an 
increase in the loudness of the murmur?
A.	Hand-grip exercise
B.	Squatting
C.	Standing
D.	Valsalva maneuver
E.	A and B
F.	C and D
10.	 An 18-year-old college freshman is being evaluated 
for a heart murmur heard at health screening. She 
reports an active lifestyle, no past medical history, 
and no cardiac symptoms. She has a mid-systolic 
murmur that follows a nonejection sound and cre-
scendos with S2. The murmur duration is greater 
when going from supine to standing and decreases 
when squatting. The murmur is heard best along 
the lower left sternal border and apex. Her elec-
trocardiogram is normal. Which of the following 
is the most likely condition causing the murmur?
A.	Aortic stenosis
B.	Hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy
Review and Self-Assessment
577
  10.  (Continued)
C.	Mitral valve prolapse
D.	Pulmonic stenosis
E.	Tricuspid regurgitation
11.	 Which of the following characteristics makes a 
heart murmur more likely to be caused by tricuspid 
regurgitation than mitral regurgitation?
A.	Decreased intensity with amyl nitrate
B.	Inaudible A2 at the apex
C.	Prominent c-v wave in jugular pulse
D.	Onset signaled by a mid-systolic click
E.	Wide splitting of S2
12.	 You are examining a 25-year-old patient in clinic 
who came in for a routine examination. Cardiac 
auscultation reveals a second heart sound that is split 
and does not vary with respiration. There is also a 
grade 2–3 mid-systolic murmur at the midsternal 
border. Which of the following is most likely?
A.	Atrial septal defect
B.	Hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy
C.	Left bundle branch block
D.	Normal physiology
E.	Pulmonary hypertension
13.	 Left bundle branch block is indicative of which of 
the following sets of conditions?
A.	Atrial septal defect, coronary heart disease, aortic 
valve disease
B.	Coronary heart disease, aortic valve disease,  
hypertensive heart disease
C.	Coronary heart disease, aortic valve disease,  
pulmonary hypertension
D.	Pulmonary embolism, cardiomyopathy, hypertensive 
heart disease
E.	Pulmonary hypertension, pulmonary embolism, 
mitral stenosis
14.	 A 57-year-old man with long-standing ischemic 
cardiomyopathy is seen in the clinic for a routine 
visit. He reports good compliance with his diuretic 
regimen, but has seen his weight fall about 2 kg 
since his last visit. Routine chemistries are drawn 
and show a potassium value of 2.0 meq/L. The 
patient is referred to the emergency department for 
repletion of potassium. Which of the following is 
likely to be found on ECG before administration 
of potassium?
A.	Diminution of P wave amplitude
B.	Osborne waves
  14.  (Continued)
C.	Prolongation of QT interval
D.	Prominent U waves
E.	Scooped ST segments
15.	 A 55-year-old woman from El Salvador is seen in the 
emergency department because of gradual onset of 
dyspnea on exertion. She denies chest pain, cough, 
wheezing, sputum, or fever. Her chest radiograph 
is notable for large pulmonary arteries and left atrial 
enlargement, but no parenchymal infiltrate. ECG 
shows a tall R in lead V1 and right axis deviation. 
Which of the following is most likely to be found 
on her echocardiography?
A.	Aortic regurgitation
B.	Aortic stenosis
C.	Low left ventricular ejection fraction
D.	Mitral stenosis
E.	Tricuspid stenosis
16.	 A 29-year-old woman is in the intensive care 
unit with rhabdomyolysis due to compartment 
syndrome of the lower extremities after a car 
accident. Her clinical course has been compli-
cated by acute renal failure and severe pain. She 
has undergone fasciotomies and is admitted to the 
intensive care unit. An ECG is obtained (shown 
in Figure 16). What is the most appropriate 
course of action at this point? 
A.	18-lead ECG
B.	Coronary catheterization
C.	Hemodialysis
D.	Intravenous fluids and a loop diuretic
E.	Ventilation/perfusion imaging
17.	 Acute hyperkalemia is associated with which of the 
following electrocardiographic changes?
A.	Decrease in the PR interval
B.	Prolongation of the ST segment
C.	Prominent U waves
D.	QRS widening
E.	T-wave flattening
18.	 The ECG shown below (Figure 18) was most likely 
obtained from which of the following patients? 
A.	A 33-year-old female with acute-onset severe  
headache, disorientation, and intraventricular  
blood on head CT scan
B.	A 42-year-old male with sudden-onset chest pain 
while playing tennis
Review and Self-Assessment
578
  18.  (Continued)
C.	A 54-year-old female with a long history of smok-
ing and 2 days of increasing shortness of breath and 
wheezing
D.	A 64-year-old female with end-stage renal insufficiency 
who missed dialysis for the last 4 days
E.	A 78-year-old male with syncope, delayed carotid 
upstrokes, and a harsh systolic murmur in the right 
second intercostal space
19.	 You are evaluating a new patient in your clinic who 
has brought in the ECG shown below (Figure 19) 
to the visit. The ECG was performed on the patient 
2 weeks ago. What complaint do you expect to 
elicit from the patient? 
A.	Angina
B.	Hemoptysis
C.	Paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea
D.	Pleuritic chest pain
E.	Tachypalpitations
20.	 All the following ECG findings are suggestive of 
left ventricular hypertrophy EXCEPT:
A.	(S in V1 + R in V5 or V6) greater than 35 mm
B.	R in aVL greater than 11 mm
C.	R in aVF greater than 20 mm
D.	(R in I + S in III) greater than 25 mm
E.	R in aVR greater than 8 mm
21.	 Based on the electrocardiogram below (Figure 21), 
treating which condition might specifically improve 
this patient’s tachycardia? 
A.	Anemia
B.	Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
C.	Myocardial ischemia
D.	Pain
22.	 A 75-year-old man is undergoing routine cardiac cath-
eterization for evaluation of stable angina that has not 
responded to medical therapy. He is inquiring about 
the risks associated with the procedure. Which of 
II
III
II
I
aVR
aVF
aVL
V1
V2
V3
V4
V5
V6
FIGURE 16
V1
V2
V3
V4
V5
V6
III
II
aVF
aVR
I
aVL
FIGURE 18
Review and Self-Assessment
579
  22.  (Continued)
the following is the most common complication of 
cardiac catheterization and coronary angiography?
A.	Acute renal failure
B.	Bradyarrhythmias
C.	Myocardial infarction
D.	Tachyarrhythmias
E.	Vascular access site bleeding
23.	 Which of the following patients is an appropriate 
candidate for right heart catheterization?
A.	A 54-year-old woman with dyspnea of unclear  
etiology; a loud, fixed split second heart sound;  
normal chest radiograph; and evidence of bidirectional 
shunt across her interatrial septum
  23.  (Continued)
B.	A 54-year-old man with an episode of sustained 
monomorphic ventricular tachycardia while at the 
casino terminated with bystander defibrillation. After 
arrival in the emergency department, the patient is 
hemodynamically stable.
C.	A 63-year-old woman with a history of tobacco 
abuse, hypercholesterolemia, and type 2 diabetes 
mellitus with chest pain at rest, a normal ECG, and 
mild elevation in serum troponin value
D.	A 66-year-old man with a history of diabetes and 
hypercholesterolemia brought to the emergency depart-
ment with 1 hour of substernal chest pain and shortness 
of breath. His blood pressure is 95/60 mmHg with a 
heart rate of 115 beats/min. An ECG shows a new left 
bundle branch block since his prior ECG 1 month ago.
III
II
I
aVR
aVF
aVL
V1
V2
V3
V4
V5
V6
II
FIGURE 19
  I
  II
  III
  II
  aVR
  aVL
  aVF
  V1
  V2
  V3
  V4
  V5
  V6
FIGURE 21
Review and Self-Assessment
580
  23.  (Continued)
E.	A 79-year-old man seen in the cardiology clinic for 
evaluation of severe aortic stenosis found on echocar-
diography performed for evaluation of dyspnea
24.	 A 55-year-old woman is undergoing evaluation of 
dyspnea on exertion. She has a history of hyperten-
sion since age 32 and is also obese with a body mass 
index (BMI) of 44 kg/m2. Her pulmonary function 
tests show mild restrictive lung disease. An echo-
cardiogram shows a thickened left-ventricular wall, 
left-ventricular ejection fraction of 70%, and find-
ings suggestive of pulmonary hypertension with 
an estimated right-ventricular systolic pressure of 
55 mmHg, but the echocardiogram is technically 
difficult and of poor quality. She undergoes a right 
heart catheterization that shows the following 
results:
Mean arterial pressure
Left-ventricular end-diastolic 
pressure
Pulmonary artery (PA) systolic 
pressure
PA diastolic pressure
PA mean pressure
Cardiac output
110 mmHg
25 mmHg
48 mmHg
20 mmHg
34 mmHg
5.9 L/min
What is the most likely cause of the patient’s dyspnea?
A.	Chronic thromboembolic disease
B.	Diastolic heart failure
C.	Obstructive sleep apnea
D.	Pulmonary arterial hypertension
E.	Systolic heart failure
25.	 Which of the following is a risk factor for the 
development of thromboembolism in patients with 
the tachycardia-bradycardia variant of sick sinus 
syndrome?
A.	Age greater than 50 years
B.	Atrial enlargement
C.	Diabetes mellitus
D.	Prothrombin 20210 mutation
E.	None of the above; there is no increased risk of 
thromboembolism with the tachycardia-bradycardia 
variant of sick sinus syndrome.
26.	 A 38-year-old man is evaluated for the recent onset 
of feeling fatigued. He is a busy executive and active 
triathlete. He competed a challenging course 1 week 
earlier without difficulty but feels tired at other 
times. Laboratory examination, including hematocrit 
  26.  (Continued)
and TSH, are unremarkable. Because his wife reports 
occasional snoring, a sleep study is recommended. 
There are no notable apneas, but ECG monitoring 
during the night shows sinus bradycardia. His heart 
rate varies between 42 and 56 while sleeping. His 
resting heart rate while awake is 65–72 beats/min. 
Which of the following is the most appropriate man-
agement for his bradycardia?
A.	Carotid sinus massage
B.	Intermittent nocturnal wakening
C.	Measurement of free T4
D.	No specific therapy
E.	Referral for pacemaker placement
27.	 All of the following are reversible causes of sino-
atrial node dysfunction EXCEPT:
A.	Hypothermia
B.	Hypothyroidism
C.	Increased intracranial pressure
D.	Lithium toxicity
E.	Radiation therapy
28.	 A 58-year-old man is admitted to the hospital after 
experiencing 2 days of severe dyspnea. Three weeks 
ago he had an ST elevation myocardial infarction that 
was treated with thrombolytics. He reports excel-
lent adherence to his medical regimen that includes 
atorvastatin, lisinopril, metoprolol, and aspirin. On 
examination, his heart rate is 44 beats/min, his blood 
pressure is 100/45 mmHg, his lungs have bilateral 
crackles, and his cardiac examination is notable for 
elevated neck veins, bradycardia, and 2+ bilateral leg 
edema. There are no gallops or new murmurs. ECG 
shows sinus bradycardia and evidence of the recent 
infarct, but no acute changes. Which of the follow-
ing is the most appropriate next management step?
A.	Begin dopamine
B.	Hold metoprolol
C.	Measure TSH
D.	Refer for pacemaker placement
E.	Refer for urgent coronary angiography
29.	 A 23-year-old college student home for the summer 
is evaluated in the emergency department for dizzi-
ness that began within the last 3 days. He reports a rash 
on his right leg that looked like a target several days 
ago, but is otherwise healthy. Physical examination 
shows bradycardia at 40 beats/min and blood pres-
sure of 88/42 mmHg; oxygen saturation is normal. 
His examination is otherwise unremarkable except 
for a bulls-eye rash over the right upper thigh. 
Review and Self-Assessment
581
  29.  (Continued)
ECG shows third-degree AV block. Which of the 
following laboratory studies is most likely to reveal 
the etiology of his signs and symptoms?
A.	ANA
B.	HLA B27 testing
C.	Borrelia burgdorferi ELISA
D.	RPR
E.	SCL-70
30.	 In the tracing below (Figure 30), what type of 
conduction abnormality is present and where in 
the conduction pathway is the block usually found? 
A.	First-degree AV block; intranodal
B.	Second-degree AV block type 1; intranodal
C.	Second-degree AV block type 2; infranodal
D.	Second-degree AV block type 2; intranodal
31.	 A 47-year-old woman with a history of tobacco 
abuse and ulcerative colitis is evaluated for intermit-
tent palpitations. She reports that for the last 6 months 
every 2–4 days she notes a sensation of her heart “flip-
flopping” in her chest for approximately 5 minutes. 
She has not noted any precipitating factors and has not 
felt lightheaded or had chest pains with these episodes. 
Her physical examination is normal. A resting ECG 
reveals sinus rhythm and no abnormalities. Aside from 
checking serum electrolytes, which of the following is 
the most appropriate testing?
A.	Abdominal CT with oral and IV contrast
B.	Event monitor
C.	Holter monitor
D.	Reassurance with no further testing needed
E.	Referral for EP study
32.	 After further testing, the patient in question 31 is 
found to have several episodes of atrial premature 
contractions. Which of the following statements 
regarding the dysrhythmia in this patient is true?
A.	Atrial premature contractions are less common than 
ventricular premature contractions on extended 
ECG monitoring.
  32.  (Continued)
B.	Echocardiography is indicated to determine if  
structural heart disease is present.
C.	Metoprolol should be initiated for symptom control.
D.	The patient should be reassured that this is not a 
dangerous condition and does not require further 
evaluation.
E.	The patient should undergo a stress test to determine 
if ischemia is present.
33.	 A 55-year-old man with end-stage COPD is admit-
ted to the intensive care unit with an exacerbation 
of his obstructive lung disease. Because of hyper-
carbic respiratory failure, he is intubated and placed 
on assist-control mechanical ventilation. Despite 
aggressive sedation, his ventilator alarms several 
times that peak inspiratory pressures are high. The 
physician is called to the bedside to evaluate tachy-
cardia. Examination is notable for a blood pressure 
of 112/68 mmHg and heart rate of 180 beats/min. 
Cardiac examination shows a regular rhythm, but 
no other abnormality. Breath sounds are decreased 
on the right. ECG shows narrow complex tachy-
cardia. With carotid sinus massage, the heart rate 
transiently drops to 130 beats/min, but then returns 
to 180 beats/min. Which of the following is the 
most appropriate next step in management?
A.	Adenosine 25-mg IV push
B.	Amiodarone 200-mg IV push
C.	Chest radiograph
D.	Metoprolol 5-mg IV push
E.	Sedation followed by cardioversion
34.	 All of the following are risk factors for stroke in a 
patient with atrial fibrillation EXCEPT:
A.	Diabetes mellitus
B.	History of congestive heart failure
C.	History of stroke
D.	Hypertension
E.	Left atrial size greater than 4.0 cm
35.	 Which of the following statements regarding resto-
ration of sinus rhythm after atrial fibrillation is true?
FIGURE 30
Review and Self-Assessment
582
  35.  (Continued)
A.	Dofetilide may be safely started on an outpatient basis.
B.	In patients who are treated with pharmacotherapy 
and are found to be in sinus rhythm, a prolonged 
Holter monitor should be worn to determine if  
anticoagulation could be safely stopped.
C.	Patients who have pharmacologically maintained 
sinus rhythm after atrial fibrillation have improved 
survival compared with patients who are treated 
with rate control and anticoagulation.
D.	Recurrence of atrial fibrillation is uncommon when 
pharmacotherapy is used to maintain sinus rhythm.
36.	 A 57-year-old woman with a history of a surgi-
cally corrected atrial septal defect in childhood 
presents to the emergency department with pal-
pitations for 3 days. She is found to have a heart 
rate of 153 beats/min and blood pressure of 
128/75 mmHg, and an ECG shows atrial flutter. 
An echocardiogram demonstrates moderate right 
and left atrial dilation, postoperative changes from 
her surgery, and normal left and right ventricular 
function. Which of the following is true?
A.	Anticoagulation with dabigatran should be initiated.
B.	If a transesophageal echocardiogram does not  
demonstrate left atrial thrombus, she may be  
cardioverted without anticoagulation.
C.	Intravenous heparin should be started immediately.
D.	She should be immediately cardioverted.
E.	Transthoracic echocardiogram is adequate to rule 
out the presence of left atrial thrombus.
37.	 A patient presents with palpitations and shortness 
of breath for 6 hours. In the emergency depart-
ment waiting room an ECG is performed (shown 
in Figure 37). Which of the following is most 
likely to be found on physical examination? 
A.	Diffuse abdominal tenderness with guarding
B.	Diffuse expiratory polyphonic wheezing with poor 
air movement and hyperinflation
C.	Left ventricular heave and third heart sound
D.	Supraclavicular lymphadenopathy
E.	Vesicular rash over right T5 dermatome
38.	 A 43-year-old woman is seen in the emergency 
department after sudden onset of palpitations 
30 minutes prior to her visit. She was seated at her 
work computer when the symptoms began. Aside 
from low back pain, she is otherwise healthy. In 
triage, her heart rate is 178 beats/min, and blood 
pressure is 98/56 mmHg with normal oxygen satu-
ration. On physical examination, she has a “frog 
sign” in her neck and tachycardia, but is otherwise 
normal. ECG shows a narrow complex tachycardia 
without identifiable P waves. Which of the follow-
ing is the most appropriate first step to manage her 
tachycardia?
A.	5 mg metoprolol IV
B.	6 mg adenosine IV
C.	10 mg verapamil IV
D.	Carotid sinus massage
E.	DC cardioversion using 100 J
  I
  II
  III
  II
  aVR
  aVL
  aVF
  V1
  V2
  V3
  V4
  V5
  V6
FIGURE 37
Review and Self-Assessment
583
39.	 A 37-year-old man who is healthy aside from a 
prior knee surgery is evaluated in the emergency 
department for palpitations that developed sud-
denly while eating dinner. He is found to have 
a heart rate of 193 beats/min, blood pressure of 
92/52 mmHg, and normal oxygen saturation. His 
physical examination is normal aside from tachy-
cardia and mild diaphoresis. An ECG obtained 
before his knee surgery shows delta waves in the 
early precordial leads. His current ECG shows 
wide complex tachycardia. Which of the follow-
ing therapies is contraindicated for treatment of his 
tachyarrhythmia?
A.	Adenosine
B.	Carotid sinus massage
C.	DC cardioversion
D.	Digoxin
E.	Metoprolol
40.	 In an ECG with wide complex tachycardia, which 
of the following clues most strongly supports the 
diagnosis of ventricular tachycardia?
A.	Atrial-ventricular dissociation
B.	Classic right bundle branch block pattern
C.	Irregularly irregular rhythm with changing QRS 
complexes
D.	QRS duration greater than 120 milliseconds
E.	Slowing of rate with carotid sinus massage
41.	 A 40-year-old male with diabetes and schizophre-
nia is started on antibiotic therapy for chronic 
osteomyelitis in the hospital. His osteomyelitis has 
developed just under an ulcer where he has been 
injecting heroin. He is found suddenly unrespon-
sive by the nursing staff. His electrocardiogram is 
  41.  (Continued)
shown in Figure 41. The most likely cause of this 
rhythm is which of the following substances? 
A.	Furosemide
B.	Metronidazole
C.	Droperidol
D.	Metformin
E.	Heroin
42.	 Normal sinus rhythm is restored with electrical car-
dioversion in the patient in question 41. A 12-lead 
electrocardiogram is notable for a prolonged QT 
interval. Besides stopping the offending drug, the 
most appropriate management for this rhythm dis-
turbance should include intravenous administration 
of which of the following?
A.	Amiodarone
B.	Lidocaine
C.	Magnesium
D.	Metoprolol
E.	Potassium
43.	 You are caring for a patient with heart rate–related 
angina. With minor elevations in heart rate, the 
patient has anginal symptoms that impact his qual-
ity of life. On review of a 24-hour Holter monitor, 
it appears that the patient has sinus tachycardia at 
the time of his symptoms. What is the mechanism 
for this patient’s arrhythmia?
A.	Delayed afterdepolarizations
B.	Early afterdepolarizations
C.	Increased automaticity
D.	Reentry pathway
aVL
V1
1
FIGURE 41
Review and Self-Assessment
584
44.	 Where are the most common drivers of atrial fibril-
lation anatomically located?
A.	Left atrial appendage
B.	Mitral annulus
C.	Pulmonary vein orifice
D.	Sinus venosus
E.	Sinus node
45.	 Symptoms of atrial fibrillation vary dramatically 
from patient to patient. A patient with which of the 
following clinical conditions will likely be the most 
symptomatic (e.g., short of breath) if the patient 
develops atrial fibrillation?
A.	Acute alcohol intoxication
B.	Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
C.	Hyperthyroidism
D.	Hypothermia
E.	Postoperative after thoracotomy
46.	 A 47-year-old postmenopausal woman is seen for 
onset of severe dyspnea over the last few weeks. 
She reports no preceding chest pain, cough, spu-
tum, or fever, though she does report leg swelling. 
Physical examination is notable for a blood pressure 
of 145/78 mmHg and heart rate of 123 beats/min. 
Exophthalmos is present as well as bilateral inspira-
tory crackles occupying approximately one-third of 
the lower chest; neck vein distention; normal car-
diac rhythm, though tachycardia is present; and a 
third heart sound with no murmur. Bilateral lower 
extremity edema and a fine hand tremor are also 
present. Which of the following is the most likely 
pathophysiologic explanation for her heart failure?
A.	Anemia with high-output state
B.	Chronic systemic hypertension with resultant left 
ventricular hypertrophy and nonsystolic heart failure
C.	Hemochromatosis with subsequent restrictive  
cardiomyopathy
D.	Myocardial infarction with depressed left ventricular 
systolic function
E.	Thyrotoxicosis with high-output state
47.	 Which of the following statements is true regard-
ing measurement of plasma BNP to diagnose heart 
failure?
A.	An elevated plasma BNP in a dyspneic patient  
confirms the diagnosis of left heart failure.
B.	In the presence of renal failure, BNP levels are  
suppressed even when heart failure is present.
C.	Plasma BNP levels may be falsely low in patients 
with obesity and heart failure.
  47.  (Continued)
D.	Serial measurement of BNP in the therapy of 
decompensated heart failure should be used to guide 
therapy.
E.	All of the above are true.
48.	 A 64-year-old man with an ischemic cardiomy-
opathy, ejection fraction 35%, and stage C heart 
failure is seen in the cardiology clinic for evaluation 
of his disease status. The patient reports a regular 
exercise regimen of walking on the treadmill sev-
eral times weekly and occasional exacerbations of 
his leg edema that he manages with an extra dose 
of furosemide. He has never been hospitalized for 
heart failure. His current medical regimen includes 
lisinopril, aspirin, furosemide, atorvastatin, digoxin, 
spironolactone, and metoprolol. He is interested 
in stopping medications because of their expense. 
Which of the following statements is true regarding 
his medical regimen?
A.	ACE inhibition therapy has not been shown to 
improve heart failure symptoms.
B.	Beta blocker therapy in this patient may be  
exacerbating his occasional need for extra furosemide 
and therefore should be stopped.
C.	He should be switched from spironolactone to 
eplerenone for improved efficacy, as seen in patients 
with EF less than 35%.
D.	If digoxin is withdrawn, he will likely have  
worsening symptoms.
E.	If he is intolerant to lisinopril because of cough,  
it would be reasonable to switch him to an  
angiotensin-receptor blocker.
49.	 A 78-year-old slender woman is seen in the emer-
gency department after several weeks of dyspnea 
on exertion that progressed to dyspnea at rest fol-
lowing a summer cookout where she consumed 
multiple pickled vegetables. She also complains of 
leg swelling, orthopnea, and occasionally awaken-
ing at night with dyspnea. Her past medical history 
is notable for long-standing systemic hypertension, 
uterine prolapse, and an anxiety disorder. Examina-
tion confirms the presence of heart failure with a 
laterally displaced and sustained point of maximum 
impulse and a fourth heart sound. She is admitted 
to the hospital and given diuretics, and an echo-
cardiogram is obtained. Echocardiography reveals 
severe left ventricular hypertrophy with an ejection 
fraction of 70%, but there are no focal wall motion 
abnormalities, and aortic and mitral valvular func-
tion is intact. Her right ventricular systolic pressure 
is estimated to be 45 mmHg. After resolution of her 
Review and Self-Assessment
585
  49.  (Continued)
heart failure symptoms with diuresis, the patient is 
ready for discharge. Which of the following medi-
cations have been shown to improve mortality in 
patients with heart failure with preserved ejection 
fraction and should be included in this patient’s 
regimen?
A.	Digoxin
B.	Lisinopril
C.	Metoprolol
D.	Sildenafil
E.	None of the above
50.	 A 68-year-old man with a history of myocardial 
infarction and congestive heart failure is comfortable 
at rest. However, when walking to his car he devel-
ops dyspnea, fatigue, and sometimes palpitations. He 
must rest for several minutes before these symptoms 
resolve. His New York Heart Association classifica-
tion is which of the following?
A.	Class I
B.	Class II
C.	Class III
D.	Class IV
51.	 The husband of a 68-year-old woman with con-
gestive heart failure is concerned because his wife 
appears to stop breathing for periods of time when 
she sleeps. He has noticed that she stops breathing 
for approximately 10 seconds and then follows this 
with a similar period of hyperventilation. This does 
not wake her from sleep. She does not snore. She 
feels well rested in the morning but is very dys-
pneic with even mild activity. What is your next 
step in management?
A.	Electroencephalography
B.	Maximize heart failure management
C.	Nasal continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) 
during sleep
D.	Obtain a sleep study
E.	Prescribe bronchodilators
52.	 A 53-year-old man undergoes cardiac transplanta-
tion for end-stage ischemic cardiomyopathy due 
to an underlying familial hypercholesterolemic 
disorder. His donor was a 23-year-old motor 
vehicle accident victim. The patient does well for 
the first 3 years after transplantation with only a 
single episode of acute rejection. He shows good 
compliance with his immunosuppression regi-
men, which includes prednisone and sirolimus. 
  52.  (Continued)
He is evaluated at a routine follow-up visit and 
reports that he has developed dyspnea on exer-
tion. His pulmonary function tests are unchanged 
and a chest radiograph is normal. He undergoes 
right and left heart catheterization with biopsy of 
the transplanted heart. Severe, diffuse, concentric, 
and longitudinal coronary artery disease is found 
on coronary angiography, and histology shows no 
evidence of acute rejection. Which of the following 
statements is true regarding the coronary atheroscle-
rosis found in this patient?
A.	No immunosuppressive regimen has been shown to 
have a lower incidence of coronary atherosclerosis 
after cardiac transplantation.
B.	The coronary atherosclerosis is most likely immuno-
logic injury of the vascular endothelium in the 
transplanted organ.
C.	The current coronary atherosclerosis after cardiac 
transplant is likely due to atherosclerosis present 
prior to transplantation.
D.	The patient’s underlying cholesterol disorder did not 
predispose him to recurrent coronary atherosclerosis 
after cardiac transplantation.
E.	Therapy with statins has not been associated with  
a reduced incidence of this complication of  
transplantation.
53.	 Which of the following is a known complication of 
ventricular assist device placement in patients with 
end-stage heart failure?
A.	Cerebrovascular accident
B.	Infection of insertion site
C.	Mechanical device failure
D.	Thromboembolism
E.	All of the above
54.	 All of the following are potential complications of 
an atrial septal defect in adults EXCEPT:
A.	Air embolism from a central venous catheter
B.	Arterial oxygen desaturation with exertion
C.	Embolic cerebrovascular accident
D.	Pulmonary arterial hypertension
E.	Unstable angina
55.	 A 32-year-old woman is seen by her primary care 
physician clinic for routine follow-up of her hypo-
thyroidism. She also has a history of complex con-
genital heart disease with a partially corrected VSD 
with predominantly right to left shunt across her 
patch. She is doing well and is able to work in jani-
torial services without severe dyspnea. She denies 
Review and Self-Assessment
586
  55.  (Continued)
any heart failure or neurologic symptoms, but does 
have a peripheral oxygen saturation of 78%. A rou-
tine CBC is drawn and shows a hematocrit of 65%. 
Which of the following is the most appropriate 
management of her elevated hematocrit?
A.	Begin oxygen therapy
B.	Check co-oximetry on arterial blood gas sample
C.	Check serum erythropoietin level
D.	Expectant waiting
E.	Refer to hematology for phlebotomy
56.	 A 43-year-old man recently was found to have an 
asymptomatic atrial septal defect that was closed 
using a percutaneous patch 1 month ago without 
complication. He is undergoing a root canal at the 
dentist next week and calls his primary care office 
to determine if antibiotic prophylaxis is indicated. 
Which of the following statements is true regarding 
antibiotic prophylaxis in this patient?
A.	Because he had only simple congenital heart disease, 
no prophylaxis is indicated.
B.	Because the lesion is corrected, no prophylaxis is 
indicated.
C.	He should avoid potentially bacteremic dental  
procedures unless no other alternative is available.
D.	Routine antibiotic prophylaxis is indicated for  
bacteremic dental procedures, particularly if the 
patch is less than 6 months old.
E.	Routine antibiotic prophylaxis is indicated for  
bacteremic dental procedures whenever foreign 
material is present.
57.	 A 20-year-old man undergoes a physical examina-
tion with chest radiograph for enrollment in the 
military. He has had a normal childhood without 
any major illness. There is no history of sinusitis, 
pneumonia, or chronic respiratory disease. Chest 
radiograph shows dextrocardia. On closer physical 
examination, a spleen tip is palpable on the right 
of the abdomen and the liver can be percussed on 
the left. Which of the following is true regarding 
his condition?
A.	He is likely to have aortic stenosis.
B.	He is likely to have aspermia.
C.	He is likely to have an atrial septal defect.
D.	He is likely to have a ventriculoseptal defect.
E.	He is likely to otherwise be normal.
58.	 A 24-year-old male seeks medical attention for 
the recent onset of headaches. The headaches are 
described as “pounding” and occur during the day and 
night. He has had minimal relief with acetaminophen. 
  58.  (Continued)
Physical examination is notable for a blood pressure 
of 185/115 mmHg in the right arm, a heart rate of 
70 beats/min, arterioventricular (AV) nicking on 
funduscopic examination, normal jugular veins and 
carotid arteries, a pressure-loaded PMI with an apical 
S4, no abdominal bruits, and reduced pulses in both 
lower extremities. Review of symptoms is positive 
only for leg fatigue with exertion. Additional mea-
surement of blood pressure reveals the following:
Right arm
Left arm
Right thigh
Left thigh
185/115
188/113
100/60
102/58
Which of the following diagnostic studies is most 
likely to demonstrate the cause of the headaches?
A.	MRI of the head
B.	MRI of the kidney
C.	MRI of the thorax
D.	24-hour urinary 5-HIAA
E.	24-hour urinary free cortisol
59.	 The patient described in question 58 is most likely 
to have which of the following associated cardiac 
abnormalities?
A.	Bicuspid aortic valve
B.	Mitral stenosis
C.	Preexcitation syndrome
D.	Right bundle branch block
E.	Tricuspid atresia
60.	 Mitral stenosis is frequently complicated by pul-
monary hypertension. Which of the following is a 
cause of pulmonary hypertension in mitral stenosis?
A.	Interstitial edema in the walls of small pulmonary 
vessels
B.	Passive transmission of elevated left atrial pressure
C.	Obliterative changes in the pulmonary vascular bed
D.	Pulmonary arteriolar constriction
E.	All of the above
61.	 A 58-year-old man with a history of systemic 
hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and tobacco abuse is 
admitted to the intensive care unit with crushing 
chest pain associated with ST-segment elevation 
and small precordial Q waves. Because his symp-
toms have been present for 36 hours, he is not a 
candidate for thrombolytics. On admission to the 
ICU, his systemic blood pressure is 123/67 mmHg, 
heart rate is 67 beats/min after beta blockade, and 
Review and Self-Assessment
587
  61.  (Continued)
his oxygenation saturation is 93% on 2L nasal can-
nula. The remainder of the physical examination 
is normal. He is treated with lisinopril, aspirin, 
heparin, and metoprolol. Before transfer can be 
arranged to a tertiary center, the patient reports 
extreme dyspnea. He is found to be diaphoretic 
and to have a heart rate of 80 beats/min, blood 
pressure of 84/56 mmHg, and oxygen saturation 
of 93% on 100% non-rebreather. His lungs have 
bilateral crackles throughout, and neck veins are 
moderately elevated. ECG is unchanged. Chest 
radiograph shows new alveolar infiltrates in the 
right lung greater than the left. Which of the fol-
lowing is a likely finding on physical examination?
A.	A fourth heart sound, III/VI systolic murmur heard 
best at the apex with a “cooing” quality that radiates 
to the axilla
B.	A right ventricular heave, loud second heart sound, 
III/VI murmur increasing with inspiration at the 
right lower sternal border
C.	A third heart sound, III/VI crescendo-decrescendo 
murmur heard best at the right upper sternal border
D.	Diffuse urticarial reaction, wheezing on pulmonary 
examination
E.	Mucosal edema, finger swelling, stridor
62.	 Which of the following is the most appropriate 
next step in therapy for the patient in question 61?
A.	Aerosolized albuterol
B.	Initiation of norepinephrine infusion
C.	Intravenous infusion of nitroprusside
D.	Intravenous methylprednisolone
E.	Placement of intraaortic balloon pump
63.	 A 26-year-old healthy woman is seen for a pap smear 
at a routine office visit. She feels well and has no 
complaints and no significant past medical history. 
Her internist performs a full physical examination 
and a mid-systolic click is heard. No murmur or gal-
lop is present. She is concerned about this finding. 
Which of the following statements is true regarding 
her examination finding?
A.	In most patients with this disorder, an underlying 
cause such as a heritable disorder of connective  
tissue is found.
B.	Infective endocarditis prophylaxis is indicated for dental 
procedures potentially associated with bacteremia.
C.	Most patients are asymptomatic from this lesion and 
will remain so their entire life.
D.	She should begin therapy with aspirin 325 mg po daily.
E.	This disorder cannot be visualized on  
echocardiography.
64.	 A 78-year-old man is evaluated for the onset of 
dyspnea on exertion. He has a long history of 
tobacco abuse, obesity, and diabetes mellitus. His 
current medications include metformin, aspirin, 
and occasional ibuprofen. On physical examination 
his peripheral pulses show a delayed peak and he 
has a prominent left ventricular heave. He is in a 
regular rhythm with a IV/VI mid-systolic murmur 
that is loudest at the base of the heart and radiates to 
the carotid arteries. A fourth heart sound is present. 
Echocardiography confirms severe aortic stenosis 
without other valvular lesions. Which of the fol-
lowing most likely contributed to the development 
of his cardiac lesion?
A.	Congenital bicuspid aortic valve
B.	Diabetes mellitus
C.	Occult rheumatic heart disease
D.	Underlying connective tissue disease
E.	None of the above
65.	 A 63-year-old man presents with new-onset exer-
tional syncope and is found to have aortic stenosis. 
In counseling the patient, you tell him that your 
therapeutic recommendation is based on the obser-
vation that untreated patients with his presentation 
have a predicted average life span of:
A.	5 years
B.	4 years
C.	3 years
D.	2 years
E.	1 year
66.	 Which of the following physical examination find-
ings suggests severe aortic regurgitation?
A.	Corrigan’s pulse
B.	Pulsus alternans
C.	Pulsus bigeminus
D.	Pulsus paradoxus
E.	Pulsus parvus et tardus
67.	 A 41-year-old Somali woman is seen in clinic for 
onset of hemoptysis in the sixth month of her preg-
nancy. This is her fourth pregnancy and the others 
were uncomplicated, though she was 35 years old 
at the birth of her last child. Prior to this, she had 
been healthy. She reports mild dyspnea beginning 
at the fourth month of her pregnancy with onset of 
mild leg swelling shortly thereafter that she attrib-
uted to her pregnancy. The dyspnea has become 
severe, and she is now limited to walking around 
her house. She began to cough small amounts of 
bloody sputum 5 days ago. She had neither fever 
Review and Self-Assessment
588
  67.  (Continued)
nor purulent sputum and has not responded to a 
course of antibiotics prescribed by her obstetri-
cian. Physical examination is notable for a normal 
temperature, heart rate of 110 beats/min, blood 
pressure of 108/60 mmHg, and oxygen saturation 
of 91% on room air. No source of bleeding is 
seen in her nares or oropharynx. Her lungs have 
diffuse crackles, and cardiac examination shows 
moderately elevated neck veins, a regular heart 
rhythm, a loud second heart sound, and a low-
pitched diastolic rumble heard best at the apex. 
The abdomen has a gravid uterus, and 1+ lower 
extremity edema is present. Which of the follow-
ing is most likely to demonstrate the cause of her 
symptoms?
A.	Bronchoscopy
B.	Chest CT with contrast
C.	Echocardiogram
D.	Right heart catheterization
E.	Upper airway inspection by an otolaryngologist
68.	 In the patient described in question 67, which of 
the following should be prescribed at her visit to 
alleviate her symptoms?
A.	Benazepril
B.	Digoxin
C.	Furosemide
D.	Heparin
E.	Levofloxacin
69.	 Which of the following patients with echocardio-
graphic evidence of significant mitral regurgitation 
has the best indication for surgery with the most 
favorable likelihood of a positive outcome?
A.	A 52-year-old man with an ejection fraction of 25%, 
NYHA class III symptoms, and a left-ventricular 
end-systolic dimension of 60 mm
B.	A 54-year-old man with an ejection fraction  
of 30%, NYHA class II symptoms, and pulmonary 
hypertension
C.	A 63-year-old man in sinus rhythm without  
symptoms, an ejection fraction of 65%, and a  
normal right heart catheterization
D.	A 66-year-old man without symptoms, an ejection 
fraction of 50%, and left-ventricular end-systolic 
dimension of 45 mm
E.	A 72-year-old asymptomatic woman with newly 
discovered atrial fibrillation, ejection fraction of 
60%, and end-systolic dimension of 35 mm
70.	 All of the following are potential causes of tricuspid 
regurgitation EXCEPT:
A.	Congenital heart disease
B.	Infective endocarditis
C.	Inferior wall myocardial infarction
D.	Pulmonary arterial hypertension
E.	Rheumatic heart disease
F.	All of the above will cause tricuspid regurgitation
71.	 All the following are true about cardiac valve 
replacement EXCEPT:
A.	Bioprosthetic valve replacement is preferred to 
mechanical valve replacement in younger patients 
because of the superior durability of the valve.
B.	Bioprosthetic valves have a low incidence of  
thromboembolic complications.
C.	The risk of thrombosis with mechanical valve 
replacement is higher in the mitral position than in 
the aortic position.
D.	Mechanical valves are relatively contraindicated in 
patients who wish to become pregnant.
E.	Double-disk tilting mechanical prosthetic valves 
offer superior hemodynamic characteristics over 
single-disk tilting valves.
72.	 Which of the following infectious agents have been 
associated with the development of inflammatory 
myocarditis?
A.	Coxsackievirus
B.	Diphtheria
C.	Q fever
D.	Trypanosoma cruzi
E.	All of the above
73.	 All of the following are risk factors for the devel-
opment of peripartum cardiomyopathy EXCEPT:
A.	Advanced maternal age
B.	Malnutrition
C.	Primiparity
D.	Twin pregnancy
E.	Use of tocolytics
74.	 A 67-year-old man with a long history of alcohol 
abuse presents with findings consistent with left 
ventricular failure including pulmonary edema and 
congestion. He undergoes right heart catheteriza-
tion and left heart catheterization. No significant 
coronary artery disease is found. Which of the fol-
lowing right heart catheterization numbers (see 
Table 74) would support a diagnosis of beriberi 
heart disease?
Review and Self-Assessment
589
75.	 A 20-year-old basketball player is seen for evalua-
tion prior to beginning another season of competi-
tive sports. A harsh systolic murmur is heard at the 
left lower sternal border. Which of the following 
maneuvers will enhance this murmur if hypertro-
phic cardiomyopathy is the underlying cause?
A.	Hand grip
B.	Leaning forward while sitting
C.	Lying left side down
D.	Squatting
E.	Valsalva maneuver
76.	 A 62-year-old woman presents to your office with 
dyspnea of 4 months duration. She has a history of 
monoclonal gammopathy of unclear significance 
(MGUS) and has been lost to follow-up for the past 
5 years. She is able to do only minimal activity before 
she has to rest but has no symptoms at rest. She has 
developed orthopnea but denies paroxysmal noctur-
nal dyspnea. She complains of fatigue, lightheaded-
ness, and lower extremity swelling. On examination, 
blood pressure is 110/90 mmHg and heart rate is 
94 beats/min. Jugular venous pressure is elevated, and 
the jugular venous wave does not fall with inspiration. 
An S3 and S4 are present, as well as a mitral regur-
gitation murmur. The point of maximal impulse is 
not displaced. Abdominal examination is significant 
for ascites and a large, tender, pulsatile liver. Chest 
radiograph shows bilateral pulmonary edema. An 
electrocardiogram shows an old left bundle branch 
block. Which clinical features differentiate constric-
tive pericarditis from restrictive cardiomyopathy?
A.	Elevated jugular venous pressure
B.	Kussmaul’s sign
C.	Narrow pulse pressure
D.	Pulsatile liver
E.	None of the above
77.	 You are evaluating a new patient in the clinic. The 
25-year-old patient was diagnosed with “heart fail-
ure” in another state and has since relocated. He 
has New York Heart Association class II symptoms 
and denies angina. He presents for evaluation and 
management. The patient has been wheelchair 
bound for many years and has severe scoliosis. He 
has no family history of hyperlipidemia. His physical 
examination is notable for bilateral lung crackles, an 
S3, and no cyanosis. An electrocardiogram (ECG) is 
obtained in the clinic and shows tall R waves in V1 
and V2 with deep Qs in V5 and V6. An echocardio-
gram reports severe global left ventricular dysfunc-
tion with reduced ejection fraction. What is the most 
likely diagnosis?
A.	Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
B.	Atrial septal defect
C.	Chronic thromboembolic disease
D.	Duchenne’s muscular dystrophy
E.	Ischemic cardiomyopathy
78.	 A 35-year-old woman with a history of tobacco 
abuse presents to the emergency department 
because of severe chest pain radiating to both 
arms. The pain began 8 hours ago and is worse 
with inspiration. She has been unable to lie down 
as this markedly exacerbates the pain, but she feels 
better with sitting forward. Examination is notable 
for a heart rate of 96 beats/min, blood pressure of 
145/78 mmHg, and oxygen saturation of 98%. 
Lungs are clear and a friction rub with three com-
ponents is audible and is best heard at the left lower 
sternal border. Which of the following are most 
likely to be found on her ECG?
A.	Diffusely inverted T waves in the precordial leads
B.	PR elevation in leads II, III, and aVF
C.	Sinus tachycardia
Table 74
        Right Atrial 
Pressure (mmHg)
Mean Pulmonary 
Arterial Pressure 
(mmHg)
Pulmonary 
Capillary Wedge 
Pressure (mmHg)
Cardiac Output 
(L/min)
Systemic Vascular 
Resistance  
(dyn • s/cm5)
A.
18
30
24
12 
  610
B. 
  4
15
12 
  6
1050
C.
24
35
28 
  3
2140
D.
24
48 
  8 
  5
2140
E. 
  2
10 
  2 
  4
2140
  74.  (Continued)
Review and Self-Assessment
590
  78.  (Continued)
D.	ST-segment elevation in I, aVL, and V2–V6 with 
upward concavity and reciprocal depressions in aVR
E.	ST-segment elevation V1–V6 with convex curvature 
and reciprocal depressions in aVR
79.	 Which of the following statements is true regarding 
pulsus paradoxus?
A.	It consists of a greater than 15 mmHg increase in 
systolic arterial pressure with inspiration.
B.	It may be found in patients with severe obstructive 
lung disease.
C.	It is the reversal of a normal phenomenon during 
inspiration.
D.	It results from right ventricular distention during 
expiration resulting in compression of the left  
ventricular volume and subsequent reduction in 
systolic pulse pressure.
E.	All of the above are true.
80.	 Which of the following are features of Beck’s triad 
in cardiac tamponade?
A.	Hypotension, electrical alternans, prominent 
x-descent in neck veins
B.	Hypotension, muffled heart sounds, electrical  
alternans
C.	Hypotension, muffled heart sounds, jugular venous 
distention
D.	Kussmaul’s sign, hypotension, muffled heart sounds
E.	Muffled heart sounds, hypotension, friction rub
81.	 A 35-year-old woman is admitted to the hospi-
tal with malaise, weight gain, increasing abdomi-
nal girth, and edema. The symptoms began about 
3 months ago and gradually progressed. The patient 
reports an increase in waist size of approximately 
15 cm. The swelling in her legs has gotten increas-
ingly worse such that she now feels her thighs are 
swollen as well. She has dyspnea on exertion and two-
pillow orthopnea. She has a past history of Hodgkin’s 
disease diagnosed at age 18. She was treated at that 
time with chemotherapy and mediastinal irradiation. 
On physical examination, she has temporal wast-
ing and appears chronically ill. Her current weight 
is 96 kg, which reflects an increase of 11 kg over 
the past 3 months. Her vital signs are normal. Her 
jugular venous pressure is approximately 16 cm, 
and the neck veins do not collapse on inspiration. 
Heart sounds are distant. There is a third heart sound 
heard shortly after aortic valve closure. The sound 
is short and abrupt and is heard best at the apex. 
The liver is enlarged and pulsatile. Ascites is present. 
  81.  (Continued)
There is pitting edema extending throughout the 
lower extremities and onto the abdominal wall. 
Echocardiogram shows pericardial thickening, dila-
tation of the inferior vena cava and hepatic veins, 
and abrupt cessation of ventricular filling in early 
diastole. Ejection fraction is 65%. What is the best 
approach for treatment of this patient?
A.	Aggressive diuresis only
B.	Cardiac transplantation
C.	Mitral valve replacement
D.	Pericardial resection
E.	Pericardiocentesis
82.	 A 19-year-old previously healthy hockey player is 
defending the goal when he is hit in the left chest 
with a hockey puck. He immediately collapses to 
the ice. His coach runs to his side and finds him 
unresponsive and without a pulse. Which of the fol-
lowing is most likely responsible for this syndrome?
A.	Aortic rupture
B.	Cardiac tamponade
C.	Commotio cordis
D.	Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
E.	Tension pneumothorax
83.	 Which of the following is the most common 
cause of native valve infective endocarditis in the 
community?
A.	Coagulase-negative staphylococci
B.	Coagulase-positive staphylococci
C.	Enterococci
D.	Fastidious gram-negative coccobacilli
E.	Non-enterococcal streptococci
84.	 All of the following are minor criteria in the Duke 
criteria for the clinical diagnosis of infective endo-
carditis EXCEPT:
A.	Immunologic phenomena (glomerulonephritis, 
Osler nodes, Roth spots)
B.	New valvular regurgitation on transthoracic  
echocardiogram
C.	Predisposing condition (heart condition, intravenous 
drug use)
D.	Temperature >38.0°C
E.	Vascular phenomena (arterial emboli, septic pulmonary 
emboli, Janeway lesions, and so on)
85.	 Which of the following patients should receive anti-
biotic prophylaxis to prevent infective endocarditis?
Review and Self-Assessment
591
  85.  (Continued)
A.	A 23-year-old woman with known mitral valve 
prolapse undergoing a gingival surgery
B.	A 24-year-old woman who had an atrial septal defect 
completely corrected 22 years ago who is undergoing 
elective cystoscopy for painless hematuria
C.	A 30-year-old man with a history of intravenous 
drug use and prior endocarditis undergoing  
operative drainage of a prostatic abscess
D.	A 45-year-old man who received a prosthetic  
mitral valve 5 years ago undergoing routine dental 
cleaning
E.	A 63-year-old woman who received a prosthetic 
aortic valve 2 years ago undergoing screening  
colonoscopy
86.	 A 38-year-old homeless man presents to the emer-
gency department with a transient ischemic attack 
characterized by a facial droop and left arm weak-
ness lasting 20 minutes and left upper quadrant pain. 
He reports intermittent subjective fevers, diaphore-
sis, and chills for the past 2 weeks. He has had no 
recent travel or contact with animals. He has taken 
no recent antibiotics. Physical examination reveals a 
slightly distressed man with disheveled appearance. 
His temperature is 38.2°C, heart rate is 90 beats/
min, and blood pressure is 127/74 mmHg. He has 
poor dentition. Cardiac examination reveals an 
early diastolic murmur over the left third intercos-
tal space. His spleen is tender and 2 cm descended 
below the costal margin. He has tender painful red 
nodules on the tips of the third finger of his right 
hand and on the fourth finger of his left hand that 
are new. He has nits evident on his clothes consis-
tent with body louse infection. His white blood cell 
count is 14,500/μL with 5% band forms and 93% 
polymorphonuclear cells. Blood cultures are drawn 
followed by empirical vancomycin therapy. These 
cultures remain negative for growth 5 days later. 
He remains febrile but hemodynamically stable but 
does develop a new lesion on his toe similar to those 
on his fingers on hospital day 3. A transthoracic 
echocardiogram reveals a 1-cm mobile vegetation 
on the cusp of his aortic valve and moderate aortic 
regurgitation. A CT scan of the abdomen shows 
an enlarged spleen with wedge-shaped splenic and 
renal infarctions. What test should be sent to con-
firm the most likely diagnosis?
A.	Bartonella serology
B.	Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) heterophile antibody
C.	HIV polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
D.	Peripheral blood smear
E.	Q fever serology
87.	 In a patient with bacterial endocarditis, which of 
the following echocardiographic lesions is most 
likely to lead to embolization?
A.	5-mm mitral valve vegetation
B.	5-mm tricuspid valve vegetation
C.	11-mm aortic valve vegetation
D.	11-mm mitral valve vegetation
E.	11-mm tricuspid valve vegetation
88.	 A patient is admitted with fevers, malaise, and dif-
fuse joint pains. His initial blood cultures reveal 
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) in 
all culture bottles. He has no arthritis on examina-
tion, and his renal function is normal. Echocardio-
gram shows a 5-mm vegetation on the aortic valve. 
He is initiated on IV vancomycin at 15 mg/kg 
every 12 hours. Four days later, the patient remains 
febrile, and cultures remain positive for MRSA. In 
addition to a search for embolic foci of infection, 
which of the following changes would you make to 
his treatment regimen?
A.	No change
B.	Add gentamicin
C.	Add rifampin
D.	Check the vancomycin serum peak and trough  
levels and consider tid dosing
E.	Discontinue vancomycin, start daptomycin
89.	 Which of the following is the most common clini-
cal presentation of acute rheumatic fever (ARF)?
A.	Carditis
B.	Chorea
C.	Erythema marginatum
D.	Polyarthritis
E.	Subcutaneous nodules
90.	 A 19-year-old recent immigrant from Ethiopia 
comes to your clinic to establish primary care. She 
currently feels well. Her past medical history is 
notable for a recent admission to the hospital for 
new-onset atrial fibrillation. As a child in Ethiopia, 
she developed an illness that caused uncontrolled 
flailing of her limbs and tongue lasting approxi-
mately 1 month. She also has had three episodes 
of migratory large-joint arthritis during her adoles-
cence that resolved with pills that she received from 
the pharmacy. She is currently taking metopro-
lol and warfarin and has no known drug allergies. 
Physical examination reveals an irregularly irregular 
heartbeat with normal blood pressure. Her point 
of maximal impulse (PMI) is most prominent at the 
Review and Self-Assessment
592
  90.  (Continued)
midclavicular line and is normal in size. An early 
diastolic rumble and a 3/6 holosystolic murmur are 
heard at the apex. A soft early diastolic murmur is 
also heard at the left third intercostal space. You 
refer her to a cardiologist for evaluation of valve 
replacement and echocardiography. What other 
intervention might you consider at this time?
A.	Glucocorticoids
B.	Daily aspirin
C.	Daily doxycycline
D.	Monthly penicillin G injections
E.	Penicillin G injections as needed for all sore throats
91.	 All of the following statements regarding cardio-
genic shock are true EXCEPT:
A.	Approximately 80% of cases of cardiogenic shock 
complicating acute myocardial infarction are  
attributable to acute severe mitral regurgitation.
B.	Cardiogenic shock is more common in ST-segment 
elevation than non–ST-segment elevation  
myocardial infarction.
C.	Cardiogenic shock is uncommon in inferior wall 
myocardial infarction.
D.	Cardiogenic shock may occur in the absence of 
significant coronary stenosis.
E.	Pulmonary capillary wedge pressure is elevated in 
cardiogenic shock.
92.	 Aortic counterpulsation with an intraaortic balloon 
pump has which of the following as an advantage 
over therapy with infused vasopressors or inotropes 
in a patient with acute ST-segment elevation myo-
cardial infarction and cardiogenic shock?
A.	Increased heart rate
B.	Increased left ventricular afterload
C.	Lower diastolic blood pressure
D.	Not contraindicated in acute aortic regurgitation
E.	Reduced myocardial oxygen consumption
93.	 Which of the following is the most common elec-
trical mechanism to explain sudden cardiac death?
A.	Asystole
B.	Bradycardia
C.	Pulseless electrical activity (PEA)
D.	Pulseless ventricular tachycardia (PVT)
E.	Ventricular fibrillation
94.	 All of the following statements regarding success-
ful resuscitation from sudden cardiac death are true 
EXCEPT:
  94.  (Continued)
A.	Advanced age does not affect the likelihood of 
immediate resuscitation, only the probability of 
hospital discharge.
B.	After out-of-hospital cardiac arrest, survival rates are 
approximately 25% if defibrillation is administered 
after 5 minutes.
C.	If the initial rhythm in an out-of-hospital cardiac 
arrest is pulseless ventricular tachycardia, the patient 
has a higher probability of survival than asystole.
D.	Prompt CPR followed by prompt defibrillation 
improves outcomes in all settings.
E.	The probability of survival from cardiac arrest is 
higher if the event takes place in a public setting 
than at home.
95.	 A 32-year-old man is evaluated at a routine clinic 
visit for coronary risk factors. He is healthy and 
reports no tobacco use, his systemic blood pres-
sure is normal, and he does not have diabetes. 
His family history is notable for high cholesterol 
in his mother and maternal grandparents. Physical 
examination shows tendon xanthomas. A fasting 
cholesterol is notable for a low-density lipoprotein 
cholesterol (LDL-C) of 387 mg/dL. Which of the 
following is the most likely genetic disorder affect-
ing this individual?
A.	Autosomal dominant hypercholesterolemia
B.	Familial defective apoB-100
C.	Familial hepatic lipase deficiency
D.	Familial hypercholesterolemia
E.	Lipoprotein lipase deficiency
96.	 All of the following are potential causes of elevated 
LDL EXCEPT:
A.	Anorexia nervosa
B.	Cirrhosis
C.	Hypothyroidism
D.	Nephrotic syndrome
E.	Thiazide diuretics
97.	 A 16-year-old male is brought to your clinic by 
his parents due to concern about his weight. He 
has not seen a physician for many years. He states 
that he has gained weight due to inactivity and that 
he is less active because of exertional chest pain. 
He takes no medications. He was adopted and his 
parents do not know the medical history of his 
biological parents. Physical examination is notable 
for stage 1 hypertension and body mass index of 
30 kg/m2. He has xanthomas on his hands, heels, and 
buttocks. Laboratory testing shows a low-density 
Review and Self-Assessment
593
  97.  (Continued)
lipoprotein (LDL) of 210 mg/dL, creatinine of 
0.7 mg/dL, total bilirubin of 3.1 mg/dL, haptoglo-
bin below 6 mg/dL, and a glycosylated hemoglobin 
of 6.7%. You suspect a hereditary lipoproteinemia 
due to the clinical and laboratory findings. Which 
test would be diagnostic of the primary lipoprotein 
disorder in this patient?
A.	Congo red staining of xanthoma biopsy
B.	CT scan of the liver
C.	Family pedigree analysis
D.	Gas chromatography
E.	LDL receptor function in skin biopsy
98.	 Your 60-year-old patient with a monoclonal gam-
mopathy of unclear significance presents for a follow-
up visit and to review recent laboratory data. His 
creatinine is newly elevated to 2.0 mg/dL, potassium 
is 3.7 mg/dL, calcium is 12.2 mg/dL, low-density 
lipoprotein (LDL) is 202 mg/dL, and triglycerides 
are 209 mg/dL. On further questioning he reports 
3 months of swelling around the eyes and “foamy” 
urine. On examination, he has anasarca. Concerned 
for multiple myeloma and nephrotic syndrome, you 
order a urine protein/creatinine ratio, which returns 
at 14:1. Which treatment option would be most 
appropriate to treat his lipid abnormalities?
A.	Cholesterol ester transfer protein inhibitor
B.	Dietary management
C.	HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors
D.	Lipid apheresis
E.	Niacin and fibrates
99.	 A 48-year-old white man is seen in the clinic for a 
routine physical examination. He reports no com-
plaints. Examination shows a blood pressure of 
134/82 mmHg with a normal heart rate. BMI is 
31 kg/m2. The remainder of his physical exami-
nation is normal. Which of the following is true 
regarding lifestyle modification?
A.	Brisk walking for as little as 10 minutes, 4 days per 
week will lower his blood pressure to within the 
normal range.
B.	Dietary NaCl restriction of less than 6 g per day will 
reduce his blood pressure.
C.	Lifestyle modification will have no effect on his 
blood pressure.
D.	Reduction of alcohol consumption to three or fewer 
drinks per day will decrease his blood pressure.
E.	Weight loss of approximately 9 kg can be expected 
to bring his blood pressure to within the normal limit.
100.	A 46-year-old white female presents to your office 
with concerns about her diagnosis of hypertension 
1 month previously. She asks you about her likeli-
hood of developing complications of hypertension, 
including renal failure and stroke. She denies any 
past medical history other than hypertension and 
has no symptoms that suggest secondary causes. She 
currently is taking hydrochlorothiazide 25 mg/d. 
She smokes half a pack of cigarettes daily and drinks 
alcohol no more than once per week. Her fam-
ily history is significant for hypertension in both 
parents. Her mother died of a cerebrovascu-
lar accident. Her father is alive but has coronary 
artery disease and is on hemodialysis. Her blood 
pressure is 138/90 mmHg. Body mass index is 23. 
She has no retinal exudates or other signs of hyper-
tensive retinopathy. Her point of maximal cardiac 
impulse is not displaced but is sustained. Her rate 
and rhythm are regular and without gallops. She 
has good peripheral pulses. An electrocardiogram 
reveals an axis of –30 degrees with borderline volt-
age criteria for left ventricular hypertrophy. Creati-
nine is 1.0 mg/dL. Which of the following items in 
her history and physical examination is a risk factor 
for a poor prognosis in a patient with hypertension?
A.	Family history of renal failure and cerebrovascular 
disease
B.	Persistent elevation in blood pressure after the  
initiation of therapy
C.	Ongoing tobacco use
D.	Ongoing use of alcohol
E.	Presence of left ventricular hypertrophy on ECG
101.	A 28-year-old female has hypertension that is dif-
ficult to control. She was diagnosed at age 26. Since 
that time she has been on increasing amounts of 
medication. Her current regimen consists of labetalol 
1000 mg bid, lisinopril 40 mg qd, clonidine 0.1 mg 
bid, and amlodipine 5 mg qd. On physical examina-
tion she appears to be without distress. Blood pres-
sure is 168/100 mmHg, and heart rate is 84 beats/
min. Cardiac examination is unremarkable, without 
rubs, gallops, or murmurs. She has good peripheral 
pulses and has no edema. Her physical appearance 
does not reveal any hirsutism, fat maldistribution, or 
abnormalities of genitalia. Laboratory studies reveal 
a potassium of 2.8 meq/dL and a serum bicarbonate 
of 32 meq/dL. Fasting blood glucose is 114 mg/dL. 
What is the likely diagnosis?
A.	Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
B.	Fibromuscular dysplasia
C.	Cushing’s syndrome
Review and Self-Assessment
594
101.  (Continued)
D.	Conn’s syndrome
E.	Pheochromocytoma
102.	What is the best way to diagnose this disease in 
question 101?
A.	Renal vein renin levels
B.	24-hour urine collection for metanephrines
C.	Magnetic resonance imaging of the renal arteries
D.	24-hour urine collection for cortisol
E.	Plasma aldosterone/renin ratio
103.	Which of the following patients with aortic dissec-
tion or hematoma is best managed without surgical 
therapy?
A.	A 74-year-old male with a dissection involving the 
root of the aorta.
B.	A 45-year-old female with a dissection involving the 
aorta distal to the great vessel origin but cephalad to 
the renal arteries.
C.	A 58-year-old male with aortic dissection involving 
the distal aorta and the bilateral renal arteries.
D.	A 69-year-old male with an intramural hematoma 
within the aortic root.
E.	All of the above patients require surgical manage-
ment of their aortic disease.
104.	A 68-year-old male presents to your office for 
routine follow-up care. He reports that he is feel-
ing well and has no complaints. His past medical 
history is significant for hypertension and hyper-
cholesterolemia. He continues to smoke a pack of 
cigarettes daily. He is taking chlorthalidone 25 mg 
daily, atenolol 25 mg daily, and pravastatin 40 mg 
nightly. Blood pressure is 133/85 mmHg, and heart 
rate is 66 beats/min. Cardiac and pulmonary exam-
inations are unremarkable. A pulsatile abdominal 
mass is felt just to the left of the umbilicus and mea-
sures approximately 4 cm. You confirm the diag-
nosis of abdominal aortic aneurysm by CT imaging. 
It is located infrarenally and measures 4.5 cm. All 
the following are true about the patient’s diagnosis 
EXCEPT:
A.	The 5-year risk of rupture of an aneurysm of this 
size is 1–2%.
B.	Surgical or endovascular intervention is warranted 
because of the size of the aneurysm.
C.	Infrarenal endovascular stent placement is an option 
if the aneurysm experiences continued growth in 
light of the location of the aneurysm infrarenally.
104.  (Continued)
D.	Surgical or endovascular intervention is warranted if 
the patient develops symptoms of recurrent abdomi-
nal or back pain.
E.	Surgical or endovascular intervention is warranted if 
the aneurysm expands beyond 5.5 cm.
105.	A 32-year-old female is seen in the emergency 
department for acute shortness of breath. A helical 
CT shows no evidence of pulmonary embolus, but 
incidental note is made of dilatation of the ascend-
ing aorta to 4.3 cm. All the following are associated 
with this finding EXCEPT:
A.	Syphilis
B.	Takayasu’s arteritis
C.	Giant cell arteritis
D.	Rheumatoid arthritis
E.	Systemic lupus erythematosus
106.	 A 68-year-old man with a history of coronary artery 
disease is seen in his primary care clinic for complaint 
of cough with sputum production. His care provider 
is concerned about pneumonia, so a chest radiograph 
is ordered. On the chest radiograph, the aorta appears 
tortuous with a widened mediastinum. A contrast-
enhanced CT of the chest confirms the presence of a 
descending thoracic aortic aneurysm measuring 4 cm 
with no evidence of dissection. What is the most 
appropriate management of this patient?
A.	Consult interventional radiology for placement of an 
endovascular stent.
B.	Consult thoracic surgery for repair.
C.	No further evaluation is needed.
D.	Perform yearly contrast-enhanced chest CT and 
refer for surgical repair when the aneurysm size is 
greater than 4.5 cm.
E.	Treat with beta blockers, perform yearly contrast-
enhanced chest CT, and refer for surgical repair if 
the aneurysm grows more than 1 cm/year.
107.	A 37-year-old woman with no significant past 
medical history except for a childhood murmur is 
evaluated for severe pain of sudden onset in her 
right lower extremity. Examination is notable for 
a young, uncomfortable woman with normal vital 
signs except for a heart rate of 110 beats/min. Right 
leg has pallor distal to the right knee and is cold 
to the touch, and the dorsalis pedis pulse is absent. 
Which of the following studies is likely to diagnose 
the underlying reason for the patient’s presentation?
A.	Angiography of right lower extremity
B.	Blood cultures
Review and Self-Assessment
595
1.	 The answer is D. 
(Chap. 5) Shortness of breath, or dyspnea, is a common 
presenting complaint in primary care. However, dyspnea 
is a complex symptom and is defined as the subjective 
experience of breathing discomfort that includes compo-
nents of physical as well as psychosocial factors. A signifi-
cant body of research has been developed regarding the 
language by which a patient describes dyspnea with certain 
factors being more common in specific diseases. Individ-
uals with airways diseases (asthma, chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease [COPD]) often describe air hunger, 
increased work of breathing, and the sensation of being 
unable to get a deep breath because of hyperinflation. 
In addition, individuals with asthma often complain of a 
tightness in the chest. Individuals with cardiac causes of 
dyspnea also describe chest tightness and air hunger but 
do not have the same sensation of being unable to draw 
a deep breath or have increased work of breathing. A 
careful history will also lead to further clues regarding the 
cause of dyspnea. Nocturnal dyspnea is seen in conges-
tive heart failure or asthma, and orthopnea is reported in 
heart failure, diaphragmatic weakness, and asthma that is 
triggered by esophageal reflux. When discussing exer-
tional dyspnea, it is important to assess if the dyspnea is 
chronic and progressive or episodic. Whereas episodic 
dyspnea is more common in myocardial ischemia and 
asthma, COPD and interstitial lung diseases present with 
a persistent dyspnea. Platypnea is a rare presentation of 
dyspnea in which a patient is dyspneic in the upright 
position and feels improved with lying flat. On physi-
cal examination of a patient with dyspnea, the physician 
should observe the patient’s ability to speak and the use 
of accessory muscle or preference of the tripod position. 
As part of vital signs, a pulsus paradoxus may be mea-
sured with a value of greater than 10 mmHg common 
in asthma and COPD. Pulsus paradoxus greater than 
10 mmHg may also occur in pericardial tamponade. Lung 
examination may demonstrate decreased diaphragmatic 
excursion, crackles, or wheezes that allow one to deter-
mine the cause of dyspnea. Further workup may include 
pulmonary function testing, chest radiography, chest CT, 
electrocardiography, echocardiography, or exercise test-
ing, among others, to ascertain the cause of dyspnea.
2.	 The answer is D. 
(Chap. 6) When a patient presents for evaluation of 
hypoxia, it is important to consider the underlying 
mechanism of hypoxia in order to determine the eti-
ology. The primary causes of hypoxia are related to 
respiratory disease and include ventilation/perfusion 
(V/Q) mismatch, hypoventilation, and intrapulmonary 
right-to-left shunting. Causes of hypoxia outside of 
the respiratory system include intracardiac right-to-left 
shunting, high-altitude hypoxia, anemic hypoxia, cir-
culatory hypoxia, and carbon monoxide poisoning. In 
this patient, the mechanism of hypoxia can be narrowed 
to two possibilities—intracardiac versus intrapulmonary 
right-to-left shunting—quite easily because the patient 
failed to correct his hypoxia in response to 100% oxy-
gen. The history of platypnea and orthodeoxia is sugges-
tive that the likely cause is intrapulmonary rather than 
intracardiac shunting. The finding of a possible lung 
nodule on chest radiographs in the lower lung fields also 
is supportive of a pulmonary cause of shunting through 
an arteriovenous malformation, which can appear as a 
lung nodule on chest x-ray. An intracardiac right-to-
left shunt is caused by congenital cardiac malformations 
and Eisenmenger syndrome. If there was an intracar-
diac cause of shunt, the cardiac examination would be 
expected to demonstrate a murmur and/or evidence of 
pulmonary hypertension.
V/Q mismatch is the most common cause of hypoxia 
and results from perfusion of areas of the lung that receive 
limited ventilation. Examples of V/Q mismatch include 
asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and pul-
monary embolus. Hypoxia caused by V/Q mismatch 
can be corrected with supplemental oxygen. Hypoven-
tilation can be caused by multiple causes, including acute 
respiratory depression or chronic respiratory failure with 
elevations in PaCO2. Hypoxia caused by hypoventila-
tion is also correctable with oxygen but frequently has a 
normal alveolar–arterial oxygen gradient.
Causes of hypoxia outside the respiratory system are 
less common. High-altitude hypoxia becomes apparent 
when individuals travel to elevations greater than 3000 m. 
Anemic hypoxia is not associated with a decrease 
in PaO2, but a decrease in hemoglobin does cause 
107.  (Continued)
C.	Echocardiogram with bubble study
D.	Serum c-ANCA
E.	Venous ultrasound of right upper extremity
108.	Doppler echocardiography is most useful for diag-
nosis of which of the following cardiac lesions?
A.	Determination of cardiac mass in a patient with an 
audible “plop” on examination
108.  (Continued)
B.	Determination of left ventricular ejection fraction in 
a patient with a history of myocardial infarction
C.	Diagnosis of myocardial ischemia in a patient with 
atypical chest pain
D.	Diagnosis of pericardial effusion
E.	Diastolic filling assessment in a patient with  
suspected heart failure with preserved ejection  
fraction
ANSWERS
Review and Self-Assessment
596
decreased oxygen-carrying capacity in the blood and 
relative tissue hypoxia if severe. Circulatory hypoxia 
refers to tissue hypoxia that occurs because of a decrease 
cardiac output that leads to greater tissue extraction of 
oxygen. As a result, the venous partial pressure of oxy-
gen is reduced, and there is an increased arterial-mixed 
venous oxygen gradient.
3.	 The answer is C. 
(Chap. 6) In the evaluation of cyanosis, the first step is to 
differentiate central from peripheral cyanosis. In central 
cyanosis, because the etiology is either reduced oxygen 
saturation or abnormal hemoglobin, the physical findings 
include bluish discoloration of both mucous membranes 
and skin. In contrast, peripheral cyanosis is associated with 
normal oxygen saturation but slowing of blood flow and 
an increased fraction of oxygen extraction from blood; 
subsequently, the physical findings are present only in 
the skin and extremities. Mucous membranes are spared. 
Peripheral cyanosis is commonly caused by cold exposure 
with vasoconstriction in the digits. Similar physiology 
is found in Raynaud’s phenomenon. Peripheral vascu-
lar disease and deep venous thrombosis result in slowed 
blood flow and increased oxygen extraction with sub-
sequent cyanosis. Methemoglobinemia causes abnormal 
hemoglobin that circulates systemically. Consequently, 
the cyanosis associated with this disorder is systemic. 
Other common causes of central cyanosis include severe 
lung disease with hypoxemia, right-to-left intracardiac 
shunting, and pulmonary arteriovenous malformations.
4.	 The answer is B. 
(Chaps. 9, 40) Pulmonary hypertension is associated with 
a loud second heart sound that is heard to be louder than 
the first heart sound at the cardiac base. In idiopathic 
pulmonary arterial hypertension, there is no associated 
congenital lesion, such as atrial septal defect (ASD). In 
ASD, the components of the second heart sound, aortic 
and pulmonic valve closure, do not alter their timing 
with respect to respiratory cycle and are always widely 
split, and thus are described as “fixed split.” In idiopathic 
pulmonary arterial hypertension, the components of the 
second heart sound are nearly superimposed and loud; 
often there is little respiratory variation. The soft sys-
tolic murmur at the left lower sternal border of tricus-
pid regurgitation is nearly always present in pulmonary 
hypertension of all etiologies. Idiopathic pulmonary 
arterial hypertension, by definition, is not associated 
with a parenchymal lung disease such as emphysema. 
Patients with idiopathic pulmonary arterial hyperten-
sion should not have physical findings associated with 
chronic airways disease.
5.	 The answer is A. 
(Chap. 9) The patient is very likely to have pericardial 
tamponade from metastatic cancer as suggested by her 
elevated neck veins, heart shadow shape and size, and 
predisposing condition. Because of the exaggerated 
interventricular dependence, the normal (<10 mmHg) 
fall in systemic blood pressure with inspiration is exag-
gerated (often >15 mmHg) with cardiac tamponade. 
This is referred to as pulsus paradoxus, though it is in 
fact an augmentation of a normal finding. Kussmaul’s 
sign, or a lack of fall of the jugular venous pressure with 
inspiration, usually denotes a lack of compliance in the 
right ventricle, as seen most frequently in constrictive 
pericarditis, though it may be found in restrictive car-
diomyopathy or massive pulmonary embolism. A rapid 
y-descent, which follows the peak of the v wave, of 
jugular venous pressure tracing is indicative of cardiac 
tamponade. Pulsus parvus et tardus, or small and slow 
arterial pulsation, is a late finding in aortic stenosis. Late 
diastolic murmur and opening snap is found in mitral 
stenosis.
6.	 The answer is A. 
(Chap. 9) A fourth heart sound indicates left ventricular 
presystolic expansion and is common among patients in 
whom active atrial contraction is important for ventric-
ular filling. A fourth heart sound is not found in atrial 
fibrillation. An irregular heart rate is characteristic of 
atrial fibrillation. The irregular rate is often characterized 
as “irregularly irregular.” A third heart sound occurs 
during the rapid filling phase of ventricular diastole and 
indicates heart failure. Reversed splitting of the second 
heart sound occurs with left bundle branch block, as this 
patient has. Finally, pulsus alternans is beat-to-beat vari-
ability in pulse amplitude. It is present when only every 
other Korotkoff sound is audible as the cuff pressure is 
lowered slowly. It is thought to be due to cyclic changes 
in intracellular calcium and action potential duration and 
is associated with severe left ventricular failure.
7.	 The answer is A. 
(Chap. 9) The presentation of this patient is consistent 
with the diagnosis of acute valvular dysfunction due to 
infective endocarditis. The presence of a widened pulse 
pressure and diastolic murmur heard best along the lower 
sternal border suggests aortic regurgitation. Panel C of 
Figure 9-2 shows a typical bisferiens pulse that is char-
acteristic of aortic regurgitation. With a bisferiens pulse, 
there are two distinct pulsations that can be palpated 
with systole. The initial pulse represents an exaggerated 
percussion wave reflecting the increased stroke volume 
that occurs in aortic regurgitation, with the second peak 
reflecting the tidal, or anacrotic, wave.
Infective endocarditis causes loss of valvular integrity 
and acutely causes valvular regurgitation. Of the other 
options, both mitral regurgitation and tricuspid regur-
gitation (choice E) would cause systolic and not dia-
stolic murmurs. A hyperkinetic pulse may occur in these 
conditions, particularly if associated with fever or sepsis. 
Review and Self-Assessment
597
With a hyperkinetic pulse the usual dichrotic notch is 
more pronounced, as seen in panel E of the figure. Mitral 
stenosis causes a diastolic murmur but is not a com-
mon lesion associated with infective endocarditis, unless 
underlying valvular stenosis was present prior to acquir-
ing the infection. It is not associated with a bisferiens 
pulse. Aortic stenosis is associated with pulsus parvus et 
tardus, with a delayed and prolonged carotid upstroke 
as shown in panel B of the figure. Aortic stenosis has an 
associated harsh crescendo-decrescendo systolic murmur.
8.	 The answer is A. 
(Chap. 9) Peripheral arterial disease (PAD) affects 5–8% 
of Americans, with increasing incidence with age. Over 
the age of 65, the incidence of PAD rises to between 
12% and 20%. The primary symptom of PAD is clau-
dication. As this patient describes, claudication occurs 
with ambulation and is often described as a crampy to 
aching pain that is relieved with rest. On physical exam-
ination, those with PAD often have diminished periph-
eral pulses, delayed capillary refill, and hair loss in the 
distal extremities. The skin is often cool to the touch 
with a thin, shiny appearance. In severe PAD, pain in 
the extremities occurs at rest. Diagnosis of PAD can be 
suggested by these findings and should be documented 
by determination of the ankle-brachial index (ABI), as 
physical examination alone is insufficient to diagnose 
PAD. Although lack of a palpable pulse suggests criti-
cal ischemia, it is not diagnostic. To perform an ABI, 
blood pressures are determined in the arm and the lower 
extremities. Either the dorsalis pedis or posterior tibial 
pulses can be used. The ABI is calculated by dividing 
the ankle systolic pressure by the brachial systolic pres-
sure. A resting ABI less than 0.9 is abnormal, but critical 
ischemia with rest pain does not occur until the ABI is 
less than 0.3. In individuals with heavily calcified blood 
vessels, the ABI can be abnormally elevated (ABI >1.2) 
when PAD is present. In this situation, toe pressures to 
determine ABI or employing imaging techniques such 
as MRI or arteriography should be considered. Lower 
extremity edema is suggestive of congestive heart failure, 
not PAD.
9.	 The answer is F. 
(Chap. 9) When a murmur of uncertain cause is iden-
tified on physical examination, a variety of physiologic 
maneuvers can be used to assist in the elucidation of the 
cause. Commonly used physiologic maneuvers include 
change with respiration, Valsalva maneuver, position, 
and exercise. In hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, there is 
asymmetric hypertrophy of the interventricular septum, 
which creates a dynamic outflow obstruction. Maneuvers 
that decrease left-ventricular filling will cause an increase 
in the intensity of the murmur, whereas those that 
increase left-ventricular filling will cause a decrease in the 
murmur. Of the interventions listed, both standing and a 
Valsalva maneuver will decrease venous return and sub-
sequently decrease left ventricular filling, resulting in an 
increase in the loudness of the murmur of hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy. Alternatively, squatting will increase 
venous return and thus decrease the murmur. Maximum 
hand-grip exercise also will result in a decreased loudness 
of the murmur.
10.	 The answer is C. 
(Chap. 10) Mitral valve prolapse is characterized by a 
mid-systolic nonejection sound (click) followed by a late 
systolic murmur that crescendos and terminates with S2. 
A decrease in venous return induced by standing will 
move the click closer to S1 and increase the duration 
of the murmur. Squatting will increase venous return 
and shorten the duration of the murmur. The murmur 
of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy behaves in a similar 
fashion, but there would be no nonejection click, and 
left ventricular hypertrophy would be expected on elec-
trocardiography (ECG). Aortic stenosis is best heard at 
the right second intercostal space radiating to the carotid 
and is crescendo-decrescendo in character. Congenital 
pulmonic stenosis is crescendo-decrescendo in character 
and is heard best in the second to third left intercostal 
space. If severe, there is a parasternal lift right ventricu-
lar overload on ECG. Tricuspid regurgitation causes a 
holosystolic, not mid-systolic, murmur that increases 
with inspiration.
11.	 The answer is C. 
(Chap. 10) Tricuspid regurgitation and mitral regurgi-
tation (along with ventricular septal defect) cause holo-
systolic murmurs. These murmurs have their onset with 
S1 and terminate at or with S2. Whereas tricuspid regur-
gitation is heard best over the left sternal border, mitral 
regurgitation is heard best at the apex with radiation to 
the base or axilla. The onset of a murmur after S1 with a 
nonejection sound (click) is characteristic of mitral valve 
prolapse. Amyl nitrate decreases the intensity of mitral 
regurgitation and ventricular septal defect murmurs. 
Tricuspid regurgitation increases with inspiration. Wide 
splitting of S2 is characteristic of ventricular septal defects. 
Inaudible A2 at the ventricular apex is characteristic of 
mitral regurgitation. Because of the incompetent tricuspid 
valve, the murmur of tricuspid regurgitation is associated 
with prominent c-v waves and a sharp y-descent in the 
jugular venous pulse.
12.	 The answer is A. 
(Chap. 10) Evaluating the splitting of the aortic (A2) and 
pulmonic (P2) components of the second heart sound 
(S2) during auscultation can be diagnostically useful. 
In normal conditions, P2 follows A2, and the splitting 
increases during inspiration. Reversed (or paradoxical) 
splitting of S2, when P2 precedes A2 during expiration 
(and they come closer together during inspiration), 
Review and Self-Assessment
598
is attributable to a delay in A2 and is characteristic of 
severe aortic stenosis, hypertrophic obstructive cardio-
myopathy, left bundle branch block, right ventricular 
pacing, or acute myocardial ischemia. Wide splitting of 
S2 is an accentuation of the physiologic pattern usually 
caused by delayed pulmonic valve closing (right bundle 
branch block, pulmonary stenosis, pulmonary hyperten-
sion) or early aortic valve closure (severe mitral regur-
gitation). Fixed splitting (no respiratory variation) with 
the murmur described is characteristic of an atrial sep-
tal defect. This is an important finding because it may 
be asymptomatic until the third or fourth decade of 
life and, if undiagnosed, may lead to severe pulmonary 
hypertension and Eisenmenger syndrome.
13.	 The answer is B. 
(Chap. 11) Left bundle branch, defined by QRS inter-
val greater than 120 milliseconds with typical pattern in 
V1 and V6, is associated with four conditions: coronary 
heart disease, hypertensive heart disease, aortic valve dis-
ease, and cardiomyopathy. In all cases, the left bundle 
branch block is associated with increased risk of car-
diovascular morbidity and mortality. These conditions 
share left ventricular pathology. In contrast, right bundle 
branch block is associated with congenital heart disease, 
pulmonary vascular disease, and less frequently valvular 
heart disease.
14.	 The answer is D. 
(Chap. 11) The classic findings of hypokalemia are 
prominent U waves due to prolonged ventricular repo-
larization. Scooped ST segments are commonly seen 
with digoxin toxicity. Low P wave amplitude is found 
in early hyperkalemia. Prolonged QT intervals are 
often due to drug toxicity such as tricyclic antidepres-
sant overdose, procainamide, quinidine disopyramide, 
and phenothiazines. Finally, Osborne waves, or convex 
elevation of the J point, are found in severe hypothermia 
and are due to repolarization prolongation.
15.	 The answer is D. 
(Chaps. 11, 20, and 40) The patient presents from a 
country with likely low rates of treatment for childhood 
streptococcal infection and was subsequently at high risk 
for rheumatic heart disease. Her large pulmonary arteries 
in the absence of parenchymal infiltrates suggests pulmo-
nary hypertension and her ECG shows right ventricular 
hypertrophy, characterized by a relatively tall R wave in 
lead V1, or R greater than or equal to S wave. This is 
highly likely to be due to mitral stenosis. While aortic 
stenosis and regurgitation are possible causes, these are 
less likely. Tricuspid stenosis is not associated with right 
ventricular hypertrophy. Left ventricular systolic failure 
may cause pulmonary venous hypertension, but more 
commonly is associated with evidence of left heart fail-
ure on examination.
16.	 The answer is D. 
(Chaps. 11 and 41) This ECG shows a short ST segment 
that is most prominent in V2, V3, V4, and V5. Hyper-
calcemia, by shortening the duration of repolarization, 
abbreviates the total time from depolarization through 
repolarization. This is manifested on the surface ECG by 
a short QT interval. In this scenario, the hypercalcemia 
is due to the rhabdomyolysis and renal failure. Fluids and 
a loop diuretic are an appropriate therapy for hypercal-
cemia. Hemodialysis is seldom indicated. Hemodialysis 
is indicated for significant hyperkalemia, which may also 
develop after rhabdomyolysis, manifest by “tenting” of 
the T waves or widening of the QRS. Classic ECG man-
ifestations of a pulmonary embolus (S1, Q3, T3 pattern) 
are infrequent in patients with pulmonary embolism 
(PE), though the changes may be seen with massive PE. 
There are no signs of myocardial ischemia on this ECG, 
which would make coronary catheterization and 18-lead 
ECG interpretation of low yield.
17.	 The answer is D. 
(Chap. 11) Hyperkalemia leads to partial depolariza-
tion of cardiac cells. As a result, there is slowing of the 
upstroke of the action potential as well as reduced dura-
tion of repolarization. The T wave becomes peaked, the 
RS complex widens and may merge with the T wave 
(giving a sine-wave appearance), and the P wave becomes 
shallow or disappears. Prominent U waves are associated 
with hypokalemia; ST-segment prolongation is associated 
with hypocalcemia.
18.	 The answer is C. 
(Chaps. 11 and 21) The ECG shows slight right axis 
deviation and low voltage. These changes are typical of 
emphysema when the thorax is hyperinflated with air 
and the flattened diaphragm pulls the heart inferiorly 
and vertically. An acute central nervous system (CNS) 
event such as a subarachnoid hemorrhage may cause 
QT prolongation with deep, wide inverted T waves. 
Hyperkalemia will cause peaked narrowed T waves or 
a wide QRS complex. Patients with hypertrophic car-
diomyopathy will have left ventricular hypertrophy and 
widespread deep, broad Q waves.
19.	 The answer is E. 
(Chaps. 11 and 43) This ECG tracing shows the triad 
of a short PR interval, wide QRS, and delta waves 
(seen best in leads I, II, and V5) consistent with Wolff-
Parkinson-White (WPW) syndrome. Patients with WPW 
syndrome are commonly diagnosed asymptomatically 
when an ECG is performed showing the classic find-
ings. Symptoms are due to conduction via an accessory 
pathway and include tachypalpitations, lightheadedness, 
syncope, cardiopulmonary collapse, and sudden cardiac 
death. Life-threatening presentations are usually due to 
the development of atrial fibrillation or atrial flutter with 
Review and Self-Assessment
599
1:1 conduction, both of which can precipitate ventricular 
fibrillation. Unstable angina is mainly associated with ST-
segment abnormalities, although conduction abnormali-
ties may be seen. Pulmonary embolism, which may cause 
hemoptysis and pleuritic chest pain, has nonspecific ECG 
findings including S1Q3T3 (acute right ventricular failure) 
or T-wave abnormalities.
20.	 The answer is E. 
(Chap. 11) The limb lead aVR generally has a negative 
deflection, as the primary vector for ventricular depo-
larization is directed down and away from this lead. 
Therefore, in the case of left ventricular hypertrophy 
the negative deflection, or S wave, would be expected 
to be larger without an effect on the R wave. There are 
multiple criteria for diagnosing left ventricular hypertro-
phy on ECG.
21.	 The answer is B. 
(Chaps. 11 and 43) This ECG tracing shows multifocal 
atrial tachycardia (MAT), right atrial overload, a supe-
rior axis, and poor R-wave progression in the precordial 
leads. There are varying P-wave morphologies (more 
than three morphologies) and P-P intervals. MAT is 
most commonly caused by COPD, but other conditions 
associated with this arrhythmia include coronary artery 
disease, congestive heart failure, valvular heart disease, 
diabetes mellitus, hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia, azo-
temia, postoperative state, and pulmonary embolism. 
Anemia, pain, and myocardial ischemia are also causes 
of tachycardia that should be considered when manag-
ing a new tachycardia. These states are usually associated 
with sinus tachycardia.
22.	 The answer is E. 
(Chap. 13) Although myocardial infarction, stroke, and 
death are complications that have been reported with 
cardiac catheterization (all with a frequency of <0.1%), 
the more common complications are tachy- or brady-
arrhythmias, acute renal failure, and vascular complica-
tions. Vascular access site bleeding is the most common 
complication of cardiac catheterization, occurring in 
1.5–2% of patients. When catheterization is performed 
in an emergent fashion for acute myocardial infarction 
or for hemodynamically unstable patients, the complica-
tion rate may rise substantially.
23.	 The answer is A. 
(Chap. 13) Although right heart catheterization is no 
longer routinely performed at the time of left heart 
catheterization, there remain important indications 
for this procedure. These include evaluation of unex-
plained dyspnea, especially when there is a suspicion 
of pulmonary hypertension; diagnosis of valvular heart 
disease such as mitral regurgitation; pericardial disease; 
right and/or left ventricular dysfunction, particularly for 
determination of severity; diagnosis of congenital heart 
disease; and suspected intracardiac shunts. In this case, 
the patient likely has an atrial septal defect with physical 
examination findings of a loud, fixed split second heart 
sound and perhaps associated dyspnea. During right 
heart catheterization, the pulmonary arterial pressures 
will be measured to assess for pulmonary hypertension, 
and venous saturation will be measured at the inferior 
vena cava, right atrium, right ventricle, and pulmonary 
artery to assess for evidence of an increase in saturation 
suggestive of intracardiac shunt. All the other patients 
described would be more appropriately served with a 
left heart catheterization and coronary angiogram.
24.	 The answer is B. 
(Chaps. 13 and 40) In the diagnostic algorithm for pul-
monary hypertension, the right heart catheterization 
is important to document the presence and degree of 
pulmonary hypertension. The right-ventricular systolic 
pressure (RVSP) on echocardiography provides an esti-
mate of pulmonary arterial pressures, but accurate deter-
mination of the RVSP relies on the presence of tricuspid 
regurgitation and good quality echocardiography. This 
patient’s body habitus is prohibitive in obtaining good 
windows for echocardiography. Thus, a right heart cath-
eterization is imperative for documenting pulmonary 
hypertension, as well as for determining the cause. The 
right heart catheterization demonstrates an elevated mean 
arterial pressure, elevated left-ventricular end-diastolic 
pressure (pulmonary capillary wedge pressure), and ele-
vated mean pulmonary artery pressure. In the presence of 
a normal cardiac output and an elevated left-ventricular 
ejection fraction, this is consistent with the diagnosis of 
diastolic heart failure. Systolic heart failure is associated 
with similar indices on right heart catheterization, but 
left-ventricular function is depressed in systolic heart fail-
ure. The other causes listed as options are known causes 
of pulmonary hypertension but would not be expected 
to cause an increase in the left-ventricular end-diastolic 
pressure. Obstructive sleep apnea is usually associated 
only with mild elevations in pulmonary artery pressure. 
This patient’s BMI puts her at risk for obstructive sleep 
apnea but would not be responsible for these right heart 
catheterization values. Both chronic thromboembolic 
disease and pulmonary arterial hypertension can cause 
severe elevations in the pulmonary arterial pressure but 
have a normal left atrial pressure.
25.	 The answer is B. 
(Chap. 15) The tachycardia-bradycardia variant of sick 
sinus syndrome is associated with an increased risk of 
thromboembolism, particularly when similar risk fac-
tors are present that increase the risk of thromboem-
bolism in patients with atrial fibrillation. Specific risk 
factors associated with highest risk include age greater 
than 65 years and prior history of stroke, valvular heart 
Review and Self-Assessment
600
disease, left ventricular dysfunction, or atrial enlarge-
ment. Patients with these risk factors should be treated 
with anticoagulation.
26.	 The answer is D. 
(Chap. 15) Bradycardia is frequently present in trained 
athletes, particularly at night, where heart rates are usu-
ally between 40 and 60 beats/min. While sleep apnea 
can be associated with bradycardia, no apnea was found 
in this patient on overnight polysomnography. Other 
possible causes of bradycardia in this patient such as 
hypothyroidism have been ruled out. Measurement of 
free T4 is not indicated with a normal TSH. Pacemaker 
insertion is not indicated for his normal physiology. 
Carotid sinus massage is likely to cause further bradycar-
dia. Fatigue is likely due to his stressful job.
27.	 The answer is E. 
(Chap. 15) Sinoatrial dysfunction is often divided into 
intrinsic disease and extrinsic disease of the node. This is 
a critical distinction, as extrinsic causes are often revers-
ible and pacemaker placement is not required. Drug 
toxicity is a common cause of extrinsic, reversible sino-
atrial dysfunction, with common culprits including beta 
blockers, calcium channel blockers, lithium toxicity, 
narcotics, pentamidine, and clonidine. Hypothyroid-
ism, sleep apnea, hypoxia, hypothermia, and increased 
intracranial pressure are all reversible forms of extrinsic 
dysfunction. Radiation therapy can result in permanent 
dysfunction of the node and therefore is an irrevers-
ible, or intrinsic, cause of sinoatrial node dysfunction. 
In symptomatic patients, pacemaker insertion may be 
indicated.
28.	 The answer is B. 
(Chap. 15) When there is evidence of sinoatrial node 
dysfunction, as manifest in this patient with sinus brady-
cardia, the first approach is to search for reversible causes. 
In this case, excessive beta blockade is the most likely 
explanation for his bradycardia and symptoms. Stopping 
the metoprolol at least temporarily is in order. There 
are no urgent indications for temporary or permanent 
pacemaker placement, as he does not have a high-level 
AV block, syncope, or shock. His heart failure should 
reverse when his heart rate increases. Although phar-
macologic chronotropic stimulation can increase heart 
rate temporarily, his moderate symptoms suggest that 
simply waiting for the beta blocker to be metabolized 
will be adequate. There is no evidence of new infarction 
or post-infarct angina; thus the patient does not require 
urgent revascularization. Once the patient is stabilized, 
the risks and benefits of restarting the beta blocker at a 
lower dosage may be considered.
29.	 The answer is C. 
(Chap. 15) The patient presents with a classic bulls-eye 
lesion, or erythema migrans, consistent with Lyme disease. 
Cardiac conduction abnormalities are common in Lyme 
disease, often involving the AV node. Temporary pac-
ing may be necessary, but the conduction abnormalities 
usually resolve. The most common test to diagnose this 
condition is an ELISA with confirmatory Western blot. 
Other infectious etiologies can present with heart block 
such as syphilis and Chagas’ disease, but these would not be 
associated with the characteristic Lyme rash. Autoimmune 
and infiltrative diseases may also present with conduction 
system disease such as ankylosing spondylitis, rheumatoid 
arthritis, scleroderma, and systemic lupus erythematosus.
30.	 The answer is B. 
(Chap. 15) Second-degree AV block type 1 (Mobitz 
type 1) is characterized by a progressive lengthening 
of the PR interval preceding a pause. The pause in 
this tracing is between the third and fourth QRS com-
plex. First-degree AV block is a slowing of conduction 
through the AV junction and is diagnosed when the PR 
interval is greater than 200 milliseconds. Type 2 second- 
degree AV block is characterized by intermittent failure of 
conduction of the P wave without changes in the pre-
ceding PR or RR intervals. Second-degree AV block 
type 2 usually occurs in the distal or infra-His conduc-
tion systems.
  31 and 32.   The answers are B and D, respectively. 
(Chap. 16) The patient has persistent, non–life-threaten-
ing palpitations that distress her enough to seek medical 
attention. A continuous Holter monitor for 24 hours is 
appropriate for patients in whom the symptoms happen 
several times a day in which an event monitor is trig-
gered by the patient when symptoms occur and thus 
can be worn for a longer period of time. There is no 
indication of gastrointestinal triggers, so abdominal CT 
would not be helpful. The atrial premature contractions 
are uncomplicated, do not require additional diagnostic 
evaluation at this time, and pose no additional health risk. 
EP referral is indicated for patients with life-threatening 
or severe symptoms such as syncope.
	33.	 The answer is C. 
(Chap. 16) The patient has physiologic sinus tachycardia 
related to a pneumothorax, for which he was at risk from 
his obstructive lung disease and volume-cycled mechan-
ical ventilation. The increased peak inspiratory pres-
sure on the mechanical ventilator is due to the reduced 
respiratory system compliance from the pneumothorax. 
Physiologic sinus tachycardia often comes on slowly and 
responds poorly to carotid sinus massage with gradual 
return to original rate. Pharmacologic interventions are 
usually unsuccessful with correction of the underlying 
cause required for resolution of the tachycardia. In this 
case, a tension pneumothorax is confirmed by chest 
radiograph and, with placement of a chest tube, the 
tachycardia resolves. Other causes of physiologic sinus 
Review and Self-Assessment
601
tachycardia include pain, hyperthyroidism, anxiety, ane-
mia, hypotension, fever, and exercise.
	34.	 The answer is E. 
(Chap. 16) Patients at the highest risk for stroke associ-
ated with atrial fibrillation include those with a prior 
history of stroke, TIA, or embolism, and patients with 
hypertension, diabetes mellitus, congestive heart failure, 
rheumatic heart disease, LV dysfunction, and marked 
left atrial dilation of greater than 5.0 cm or age greater 
than 65 years. Anticoagulation should be strongly con-
sidered in these patients. Increased left atrial size is a risk 
factor for chronic atrial fibrillation.
	35.	 The answer is B. 
(Chap. 16) The AFFIRM and RACE trials compared out-
comes in survival and thromboembolic events in patients 
with atrial fibrillation using two treatment strategies: rate 
control and anticoagulation versus pharmacotherapy to 
maintain sinus rhythm. There was no difference in events 
in the two groups, which is thought to be due to the inef-
ficiencies of pharmacotherapy, with over half of patients 
failing drug therapy, and also the high rates of asymptom-
atic atrial fibrillation in the sinus rhythm group. Thus, 
when considering discontinuation of anticoagulation in 
patients who have maintained sinus rhythm, placing a 
prolonged ECG monitor is recommended to ensure that 
asymptomatic atrial fibrillation is not present. Because of 
the risk of QT prolongation and polymorphic ventricular 
tachycardia, initiation of dofetilide and sotalol in the hos-
pital is recommended.
	36.	 The answer is C. 
(Chap. 16) The patient has atrial flutter, which has a high 
risk of thromboembolic events and should be treated the 
same as atrial fibrillation. If atrial flutter has been pres-
ent for more than 24–48 hours without anticoagulation, 
a transesophageal echocardiogram may be performed 
to rule out left atrial thrombus. If this is not present, 
cardioversion may be attempted, with anticoagulation 
continued for 1 month if successful. Transthoracic echo-
cardiography is inadequate to rule out left atrial throm-
bus. The patient is hemodynamically stable and has no 
indications for acute cardioversion. Dabigatran is not 
currently FDA approved for atrial flutter. Intravenous 
heparin should be started immediately if there are no 
contraindications, given the greater than 12-hour dura-
tion of symptoms.
	37.	 The answer is B. 
(Chap. 16) The ECG shows at least three different 
P-wave morphologies with three different PR intervals, 
which is the hallmark of multifocal atrial tachycardia. 
This is the signature tachycardia of patients with sig-
nificant pulmonary disease and is commonly seen in 
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, as 
suggested by diffuse polyphonic expiratory wheezing 
and hyperinflation.
	38.	 The answer is D. 
(Chap. 16) The patient has classic symptoms for an AV 
nodal reentrant tachycardia. The so-called frog sign 
(prominent venous pulsations in the neck due to cannon 
A waves seen in AV dissociation) on physical examina-
tion is frequently present and suggests simultaneous atrial 
and ventricular contraction. First-line therapy for these 
reentrant narrow complex tachyarrhythmias is carotid 
sinus massage to increase vagal tone. Often this is all 
that is required to return the patient to sinus rhythm. 
If that is not successful, IV adenosine 6–12 mg may be 
attempted. If adenosine fails, intravenous beta blockers 
or calcium channel blockers may be used (diltiazem or 
verapamil). Finally, in hemodynamically compromised 
patients or those who have failed to respond to previous 
measures, DC cardioversion with 100–200 J is indicated.
	39.	 The answer is D. 
(Chap. 16) The patient has an accessory conduction 
pathway, as evidenced by the delta waves on his baseline 
ECG. He now presents with atrial fibrillation through 
the accessory pathway. The wide complex is not due to 
ventricular arrhythmia but rather the aberrant accessory 
conduction through the accessory pathway. In general, 
this reentrant tachycardia may be treated as all others, 
with the exception of avoiding digoxin and verapamil, 
both of which may cause deterioration to ventricular 
fibrillation. Digoxin is thought to shorten the refractory 
period of the accessory pathway and thus can precipi-
tate degeneration to ventricular fibrillation. Verapamil is 
thought to cause systemic vasodilation, with a resultant 
increase in sympathetic tone, and thus may precipitate 
ventricular fibrillation as well.
	40.	 The answer is A. 
(Chap. 16) Atrial-ventricular dissociation is a classic 
finding in ventricular tachycardia. Physical examina-
tion may show jugular vein cannon A waves when the 
atria contracts against a closed tricuspid valve and the 
ECG will manifest this with atrial capture and/or fusion 
beats. Other findings on ECG of ventricular tachycar-
dia include QRS duration greater than 140 milliseconds 
for right bundle branch pattern in V1 or greater than 
160 milliseconds for left bundle morphology in lead 
V1, frontal plane axis of –90 to 180°, delayed activation 
during initial phase of the QRS complex, or bizarre 
QRS pattern that does not mimic typical right or left 
bundle branch block QRS complex patterns. An irreg-
ularly irregular rhythm with changing QRS complexes 
suggests atrial fibrillation with ventricular preexcitation. 
Carotid sinus massage, aimed at increasing vagal tone 
and slowing AV node conduction, is not effective at 
slowing ventricular tachycardia because the reentrant 
focus is below the AV node.
Review and Self-Assessment
602
  41 and 42.   The answers are C and C, respectively. 
(Chap. 16) The patient’s rhythm is torsade de pointes, 
with polymorphic ventricular tachycardia and QRS 
complexes with variations in amplitude and cycle 
length, giving the appearance of oscillation about an 
axis. Torsades de pointes are associated with a prolonged 
QT interval; thus, anything that is associated with a pro-
longed QT can potentially cause torsade. Most com-
monly, electrolyte disturbances such as hypokalemia and 
hypomagnesemia, phenothiazines, fluoroquinolones, 
antiarrhythmic drugs, tricyclic antidepressants, intracra-
nial events, and bradyarrhythmias are associated with 
this malignant arrhythmia. Management, besides sta-
bilization, which may require electrical cardioversion, 
consists of removing the offending agent. In addition, 
success in rhythm termination or prevention has been 
reported with the administration of magnesium as well 
as overdrive atrial or ventricular pacing, which will 
shorten the QT interval. Beta blockers are indicated for 
patients with congenital long QT syndrome, but are not 
indicated in this patient.
	43.	 The answer is C. 
(Chap. 16) There are three main mechanisms by which 
arrhythmias are initiated and maintained: automaticity, 
afterdepolarizations, and reentry. Automaticity, such as 
that seen with sinus tachycardia, atrial premature com-
plexes, and some atrial tachycardias, is due to an increase 
in the slope of phase 4 of the action potential. The depo-
larization threshold is reached more quickly and repeat-
edly. Afterdepolarizations are associated with an increase 
in cellular calcium accumulation, leading to repeated 
myocardial depolarization during phase 3 (early) and 
phase 4 (delayed) of the action potential. Early afterde-
polarizations may be related to the initiation of torsades 
de pointes. Delayed afterdepolarizations are respon-
sible for arrhythmias related to digoxin toxicity and for 
catecholamine-induced ventricular tachycardia. Reentry 
is due to inhomogeneities in myocardial conduction and 
refractory periods. With reentry, conduction is blocked 
in one pathway, allowing slow conduction in the other. 
This allows for sufficient delay so that the blocked site 
has time for reentry and propagation of the tachycar-
dia within the two pathways. Reentry appears to be the 
mechanism for most supraventricular and ventricular 
tachycardias.
	44.	 The answer is C. 
(Chap. 16) The mechanisms for atrial fibrillation initia-
tion and maintenance are still debated; however, there 
are anatomic structures that play a role in both of these 
processes. Muscularized tissue at the orifices of the pul-
monary vein inlets are the predominant anatomic driv-
ers of atrial fibrillation, although metabolic disturbances 
(e.g., hyperthyroidism, inflammation, infection) are also 
very common. Radio-frequency ablation of the tissue in 
the area of the pulmonary vein inlets can terminate atrial 
fibrillation; however, recurrences are not uncommon 
and other anatomic drivers may be present. The left 
atrial appendage is an important site of thrombus forma-
tion in patients with atrial fibrillation. Any focus within 
the left or right atrium can be a focus of reentry of focal 
atrial tachycardia, including the mitral annulus or sinus 
venosus. Increased automaticity of the sinus node is the 
mechanism for sinus tachycardia.
	45.	 The answer is B. 
(Chap. 16) Symptoms of atrial fibrillation vary dra-
matically. The most common symptom is tachypalpita-
tions; however, the hemodynamic effects account for 
symptoms of impaired left ventricular filling. In atrial 
fibrillation, there is not an effective atrial contraction to 
augment late-diastolic left ventricular filling. In patients 
with impaired ventricular diastolic function, this loss 
of effective atrial contraction causes impaired left ven-
tricular filling, increased left atrial filling pressures, and 
pulmonary congestion. These hemodynamic effects are 
more common in the elderly and in patients with long-
standing hypertension, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, 
and obstructive aortic valve disease. The tachycardia of 
atrial fibrillation further compromises left ventricular 
filling and increases atrial filling pressures. Atrial fibril-
lation may occur with acute alcohol intoxication, with 
warming of hypothermic patients, and postoperatively 
after thoracic surgery. The magnitude of the hemody-
namic effect and symptoms will be related to ventricular 
rate (a slower rate allows more time for left ventricular 
filling) and underlying cardiac function.
	46.	 The answer is E. 
(Chap. 17) The patient presents with evidence of heart 
failure by history, and physical examination confirms 
this diagnosis. Physical examination also shows exoph-
thalmos and a fine tremor, which are suggestive of 
hyperthyroidism. Thyrotoxicosis, along with anemia, 
nutritional disorders, and systemic arteriovenous shunt-
ing, can all cause high-output heart failure. Although 
systolic and diastolic dysfunction are more common 
causes of heart failure, disorders associated with a high-
output state are often reversible, and therefore a diag-
nosis should be pursued when clinical clues suggest this 
may be present.
	47.	 The answer is C. 
(Chap. 17) Circulating levels of natriuretic peptides may 
be a useful adjunctive tool in the diagnosis of heart fail-
ure, but they cannot replace clinical judgment. BNP 
or N-terminal BNP are most commonly used and are 
released from the failing heart, though their release is 
not specific to left or right heart failure; thus, elevations 
are commonly seen in cor pulmonale associated with 
pulmonary vascular disease as well as in patients with 
Review and Self-Assessment
603
left heart failure. Additionally, there are a number of 
factors that may affect the level of BNP that is normally 
released from the failing heart. Age and renal dysfunc-
tion increase plasma BNP levels. Obesity is associated 
with falsely low BNP levels. Although BNP levels may 
normalize after therapy, serial monitoring of this peptide 
is not presently recommended as a guide for heart failure 
therapy.
	48.	 The answer is E. 
(Chap. 17) Several drugs have been shown to prevent 
disease progression in heart failure including ACE 
inhibitors, angiotensin receptor blockers, beta blockers, 
and aldosterone antagonists. ACE inhibition has been 
shown to improve symptoms and survival, reduce car-
diac hypertrophy, and reduce hospitalizations. Its use 
is often complicated by cough related to kinin poten-
tiation, which is an acceptable reason to switch to an 
angiotensin receptor blocker. Digoxin therapy has not 
been shown to improve survival, may be associated with 
dose toxicity, and in patients with stable disease who are 
not frequently hospitalized, can usually be withdrawn. 
Beta blocker therapy may occasionally be associated with 
worsening heart failure symptoms at the time of initia-
tion, but this can usually be managed with increased 
diuretics. The benefits of beta blockers would far out-
weigh the nuisance of occasional extra diuretics in this 
patient. Aldosterone antagonists such as spironolactone 
and eplerenone are recommended for patients with EF 
less than 35% who are receiving standard therapy as 
above. There is no known benefit to one member of 
this class of drugs over another.
	49.	 The answer is E. 
(Chap. 17) Although there is a wealth of information on 
which drugs will improve symptoms and survival in heart 
failure with reduced ejection fraction, little is known 
about heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. In 
fact, there are no proven or approved pharmacologic 
therapies for patients with heart failure and preserved 
ejection fraction. Therapy should be aimed at treating 
the predisposing factors for development of this condi-
tion, i.e., treat systemic hypertension if present, reverse 
ischemia if appropriate, etc. Precipitating factors, such as 
dietary indiscretion in this patient, atrial fibrillation, or 
infection, may be addressed to improve symptoms. Silde-
nafil is currently only approved for therapy of pulmo-
nary arterial hypertension and is not proven to be useful 
for pulmonary hypertension associated with heart failure 
with preserved ejection fraction.
	50.	 The answer is C. 
(Chap. 17) The New York Heart Association (NYHA) 
classification is a tool to define criteria that describe the 
functional ability and clinical manifestations of patients in 
heart failure. It is also used in patients with pulmonary 
hypertension. These criteria have been shown to have 
prognostic value with worsening survival as class increases. 
They are also useful to clinicians when reading studies 
to understand the entry and exclusion criteria of large 
clinical trials. Class I is used for patients with no limiting 
symptoms; class II for patients with slight or mild limita-
tion; class III implies no symptoms at rest but dyspnea 
or angina or palpitations with little exertion—patients are 
moderately limited; class IV is used for severely limited 
patients in whom even minimal activity causes symptoms. 
Treatment guidelines also frequently base recommenda-
tions on these clinical stages. This patient has symptoms 
with mild exertion but is comfortable at rest; therefore, he 
is NYHA class III.
	51.	 The answer is B. 
(Chap. 17) Patients with severe congestive heart fail-
ure often exhibit Cheyne-Stokes breathing, defined 
as intercurrent short periods of hypoventilation and 
hyperventilation. The mechanism is thought to relate 
to the prolonged circulation time between the lungs 
and the respiratory control centers in the brain, lead-
ing to poor respiratory control of PaCO2. The degree 
of Cheyne-Stokes breathing is related to the severity of 
heart failure. This pattern of breathing is different from 
obstructive sleep apnea, which is notable for loud snor-
ing, periods of apnea, and sudden waking. Patients are 
also often hypersomnolent during the day. While sleep 
apnea is managed with weight loss and overnight CPAP, 
Cheyne-Stokes breathing is difficult to address as it is 
often a sign of advanced systolic dysfunction and implies 
a poor prognosis. All efforts to further maximize heart 
failure management are indicated. A sleep study would 
demonstrate this pattern of breathing, but this history 
and clinical presentation is typical. There is no role for 
bronchodilators or an electroencephalogram.
	52.	 The answer is B. 
(Chap. 18) Coronary artery disease is a common late 
complication after cardiac transplantation and is thought 
to be due to a primary immunologic injury of the vas-
cular endothelium, though it is influenced by nonim-
munologic factors such as dyslipidemia, diabetes mellitus, 
and cytomegalovirus infection. Use of mycophenolate, 
mofetil, and the mammalian target of rapamycin sirolimus 
have been associated with a lower short-term incidence 
of coronary intimal thickening. Similarly, statin use has 
been shown to reduce the incidence of this complica-
tion. Because donors are generally young, the coronary 
artery disease after transplantation is not thought to be 
due to coronary lesions present pretransplantation.
	53.	 The answer is E. 
(Chap. 17) Ventricular assist device therapy can be used 
either as a “bridge” to transplantation in eligible candi-
dates or as a final destination in patients with end-stage 
Review and Self-Assessment
604
heart failure who are not transplant candidates. There are 
four FDA-approved devices, all of which share common 
complications including thromboembolism, cerebrovas-
cular accident, device failure, and infection.
	54.	 The answer is E. 
(Chap. 19) Atrial septal defect (ASD) is a not uncommon 
simple congenital heart disease lesion that is often diag-
nosed in adults. Because of chronic left-to-right shunting 
of intracardiac blood, pulmonary arterial hypertension is a 
well-recognized common complication. With the devel-
opment of pulmonary arterial hypertension, the potential 
for paradoxical embolization of either air or thrombotic 
material from the right atrium to the systemic circula-
tion is increased. Similarly, with exertion in the context 
of pulmonary arterial hypertension and ASD, blood may 
shunt right to left, leading to systemic arterial oxygen 
desaturation. Atrial fibrillation or other supraventricular 
arrhythmias may occur, also as a result of atrial stretching 
with the lesion. While atherosclerosis and unstable angina 
may certainly occur in adults, is not a reported complica-
tion of ASD.
	55.	 The answer is D. 
(Chap. 19) The patient has secondary erythrocytosis 
due to Eisenmenger’s syndrome and chronic arterial 
hypoxemia. Her partially corrected left-to-right shunt 
resulted in chronic pulmonary circulation overflow 
and the subsequent development of pulmonary arte-
rial hypertension. With a rise in pulmonary vascular 
pressure, the shunt reverses to become predominantly 
right to left, which causes systemic oxygen desatura-
tion. Because hypoxemia is caused by shunt and not 
ventilation/perfusion mismatch (as in typical COPD), it 
is not responsive to oxygen therapy. Peripheral desatu-
ration results in decreased oxygen delivery to the kid-
neys, increased erythropoietin secretion, and resultant 
erythrocytosis. Erythropoietin levels would be expected 
to be elevated in this case (in contrast to polycythemia 
vera rubra). Phlebotomy is only used for patients with 
symptomatic erythrocytosis; hyperviscosity symptoms, 
including neurologic symptoms such as transient isch-
emic attack; epistaxis or bleeding symptoms; or visual 
changes. Because iron depletion may worsen viscosity 
even at a lower hematocrit, it is considered as only a 
temporary therapy for management of erythrocytosis 
in Eisenmenger’s syndrome. This patient had no symp-
toms referable to erythrocytosis; therefore, expectant 
management is most appropriate.
	56.	 The answer is D. 
(Chap. 19) Routine antibiotic prophylaxis is indicated for 
bacteremic dental procedures or instrumentation through 
an infected site in most patients with operated congeni-
tal heart disease, particularly whenever foreign material 
is present. The one exception is patches that don’t have 
a post-placement high-grade leak, where prophylaxis is 
only required for 6 months until endothelialization.
	57.	 The answer is E. 
(Chap. 19) The patient presents with dextrocardia on his 
chest radiograph and situs inversus, or complete mirror 
image situs inversus on examination. When dextrocardia 
occurs in isolation without situs inversus, multiple car-
diac abnormalities are frequently present. Alternatively, 
when dextrocardia occurs with situs inversus, other car-
diac defects are unlikely. Kartagener’s syndrome with 
mucociliary dysfunction may underlie situs inversus, 
but it is associated with sinusitis and chronic bronchitis, 
which this patient did not have.
  58 and 59.   The answers are C and A, respectively. 
(Chap. 19) This patient has a coarctation of the aorta 
presenting with marked hypertension proximal to the 
lesion. The narrowing most commonly occurs distal to 
the origin of the left subclavian artery, explaining the 
equal pressure in the arms and reduced pressure in the 
legs. Coarctations account for approximately 7% of con-
genital cardiac abnormalities, occur more frequently (2×) 
in men than in women, and are associated with gonadal 
dysgenesis and bicuspid aortic valves. Adults will pres-
ent with hypertension, manifestations of hypertension 
in the upper body (headache, epistaxis), or leg claudi-
cation. Physical examination reveals diminished and/or 
delayed lower extremity pulses, enlarged collateral ves-
sels in the upper body, or reduced development of the 
lower extremities. Cardiac examination may reveal find-
ings consistent with left ventricular (LV) hypertrophy. 
There may be no murmur, a mid-systolic murmur over 
the anterior chest and back, or an aortic murmur with a 
bicuspid valve. Transthoracic (suprasternal/parasternal) or 
transesophageal echocardiography, contrast CT or MRI 
of the thorax, or cardiac catheterization can be diagnostic. 
MRI of the head would not be useful diagnostically. 
The clinical picture is not consistent with renal artery 
stenosis, pheochromocytoma, carcinoid, or Cushing’s 
syndrome.
	60.	 The answer is E. 
(Chap. 20) Mitral stenosis is one of the leading causes 
of pulmonary hypertension worldwide, particularly in 
developing countries where the treatment of streptococ-
cal disease is less available. The primary determinants of 
pulmonary artery pressure are left atrial pressure, pulmo-
nary vascular resistance, and flow. Mitral stenosis may 
restrict flow from the left atrium to the left ventricle, 
and thus is associated with left atrial hypertension and 
passive pulmonary hypertension (due to back pressure). 
Additionally, the pulmonary vascular bed may actively 
vasoconstrict in response to left atrial hypertension. 
Additional contributors to pulmonary hypertension in 
mitral stenosis include interstitial edema in the walls of 
Review and Self-Assessment
605
small pulmonary vessels and, in end-stage disease, oblit-
erative changes in the pulmonary vascular bed as may 
be seen in some forms of pulmonary arterial hyperten-
sion. Pulmonary hypertension related to mitral stenosis 
is generally reversible with correction of the valvular 
lesion.
  61 and 62.   The answers are A and E, respectively. 
(Chap. 20) The patient presents with a relatively stable 
ST elevation myocardial infarction. He likely has exten-
sive necrosis given the duration of symptoms and ECG 
findings, and thus is at risk for complication of myocardial 
infarction. In this case, his acute dyspnea, worsening oxy-
genation, and asymmetric edema on chest radiograph all 
point to acute mitral regurgitation from papillary muscle 
rupture. An allergic reaction to a medication should not 
cause severe hypoxemia. It may cause rather mild revers-
ible hypoxemia, and should not cause an abnormal chest 
radiograph. The classic finding of acute mitral regurgita-
tion is a relatively loud systolic murmur heard best at the 
apex and radiating to the axilla. The murmur is described 
as having a “cooing” or “seagull-like” quality. A fourth 
heart sound is also common. Management of acute mitral 
regurgitation includes afterload and preload reduction, if 
possible, often with intravenous nitroprusside. If patients 
are unable to tolerate medical interventions to achieve 
this because of systemic hypotension, as in this patient, 
an intraaortic balloon pump is indicated. Albuterol and 
methylprednisolone are indicated for acute broncho-
spasm due to primary airways disease, but would not be 
helpful for the management of cardiogenic shock.
	63.	 The answer is C. 
(Chap. 20) The patient has classic physical examination 
findings for mitral valve prolapse with a mid-systolic 
click that may or may not be associated with a systolic 
murmur. Mitral valve prolapse is generally thought to 
be a benign lesion, with most patients never devel-
oping symptoms during their lifetimes. While many 
patients with heritable connective tissue disorders such 
as Marfan’s syndrome have mitral valve prolapse, in the 
majority of cases, a cause is not identified. Mitral valve 
prolapse may be seen on echocardiography by systolic 
displacement of the mitral valve leaflets by at least 2 mm 
into the left atrium. Doppler imaging may also be helpful 
to define the condition. Because the lesion is generally 
benign, endocarditis prophylaxis is generally not indi-
cated unless the patient has a prior history of endocar-
ditis. Although some patients develop atrial arrhythmias 
in conjunction with mitral valve prolapse, prophylactic 
antiplatelet agents or warfarin are not recommended, as 
most patients do not have complications.
	64.	 The answer is B. 
(Chap. 20) The patient has aortic stenosis that presented 
late in life. While bicuspid aortic valve underlies nearly 
half of all aortic stenosis cases, this lesion typically pres-
ents earlier in life, and only 40% of patients greater than 
70 years old with aortic stenosis who undergo surgery 
have a bicuspid valve. Rheumatic heart disease may 
cause aortic stenosis, but almost invariably mitral steno-
sis is also present. Underlying connective tissue disease 
is not known to be associated. Modern research on the 
development of aortic stenosis has shown that several 
traditional atherosclerotic risk factors are present such as 
diabetes mellitus, smoking, chronic kidney disease, and 
the metabolic syndrome. Polymorphisms of the vitamin D 
receptor have also been demonstrated in patients with 
symptomatic aortic stenosis.
	65.	 The answer is C. 
(Chap. 20) Exertional syncope is a late finding in aor-
tic stenosis (AS) and portends a poor prognosis. Patients 
with this symptom or with angina pectoris have an 
average time to death of 3 years. Patients with dyspnea 
have 2 years, and patients with heart failure have an 
average time to death of 1.5–2 years. Because of these 
data, patients with severe AS and symptoms should be 
strongly considered for surgical therapy.
	66.	 The answer is A. 
(Chap. 20) Patients with severe aortic regurgitation will 
have a “water-hammer” pulse that collapses suddenly as 
arterial pressure rapidly falls during late systole and dias-
tole, a so-called Corrigan’s pulse. Capillary pulsations 
seen in the nail bed in severe aortic regurgitation are 
named Quincke’s pulse. Traube’s sign, or a pistol shot 
sound, may be heard over the femoral arteries and Duro-
ziez’s sign, with a to-and-fro murmur over the femoral 
artery, have also been described. Pulsus parvus et tardus 
is found in severe aortic stenosis. Pulsus bigeminus occurs 
when there is a shorter interval after a normal beat with 
a following low volume pulse, often with a premature 
ventricular beat. Pulsus paradoxus has been described 
with pericardial tamponade or severe obstructive lung 
disease. Pulsus alternans is alternating large and small vol-
ume pulses seen in severe heart failure.
  67 and 68.   The answers are C and C, respectively. 
(Chap. 20) The patient presents with heart failure dur-
ing her second trimester from a region with high rates 
of rheumatic fever. She is therefore at risk for rheumatic 
mitral stenosis, which often presents during the second 
trimester of pregnancy as the cardiac output must rise to 
accommodate the fetus and intravascular volume expands 
substantially. The stenotic valve cannot accommodate 
the increased flow demands of pregnancy, and congestive 
heart failure ensues with secondary pulmonary venous 
hypertension. The patient has evidence of heart failure 
on examination with pulmonary hypertension. Her dia-
stolic rumble is characteristic of mitral stenosis. Finally, 
hemoptysis is not an infrequent finding in severe mitral 
Review and Self-Assessment
606
stenosis and may be due to the rupture of pulmonary-
bronchial venous connections secondary to pulmonary 
venous hypertension. Occasionally, pink frothy sputum 
can be found in patients with frank alveolar hemorrhage 
related to elevated pulmonary capillary pressure. Mitral 
stenosis is readily demonstrated by echocardiography. 
While right heart catheterization may demonstrate pul-
monary hypertension and an elevated pulmonary capil-
lary wedge pressure, the etiology of these findings will 
remain unknown without imaging of the left heart. 
Short-term management of mitral stenosis with heart 
failure should include diuretics. As the patient does not 
have left ventricular failure, ACE inhibition and digoxin 
are not likely to alleviate her symptoms. Occasionally, 
beta blockade may improve symptoms, particularly in 
patients with symptomatic atrial arrhythmias. Anticoagu-
lation is not indicated in mitral stenosis alone unless atrial 
arrhythmias or pulmonary embolism is present. As infec-
tion does not underlie the patient’s hemoptysis, further 
antibiotics will not be helpful.
	69.	 The answer is D. 
(Chap. 20) Indications for surgical repair of mitral regur-
gitation are dependent on left-ventricular function, ven-
tricular size, and the presence of sequelae of chronic mitral 
regurgitation. The experience of the surgeon and the 
likelihood of successful mitral valve repair are also impor-
tant considerations. The management strategy for chronic 
severe mitral regurgitation depends on the presence 
of symptoms, left-ventricular function, left-ventricular 
dimensions, and the presence of complicating factors such 
as pulmonary hypertension and atrial fibrillation. With 
very depressed left-ventricular function (<30% or end-
systolic dimension >55 mm), the risk of surgery increases, 
left-ventricular recovery is often incomplete, and long-
term survival is reduced. However, since medical therapy 
offers little for these patients, surgical repair should be 
considered if there is a high likelihood of success (>90%). 
When ejection fraction is between 30% and 60%, and 
end-systolic dimension rises above 40 mm, surgical repair 
is indicated even in the absence of symptoms, owing to the 
excellent long-term results achieved in this group. Waiting 
for worsening left-ventricular function leads to irreversible 
left-ventricular remodeling. Pulmonary hypertension and 
atrial fibrillation are important to consider as markers for 
worsening regurgitation. For asymptomatic patients with 
normal left-ventricular function and dimensions, the pres-
ence of new pulmonary hypertension or atrial fibrillation 
in patients with normal ejection fraction and end-systolic 
dimensions are class IIa indications for mitral valve repair.
	70.	 The answer is F. 
(Chap. 20) Tricuspid regurgitation is most commonly 
caused by dilation of the tricuspid annulus due to right-
ventricular enlargement of any cause. Any cause of 
left-ventricular failure that results in right-ventricular 
failure may lead to tricuspid regurgitation. Congenital 
heart diseases or pulmonary arterial hypertension lead-
ing to right-ventricular failure will dilate the tricuspid 
annulus. Inferior wall infarction may involve the right 
ventricle. Rheumatic heart disease may involve the tri-
cuspid valve, although less commonly than the mitral 
valve. Infective endocarditis, particularly in IV drug 
users, will infect the tricuspid valve, causing vegetations 
and regurgitation. Other causes of tricuspid regurgita-
tion include carcinoid heart disease, endomyocardial 
fibrosis, congenital defects of the atrioventricular canal, 
and right-ventricular pacemakers.
	71.	 The answer is A. 
(Chap. 20) Bioprosthetic valves are made from human, 
porcine, or bovine tissue. The major advantage of a 
bioprosthetic valve is the low incidence of throm-
boembolic phenomena, particularly 3 months after 
implantation. Although in the immediate postoperative 
period some anticoagulation may occur, after 3 months 
there is no further need for anticoagulation or moni-
toring. The downside is the natural history and lon-
gevity of the bioprosthetic valve. Bioprosthetic valves 
tend to degenerate mechanically. Approximately 50% 
will need replacement at 15 years. Therefore, these 
valves are useful in patients with contraindications to 
anticoagulation, such as elderly patients with comor-
bidities and younger patients who desire to become 
pregnant. Elderly people may also be spared the need 
for repeat surgery, as their life span may be shorter than 
the natural history of the bioprosthesis. Mechanical 
valves offer superior durability. Hemodynamic param-
eters are improved with double-disk valves compared 
with single-disk or ball-and-chain valves. However, 
thrombogenicity is high and chronic anticoagulation is 
mandatory. Younger patients with no contraindications 
to anticoagulation may be better served by mechanical 
valve replacement.
	72.	 The answer is E. 
(Chap. 21) Many infectious etiologies have been associ-
ated with the development of inflammatory myocardi-
tis including viral agents (coxsackie, adenovirus, HIV, 
hepatitis C) and parasitic agents, with Chagas disease or 
T. cruzi being most prominent, but also toxoplasmosis. 
Additionally, bacterial etiologies like diphtheria, spiro-
chetal disease like Borrelia burgdorferi, rickettsial disease, 
and fungal infections have been associated.
	73.	 The answer is C. 
(Chap. 21) Peripartum cardiomyopathy is a rare com-
plication of pregnancy and can occur during the last tri-
mester or within the first 6 months postpartum. Risk 
factors include advanced age, increased parity, twin 
pregnancy, malnutrition, use of tocolytic therapy for 
premature labor, and preeclampsia.
Review and Self-Assessment
607
	74.	 The answer is A. 
(Chap. 21) Beriberi heart disease is a dilated cardiomy-
opathy due to thiamine deficiency. While uncommon in 
developed countries, this condition still occurs in patients 
who derive most of their calories from alcohol and has 
been reported in teenagers who eat only highly processed 
foods. This condition involves systemic vasodilation with 
a very high cardiac output in its early stages. In advanced 
disease, a low-output state can occur. Thiamine repletion 
can lead to a complete recovery. Patient A has evidence 
of heart failure with systemic vasodilation and elevated 
cardiac output, as would be found in beriberi. Alterna-
tively, patient B has normal hemodynamics. Patient C 
has evidence of low-output heart failure with systemic 
vasoconstriction. Patient D has elevated pulmonary arte-
rial pressures with right heart failure in conjunction with 
normal pulmonary capillary wedge pressure, consistent 
with primary pulmonary vascular disease, e.g., pulmo-
nary arterial hypertension. Patient E has low right heart 
filling pressures, with somewhat low cardiac output and 
elevated systemic vascular resistance, as might be found 
in hypovolemic shock.
	75.	 The answer is E. 
(Chap. 21) Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy usually presents 
between age 20 and 40 years, with the most common 
symptom being dyspnea. Many patients are, however, 
asymptomatic and the only clue to the presence of this 
potentially deadly disease is physical examination. Physi-
cal examination will show a harsh systolic murmur heard 
best at the left lower sternal border arising from both the 
outflow tract turbulence during ventricular ejection and 
the often concomitant mitral regurgitation. Maneuvers 
that decrease ventricular volume such as Valsalva or mov-
ing from squatting to standing will enhance the murmur. 
Conversely, maneuvers that increase left ventricular vol-
ume will decrease the murmur’s intensity. These include 
hand grip and squatting. Having the patient lie with the 
left side down and leaning forward may make the friction 
rub of pericarditis more audible.
	76.	 The answer is E. 
(Chap. 21) A common diagnostic dilemma is differenti-
ating constrictive pericarditis from a restrictive cardio-
myopathy. Elevated jugular venous pressure is almost 
universally present in both. Kussmaul’s sign (increase 
or no change in jugular venous pressure with inspira-
tion) can be seen in both conditions. Other signs of 
heart failure do not reliably distinguish the two condi-
tions. In restrictive cardiomyopathy, the apical impulse 
is usually easier to palpate than in constrictive pericar-
ditis, and mitral regurgitation is more common. These 
clinical signs, however, are not reliable to differentiate 
the two entities. In conjunction with clinical informa-
tion and additional imaging studies of the left ventricle 
and pericardium, certain pathognomic findings increase 
diagnostic certainty. A thickened or calcified pericardium 
increases the likelihood of constrictive pericarditis. Con-
duction abnormalities are more common in infiltrating 
diseases of the myocardium. In constrictive pericarditis, 
measurements of diastolic pressures will show equilib-
rium between the ventricles, while unequal pressures 
and/or isolated elevated left ventricular pressures are 
more consistent with restrictive cardiomyopathy. The 
classic “square root sign” during right heart catheteriza-
tion (deep, sharp drop in right ventricular pressure in 
early diastole, followed by a plateau during which there 
is no further increase in right ventricular pressure) can be 
seen in both restrictive cardiomyopathy and constrictive 
pericarditis. The presence of a paraprotein abnormality 
(MGUS, myeloma, amyloid) makes restrictive cardiomy-
opathy more common.
	77.	 The answer is D. 
(Chap. 21) Cardiac involvement is common in many of 
the neuromuscular diseases. The ECG pattern of Duch-
enne’s muscular dystrophy is unique and consists of tall 
R waves in the right precordial leads with an R/S ratio 
greater than 1.0, often with deep Q waves in the limb 
and precordial leads. These patients often have a variety 
of supraventricular and ventricular arrhythmias, and are 
at risk for sudden death due to the intrinsic cardiomy-
opathy as well as the low ejection fraction. Implantable 
cardioverter defibrillators should be considered in the 
appropriate patient. Global left ventricular dysfunction is 
a common finding in dilated cardiomyopathies, whereas 
focal wall motion abnormalities and angina are more 
common if there is ischemic myocardium. This patient is 
at risk for venous thromboembolism; however, chronic 
thromboembolism would not account for the severity 
of the left heart failure and would present with findings 
consistent with pulmonary hypertension. Amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis is a disease of motor neurons and does 
not involve the heart. This patient would be young for 
that diagnosis. An advanced atrial septal defect would 
present with cyanosis and heart failure (Eisenmenger’s 
physiology).
	78.	 The answer is D. 
(Chap. 22) The patient has a classic presentation for acute 
pericarditis with constant or pleuritic chest pain, exac-
erbated by lying flat and alleviated by sitting forward. 
Serum biomarkers may show mild evidence of myo-
cardial injury from myocardial inflammation, but are 
generally not substantially elevated. Friction rub is fre-
quently present, has three components, and is best heard 
while the patient is upright and leaning forward. In the 
acute stages, ECG classically shows ST-segment eleva-
tion with upward concavity in two or three standard 
limb leads and V2 through V6 with reciprocal changes 
in aVR. Convex curvature is more commonly found 
in acute myocardial infarction. PR depression may be 
Review and Self-Assessment
608
found. After several days, the ST changes resolve and 
T waves become inverted. After weeks to months, the 
ECG returns to normal.
	79.	 The answer is B. 
(Chap. 22) Pulsus paradoxus is an exaggeration of the 
normal phenomenon in which systolic blood pressure 
declines 10 mmHg or less with inspiration. Pulsus para-
doxus is typically seen in patients with pericardial tampon-
ade and in patients with severe obstructive lung disease 
(COPD, asthma). In pulsus paradoxus due to pericardial 
tamponade, the inspiratory systolic blood pressure decline 
is greater due to the tight incompressible pericardial sac. 
The right ventricle distends with inspiration, compressing 
the left ventricle and resulting in decreased systolic pulse 
pressure in the systemic circulation. In severe obstructive 
lung disease, the inspiratory decline of systolic blood pres-
sure may be due to the markedly negative pleural pres-
sure either causing left ventricular compression (due to 
increased RV venous return) or increased LV impedance 
to ejection (increased afterload).
	80.	 The answer is C. 
(Chap. 22) Beck’s triad can be used to alert clinicians to 
the potential presence of cardiac tamponade. The prin-
cipal features are hypotension, muffled or absent heart 
sounds, and elevated neck veins, often with prominent 
x-descent and absent y-descent. These are due to the 
failure of ventricular filling and limited cardiac output. 
Kussmaul’s sign is seen in restrictive cardiomyopathy 
and pericardial constriction, not tamponade. Friction 
rub may be seen in any condition associated with peri-
cardial inflammation.
	81.	 The answer is D. 
(Chap. 22) This patient’s presentation and physical 
examination are most consistent with the diagnosis of 
constrictive pericarditis. The most common cause of 
constrictive pericarditis worldwide is tuberculosis, but 
given the low incidence of tuberculosis in the United 
States, constrictive pericarditis is a rare condition in this 
country. With the increasing ability to cure Hodgkin’s 
disease with mediastinal irradiation, many cases of con-
strictive pericarditis in the United States involve patients 
who received curative radiation therapy 10–20 years prior. 
These patients are also at risk for premature coronary 
artery disease. Risks for these complications include 
dose of radiation and radiation windows that include 
the heart. Other rare causes of constrictive pericarditis 
are recurrent acute pericarditis, hemorrhagic pericardi-
tis, prior cardiac surgery, mediastinal irradiation, chronic 
infection, and neoplastic disease. Physiologically, con-
strictive pericarditis is characterized by the inability of 
the ventricles to fill because of the noncompliant peri-
cardium. In early diastole, the ventricles fill rapidly, 
but filling stops abruptly when the elastic limit of the 
pericardium is reached. Clinically, patients present with 
generalized malaise, cachexia, and anasarca. Exertional 
dyspnea is common, and orthopnea is generally mild. 
Ascites and hepatomegaly occur because of increased 
venous pressure. In rare cases, cirrhosis may develop 
from chronic congestive hepatopathy. The jugular 
venous pressure is elevated, and the neck veins fail to 
collapse on inspiration (Kussmaul’s sign). Heart sounds 
may be muffled. A pericardial knock is frequently heard. 
This is a third heart sound that occurs 0.09–0.12 sec-
onds after aortic valve closure at the cardiac apex. Right 
heart catheterization would show the “square root sign” 
characterized by an abrupt y-descent followed by a grad-
ual rise in ventricular pressure. This finding, however, 
is not pathognomonic of constrictive pericarditis and 
can be seen in restrictive cardiomyopathy of any cause. 
Echocardiogram shows a thickened pericardium, dilata-
tion of the inferior vena cava and hepatic veins, and an 
abrupt cessation of ventricular filling in early diastole. 
Pericardial resection is the only definitive treatment of 
constrictive pericarditis. Diuresis and sodium restriction 
are useful in managing volume status preoperatively, 
and paracentesis may be necessary. Operative mortality 
ranges from 5–10%. Underlying cardiac function is nor-
mal; thus, cardiac transplantation is not indicated. Peri-
cardiocentesis is indicated for the diagnostic removal of 
pericardial fluid and cardiac tamponade, which is not 
present on the patient’s echocardiogram. Mitral valve 
stenosis may present similarly with anasarca, congestive 
hepatic failure, and ascites. However, pulmonary edema 
and pleural effusions are also common. Examination 
would be expected to demonstrate a diastolic murmur, 
and echocardiogram should show a normal pericardium 
and a thickened immobile mitral valve. Mitral valve 
replacement would be indicated if mitral stenosis were 
the cause of the patient’s symptoms.
	82.	 The answer is C. 
(Chap. 23) Blunt, nonpenetrating trauma such as that 
described here can result in commotio cordis, which 
occurs when the trauma impacts the heart during the 
susceptible phase of repolarization just before the peak 
of the T wave and results in ventricular fibrillation. This 
syndrome is most common in young athletes who are 
playing hockey, football, baseball, or lacrosse, for exam-
ple. Treatment is prompt defibrillation. While aortic 
rupture, myocardial rupture with cardiac tamponade, 
and tension pneumothorax may occur with chest wall 
trauma, their presentation should be less immediate after 
the trauma. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy may present 
with sudden cardiac death, as in this case, but the preced-
ing chest trauma makes commotio cordis more likely.
	83.	 The answer is E. 
(Chap. 25) The etiologic agents of infective endocardi-
tis vary by host (see  Figure 25-1). Community-acquired 
Review and Self-Assessment
609
native valve endocarditis remains an important clinical 
problem, particularly in elderly people. In those patients, 
streptococci (Viridans spp., S. gallolyticus, other nongroup 
A and other group streptococci, and Abiotrophia spp.) 
account for approximately 40% of cases. Staphylococcus 
aureus (30%) is next most common. Enterococci, HACEK 
group, coagulase-negative, and culture-negative cases 
each account for less than 10% of community-acquired 
native valve cases. In health care–associated, injection drug 
use–associated, and greater than 12-month-old prosthetic 
valve endocarditis, S. aureus is most common. Coagulase-
negative staphylococcus is the most common organism in 
prosthetic valve endocarditis less than 12 months. Entero-
cocci cause endocarditis in approximately 10% to 15% of 
cases in health care–associated, 2- to 12-month prosthetic 
valve, and injection drug use cases. Culture-negative 
endocarditis accounts for 5% to 10% of cases in all of the 
aforementioned clinical scenarios.
	84.	 The answer is B. 
(Chap. 25) The Duke criteria for diagnosis of infective 
endocarditis are a set of major and minor clinical, labora-
tory, and echocardiographic criteria that are highly sensi-
tive and specific. The presence of two major criteria, one 
major criterion and three minor criteria, or five minor 
criteria allows a clinical diagnosis of definite endocar-
ditis (see Table 25-3). Evidence of echocardiographic 
involvement as evidenced by an oscillating mass (veg-
etation) on a valve, supporting structure, or implanted 
material; an intracardiac abscess or partial dehiscence of 
a prosthetic valve; or a new valvular regurgitation are 
major criteria in the Duke classification. An increase or 
change in preexisting murmur by clinical examination is 
not sufficient. Transthoracic echocardiography is specific 
for infective endocarditis but only finds vegetations in 
about 65% of patients with definite endocarditis. It is not 
adequate for evaluation of prosthetic valves or for intra-
cardiac complications. Transesophageal echocardiogra-
phy is more sensitive, detecting abnormalities in more 
than 90% of cases of definite endocarditis.
	85.	 The answer is C. 
(Chap. 25) The recommendations for prophylaxis to 
prevent infective endocarditis have undergone change 
recently with a change to recommending it for fewer 
patients. The most recent American Heart Association 
guidelines (Circulation 116:1736, 2007) reverse many of 
the former recommendations based on indirect evidence 
suggesting that benefit is minimal and is not supported by 
cost-benefit or cost-effectiveness studies. Current recom-
mendations advise prophylactic antibiotics only for those 
at highest risk for severe morbidity or mortality from 
endocarditis undergoing manipulation of gingival tissue 
or periapical region of the teeth, perforation of the oral 
mucosa, or a procedure on an infected site. Prophylaxis is 
not advised for routine gastrointestinal or genitourinary 
procedures. High-risk patients include those with prior 
endocarditis, prosthetic heart valves, unrepaired cyanotic 
congenital heart disease lesions, recently (<6 months) 
repaired congenital heart lesions, incompletely repaired 
congenital heart disease lesions, and valvulopathy after 
cardiac transplant. The British Society for Antimicrobial 
Chemotherapy does recommend prophylaxis for at-risk 
patients undergoing selected gastrointestinal or genito-
urinary procedures; however, the National Institute for 
Health and Clinical Excellence in the United Kingdom 
advised discontinuation of the practice (http://www.nice
.org.uk/guidance/cg64).
	86.	 The answer is A. 
(Chap. 25) This patient has culture-negative endocardi-
tis, a rare entity defined as clinical evidence of infectious 
endocarditis in the absence of positive blood cultures. 
In this case, evidence for subacute bacterial endocardi-
tis includes valvular regurgitation; an aortic valve veg-
etation; and embolic phenomena on the extremities, 
spleen, and kidneys. A common reason for negative 
blood cultures is prior antibiotics. In the absence of this, 
the two most common pathogens (both of which are 
technically difficult to isolate in blood culture bottles) 
are Q fever, Coxiella burnetii (typically associated with 
close contact with livestock), and Bartonella spp. In this 
case, the patient’s homelessness and body louse infes-
tation are clues for Bartonella quintana infection. Diag-
nosis is made by blood culture about 25% of the time. 
Otherwise, direct polymerase chain reaction of valvular 
tissue, if available, or acute and convalescent serologies 
are diagnostic options. Empirical therapy for culture-
negative endocarditis usually includes ceftriaxone and 
gentamicin with or without doxycycline. For confirmed 
Bartonella endocarditis, optimal therapy is gentamicin 
plus doxycycline. EBV and HIV do not cause endocar-
ditis. A peripheral blood smear would not be diagnostic.
	87.	 The answer is D. 
(Chap. 25) Although any valvular vegetation can embo-
lize, vegetations located on the mitral valve and vegeta-
tions larger than 10 mm are greatest risk of embolizing. 
Of the answer choices, C, D, and E are large enough to 
increase the risk of embolization. However, only choice D 
demonstrates the risks of both size and location. Hema-
togenously seeded infection from an embolized vegeta-
tion may involve any organ but particularly affects those 
organs with the highest blood flow. They are seen in up 
to 50% of patients with endocarditis. Tricuspid lesions 
lead to pulmonary septic emboli, which are common in 
injection drug users. Mitral and aortic lesions can lead to 
embolic infections in the skin, spleen, kidneys, meninges, 
and skeletal system. A dreaded neurologic complication is 
mycotic aneurysm, focal dilations of arteries at points in 
the arterial wall that have been weakened by infection in 
the vasa vasorum or septic emboli, leading to hemorrhage.
Review and Self-Assessment
610
	88.	 The answer is A. 
(Chap. 25) Patients with infective endocarditis on anti-
biotic therapy can be expected to demonstrate clinical 
improvement within 5 to 7 days. Blood cultures fre-
quently remain positive for 3 to 5 days for Staphylococcus 
aureus treated with β-lactam antibiotics and 7 to 9 days 
with vancomycin. Neither rifampin nor gentamicin has 
been shown to provide clinical benefit in the scenario 
described in this question. Vancomycin peak and trough 
levels have not been shown to improve drug efficacy in 
infective endocarditis. It is too early in therapy to con-
sider this case representative of vancomycin failure. The 
efficacy of daptomycin or linezolid because an alternative 
to vancomycin for left-sided MRSA endocarditis has not 
been established.
	89.	 The answer is D. 
(Chap. 26) Acute rheumatic fever (ARF) is almost uni-
versally due to group A streptococcal disease at the pres-
ent time, though virtually all streptococcal disease may be 
capable of precipitating rheumatic fever. Although skin 
infections may be associated with rheumatic fever, far 
and away the most common presentation is with preced-
ing pharyngitis. There is a latent period of approximately 
3 weeks from an episode of sore throat to presentation 
of ARF. The most common manifestations are fever and 
polyarthritis, with polyarthritis being present in 60–75% 
of cases. Carditis may also be present, though somewhat 
less frequently in 50–60% of cases. Chorea and indo-
lent carditis may have a subacute presentation. Chorea 
is present in 2–30% of affected individuals, while ery-
thema marginatum and subcutaneous nodules are rare. 
Sixty percent of patients with ARF progress to rheu-
matic heart disease, with the endocardium, pericardium, 
and myocardium all potentially involved. All patients 
with ARF should receive antibiotics sufficient to treat 
the precipitating group A streptococcal infection.
	90.	 The answer is D. 
(Chap. 26) This patient has a history very suggestive of 
recurrent bouts of ARF with evidence of mitral regur-
gitation, mitral stenosis, and aortic regurgitation on 
physical examination. This and the presence of atrial 
fibrillation imply severe rheumatic heart disease. Risk 
factors for this condition include poverty and crowded 
living conditions. As a result, ARF is considerably more 
common in the developing world. Daily aspirin is the 
treatment of choice for the migratory large-joint arthri-
tis and fever that are common manifestations of ARF. 
Practitioners sometimes use steroids during acute bouts 
of carditis to quell inflammation, though this remains a 
controversial practice and has no role between flares of 
ARF. Secondary prophylaxis with either daily oral peni-
cillin or, preferably, monthly IM injections is considered 
the best method to prevent further episodes of ARF, 
and therefore prevent further valvular damage. Primary 
prophylaxis with penicillin on an as-needed basis is 
equally effective for preventing further bouts of carditis. 
However, most episodes of sore throat are too minor for 
patients to present to a physician. Therefore, second-
ary prophylaxis is considered preferable in patients who 
already have severe valvular disease. Doxycycline is not a 
first-line agent for group A Streptococcus, the pathogen 
that incites ARF.
	91.	 The answer is A. 
(Chap. 28) Cardiogenic shock (CS) is characterized by 
systemic hypoperfusion caused by severe depression of 
the cardiac index (<2.2 L/min/m2) and sustained systolic 
arterial hypotension (<90 mmHg) despite an elevated 
filling pressure (pulmonary capillary wedge pressure 
>18 mmHg). It is associated with in-hospital mortality 
rates above 50%. Acute myocardial infarction (MI) with 
left ventricular dysfunction is the most common cause 
of cardiogenic shock. Other complications of acute MI 
such as mitral regurgitation or free wall rupture are 
far less common. CS is the leading cause of death of 
patients hospitalized with MI. Early reperfusion therapy 
for acute MI decreases the incidence of CS. Shock typi-
cally is associated with ST-segment elevation MI and 
is less common with non–ST-segment elevation MI. 
In patients with acute MI, older age, female sex, prior 
MI, diabetes, and anterior MI location are all associated 
with an increased risk of CS. Shock associated with a 
first inferior MI should prompt a search for a mechanical 
cause. Reinfarction soon after MI increases the risk of 
CS. Two-thirds of patients with CS have flow-limiting 
stenoses in all three major coronary arteries, and 20% 
have stenosis of the left main coronary artery. CS may 
rarely occur in the absence of significant stenosis, as seen 
in LV apical ballooning/Takotsubo’s cardiomyopathy.
	92.	 The answer is E. 
(Chap. 28) In patients with acute myocardial infarction 
and cardiogenic shock, percutaneous coronary inter-
vention can improve mortality rate and outcomes. Sta-
bilizing the patient in cardiogenic shock is an important 
first maneuver. Initial therapy is aimed at maintaining 
adequate systemic and coronary perfusion by raising 
systemic blood pressure with vasopressors and adjust-
ing volume status to a level that ensures optimum left 
ventricular filling pressure. Decreased diastolic blood 
pressure is detrimental because it reduces coronary 
blood flow. However, vasopressor and inotropic agents 
have the potential to exacerbate the ischemic process 
by raising myocardial oxygen consumption, increasing 
heart rate, or increasing left ventricular afterload. Nor-
epinephrine is associated with fewer adverse events, 
including arrhythmias, compared with dopamine. 
Dobutamine has greater inotropic than chronotropic 
action but may cause a reduction in blood pressure 
due to vasodilation. Aortic counterpulsation with an 
Review and Self-Assessment
611
intraaortic balloon pump (IABP) is helpful in rapidly 
stabilizing patients because it is capable of augmenting 
both arterial diastolic pressure and cardiac output. The 
balloon is automatically inflated during early diastole, 
augmenting coronary blood flow, and it collapses in 
early systole, reducing the left ventricular afterload. 
IABP improves hemodynamic status temporarily in 
most patients with cardiogenic shock. In contrast to 
vasopressors and inotropic agents, myocardial O2 con-
sumption is reduced, ameliorating ischemia. IABP is 
contraindicated if aortic regurgitation is present or aor-
tic dissection is suspected.
	93.	 The answer is E. 
(Chap. 29) The most common electrical mechanism for 
cardiac arrest is ventricular fibrillation, which is respon-
sible for 50–80% of cardiac arrests. Severe persistent 
bradyarrhythmias, asystole, and pulseless electrical activ-
ity (PEA: organized electrical activity, unusually slow, 
without mechanical response, formerly called electro-
mechanical dissociation) cause another 20–30%. Pulseless 
sustained ventricular tachycardia (a rapid arrhythmia dis-
tinct from PEA) is a less common mechanism. Acute low 
cardiac output states, having a precipitous onset also may 
present clinically as a cardiac arrest. These hemodynamic 
causes include massive acute pulmonary emboli, inter-
nal blood loss from a ruptured aortic aneurysm, intense 
anaphylaxis, and cardiac rupture with tamponade after 
myocardial infarction. Sudden deaths from these causes 
are not typically included in the category of sudden car-
diac death.
	94.	 The answer is A. 
(Chap. 29) The probability of achieving successful 
resuscitation from cardiac arrest is related to the inter-
val from onset of loss of circulation to institution of 
resuscitative efforts, the setting in which the event 
occurs, the mechanism (ventricular fibrillation, ven-
tricular tachycardia, PEA, asystole), and the clinical 
status of the patient before the cardiac arrest. Return 
of circulation and survival rates as a result of defibril-
lation decrease almost linearly from the first minute to 
10 minutes. After 5 minutes, survival rates are no bet-
ter than 25–30% in out-of-hospital settings. Settings in 
which it is possible to institute prompt cardiopulmonary 
resuscitation (CPR) followed by prompt defibrillation 
provide a better chance of a successful outcome. How-
ever, the outcome in intensive care units (ICUs) and 
other in-hospital environments is heavily influenced by 
the patient’s preceding clinical status. The immediate 
outcome is good for cardiac arrest occurring in ICUs 
in the presence of an acute cardiac event or transient 
metabolic disturbance, but survival among patients 
with far-advanced chronic cardiac disease or advanced 
noncardiac diseases (e.g., renal failure, pneumonia, 
sepsis, diabetes, cancer) is low and not much better in 
the in-hospital than in the out-of-hospital setting. Sur-
vival from unexpected cardiac arrest in unmonitored 
areas in a hospital is not much better than that it is for 
witnessed out-of-hospital arrests. Because implemen-
tation of community response systems, survival from 
out-of-hospital cardiac arrest has improved, although 
it still remains low under most circumstances. Survival 
probabilities in public sites exceed those in the home 
environment. This may be because many patients with 
at home cardiac arrest have severe underlying cardiac 
disease. The success rate for initial resuscitation and 
survival to hospital discharge after an out-of-hospital 
cardiac arrest depends heavily on the mechanism of the 
event. Most cardiac arrests that are caused by ventricu-
lar fibrillation (VF) begin with a run of nonsustained 
or sustained ventricular tachycardia (VT), which then 
degenerates into VF. When the mechanism is pulse-
less VT, the outcome is best, VF is the next most suc-
cessful, and asystole and PEA generate dismal outcome 
statistics. Advanced age also adversely influences the 
chances of successful resuscitation as well as outcomes 
after resuscitation.
	95.	 The answer is D. 
(Chap. 31) Mutation of the LDL receptor results in 
hypercholesterolemia. This mutation may be homo-
zygous or heterozygous and occurs in approximately 
1/500 people in its heterozygous form. Homozygous 
disease is more severe, with the development of symp-
tomatic coronary atherosclerosis in childhood, while 
heterozygous patients have hypercholesterolemia from 
birth, and disease recognition is usually not until adult-
hood when patients are found to have tendon xanthomas 
or coronary artery disease. In patients with heterozygous 
disease, there is generally a family history on at least one 
side of the family. In familial hypercholesterolemia, there 
is an elevation of LDL-C between 200 and 400 mg/dL 
without alterations in chylomicrons or VLDL. Familial 
defective apoB-100 has a similar presentation but is less 
common (1/1000). Autosomal dominant history may 
be present in this family to suggest autosomal domi-
nant hypercholesterolemia; however, this condition is 
quite rare (<1/1,000,000) and therefore much less likely. 
Familial hepatic lipase deficiency and lipoprotein lipase 
deficiency are associated with increased chylomicrons, 
not LDL-C, and present with eruptive xanthomas, hepa-
tosplenomegaly, and pancreatitis. These conditions occur 
rarely (<1/1,000,000).
	96.	 The answer is B. 
(Chap. 31) There are many secondary forms of elevated 
LDL that warrant consideration in a patient found to have 
abnormal LDL. These include hypothyroidism, nephritic 
syndrome, cholestasis, acute intermittent porphyria, 
anorexia nervosa, hepatoma, and drugs such as thia-
zides, cyclosporine, and Tegretol. Cirrhosis is associated 
Review and Self-Assessment
612
with reduced LDL because of inadequate production. 
Malabsorption, malnutrition, Gaucher’s disease, chronic 
infectious disease, hyperthyroidism, and niacin toxicity 
are all similarly associated with reduced LDL.
	97.	 The answer is D. 
(Chap. 31) This patient has signs and symptoms of famil-
ial hypercholesterolemia (FH) with elevated plasma LDL, 
normal triglycerides, tendon xanthomas, and premature 
coronary artery disease. FH is an autosomal codomi-
nant lipoprotein disorder that is the most common of 
these syndromes caused by a single gene disorder. It has 
a higher prevalence in Afrikaners, Christian Lebanese, 
and French Canadians. There is no definitive diagnostic 
test for FH. It may be diagnosed with a skin biopsy that 
shows reduced LDL receptor activity in cultured fibro-
blasts (although there is considerable overlap with nor-
mals). FH is predominantly a clinical diagnosis, although 
molecular diagnostics are being developed. Hemolysis 
is not a feature of FH. Sitosterolemia is distinguished 
from FH by episodes of hemolysis. It is a rare autoso-
mal recessive disorder that causes a marked increase in 
the dietary absorption of plant sterols. Hemolysis is due 
to incorporation of plant sterols into the red blood cell 
membrane. Sitosterolemia is confirmed by demonstrat-
ing an increase in the plasma levels of sitosterol using 
gas chromatography. CT scanning of the liver does not 
sufficiently differentiate between the hyperlipoprotein-
emias. Many of the primary lipoproteinemias, including 
sitosterolemia, are inherited in an autosomal recessive 
pattern, and thus a pedigree analysis would not be likely 
to isolate the disorder.
	98.	 The answer is C. 
(Chap. 31) This patient has nephrotic syndrome, which 
is likely a result of multiple myeloma. The hyperlip-
idemia of nephrotic syndrome appears to be due to 
a combination of increased hepatic production and 
decreased clearance of very low-density lipoproteins, 
with increased LDL production. It is usually mixed but 
can manifest as hypercholesterolemia or hypertriglyc-
eridemia. Effective treatment of the underlying renal 
disease normalizes the lipid profile. Of the choices pre-
sented, HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors would be the 
most effective to reduce this patient’s LDL. Dietary 
management is an important component of lifestyle 
modification but seldom results in a greater than 10% 
fall in LDL. Niacin and fibrates would be indicated if 
the triglycerides were higher, but the LDL is the more 
important lipid abnormality to address at this time. Lipid 
apheresis is reserved for patients who cannot tolerate the 
lipid-lowering drugs or who have a genetic lipid disor-
der refractory to medication. Cholesterol ester transfer 
protein inhibitors have been shown to raise high- 
density lipoprotein levels, and their role in the treatment 
of lipoproteinemias is still under investigation.
	99.	 The answer is E. 
(Chap. 37) The patient presents with prehypertension, as 
evidenced by systolic blood pressure of 120–139 mmHg 
or diastolic blood pressure of 80–89 mmHg. Although at 
this blood pressure medication therapy is not indicated, 
the MRFIT trial clearly showed a graded influence of 
both systolic and diastolic blood pressure on cardiovas-
cular mortality including down to within normal range 
at 120 mmHg systolic. Thus, lifestyle modification is in 
order for the patient described here. Alcohol consump-
tion is recommended to be two or fewer drinks per day 
for men and one drink or less per day for women. NaCl 
consumption of less than 6 g per day has been shown to 
reduce blood pressure in patients with established hyper-
tension and in certain ethnic groups. To reduce blood 
pressure, regular moderate to intense aerobic activity for 
30 minutes 6–7 days per week is recommended. Finally, 
a weight loss of 9.2 kg has been shown to drop blood on 
average 6/3 mmHg.
100.	 The answer is C. 
(Chap. 37) Several factors have been shown to confer 
an increased risk of complications from hypertension. 
In the patient described here there is only one: ongo-
ing tobacco use. Epidemiologic factors that have poorer 
prognosis include African-American race, male sex, and 
onset of hypertension in youth. In addition, comorbid 
factors that independently increase the risk of atheroscle-
rosis worsen the prognosis in patients with hypertension. 
These factors include hypercholesterolemia, obesity, 
diabetes mellitus, and tobacco use. Physical and labora-
tory examination showing evidence of end-organ dam-
age also may portend a poorer prognosis. This includes 
evidence of retinal damage or hypertensive heart disease 
with cardiac enlargement or congestive heart failure. 
Furthermore, electrocardiographic evidence of ischemia 
or left ventricular strain but not left ventricular hyper-
trophy alone may predict worse outcomes. A family his-
tory of hypertensive complications does not worsen the 
prognosis if diastolic blood pressure is maintained at less 
than 110 mmHg.
101 and 102.   The answers are D and E, respectively. 
(Chap. 37) This patient presents at a young age with 
hypertension that is difficult to control, raising the ques-
tion of secondary causes of hypertension. The most 
likely diagnosis in this patient is primary hyperaldoste-
ronism, also known as Conn’s syndrome. The patient 
has no physical features that suggest congenital adrenal 
hyperplasia or Cushing’s syndrome. In addition, there is 
no glucose intolerance, as is commonly seen in Cush-
ing’s syndrome. The lack of episodic symptoms and the 
labile hypertension make pheochromocytoma unlikely. 
The findings of hypokalemia and metabolic alkalosis in 
the presence of difficult to control hypertension yield the 
likely diagnosis of Conn’s syndrome. Diagnosis of the 
Review and Self-Assessment
613
disease can be difficult, but the preferred test is the 
plasma aldosterone/renin ratio. This test should be per-
formed at 8 a.m., and a ratio above 30 to 50 is diagnostic 
of primary hyperaldosteronism. Caution should be taken 
in interpreting this test while the patient is on ACE 
inhibitor therapy, as ACE inhibitors can falsely elevate 
plasma renin activity. However, a plasma renin level that 
is undetectable or an elevated aldosterone/renin ratio in 
the presence of ACE inhibitor therapy is highly sug-
gestive of primary hyperaldosteronism. Selective adrenal 
vein renin sampling may be performed after the diag-
nosis to help determine if the process is unilateral or 
bilateral. Although fibromuscular dysplasia is a common 
secondary cause of hypertension in young females, the 
presence of hypokalemia and metabolic alkalosis should 
suggest Conn’s syndrome. Thus, magnetic resonance 
imaging of the renal arteries is unnecessary in this case. 
Measurement of 24-hour urine collection for potassium 
wasting and aldosterone secretion can be useful in the 
diagnosis of Conn’s syndrome. The measurement of 
metanephrines or cortisol is not indicated.
103.	 The answer is B. 
(Chap. 38) For all patients with aortic dissection or 
hematoma, appropriate management includes reduction 
of shear stress with beta blockade and management of 
systemic hypertension to reduce tension on the dissec-
tion. However, emergent or urgent surgical therapy is 
indicated to patients with ascending aortic dissection 
and intramural hematomas (type A), and for complicated 
type B dissections (distal aorta). Complications that 
would warrant surgical intervention include propagation 
despite medical therapy, compromise of major branches, 
impending rupture, or continued pain. Thus, patient B 
has a distal dissection without evidence of complications 
and is the best candidate for medical therapy.
104.	 The answer is B. 
(Chap. 38) Abdominal aortic aneurysms (AAAs) affect 
1–2% of men older than age 50. Most AAAs are asymp-
tomatic and are found incidentally on physical examina-
tion. The predisposing factors for AAA are the same as 
those for other cardiovascular disease, with over 90% 
being associated with atherosclerotic disease. Most 
AAAs are located infrarenally, and recent data suggest 
that an uncomplicated infrarenal AAA may be treated 
with endovascular stenting instead of the usual surgical 
grafting. Indications for proceeding to surgery include 
any patient with symptoms or an aneurysm that is grow-
ing rapidly. Serial ultrasonography or CT imaging is 
imperative, and all aneurysms larger than 5.5 cm warrant 
intervention because of the high mortality associated 
with repair of ruptured aortic aneurysms. The rupture 
rate of an AAA is directly related to size, with the 5-year 
risk of rupture being 1–2% with aneurysms less than 
5 cm and 20–40% with aneurysms greater than 5 cm. 
The mortality of patients undergoing elective repair is 
1–2% and is greater than 50% for the emergent treat-
ment of a ruptured AAA. Preoperative cardiac evalu-
ation before elective repair is imperative, as coexisting 
coronary artery disease is common.
105.	 The answer is E. 
(Chap. 38) Aortitis and ascending aortic aneurysms are 
commonly caused by cystic medial necrosis and meso-
aortitis that result in damage to the elastic fibers of the 
aortic wall with thinning and weakening. Many infec-
tious, inflammatory, and inherited conditions have been 
associated with this finding, including syphilis, tuber-
culosis, mycotic aneurysm, Takayasu’s arteritis, giant 
cell arteritis, rheumatoid arthritis, and the spondyloar-
thropathies (ankylosing spondylitis, psoriatic arthritis, 
Reiter’s syndrome, Behçet’s disease). In addition, it can 
be seen with the genetic disorders Marfan’s syndrome 
and Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
106.	 The answer is E. 
(Chap. 38) Descending aortic aneurysms are most com-
monly associated with atherosclerosis. The average 
growth rate is approximately 0.1–0.2 cm yearly. The risk 
of rupture and subsequent management are related to 
the size of the aneurysm as well as symptoms related to 
the aneurysm. However, most thoracic aortic aneurysms 
are asymptomatic. When symptoms do occur, they are 
frequently related to mechanical complications of the 
aneurysm causing compression of adjacent structures. 
This includes the trachea and esophagus, and symptoms 
can include cough, chest pain, hoarseness, and dyspha-
gia. The risk of rupture is approximately 2–3% yearly 
for aneurysms less than 4 cm and increases to 7% per 
year once the size is greater than 6 cm. Management 
of descending aortic aneurysms includes blood pressure 
control. Beta blockers are recommended because they 
decrease the contractility of the heart and thus decrease 
aortic wall stress, potentially slowing aneurysmal growth. 
Individuals with thoracic aortic aneurysms should 
be monitored with chest imaging at least yearly, or more 
frequently if new symptoms develop. This can include 
CT angiography, MRI, or transesophageal echocar-
diography. Operative repair is indicated if the aneurysm 
expands by more than 1 cm in a year or reaches a diam-
eter of more than 5.5–6.0 cm. Endovascular stenting for 
the treatment of thoracic aortic aneurysms is a relatively 
new procedure with limited long-term results available. 
The largest study to date included more than 400 patients 
with a variety of indications for thoracic endovascular 
stents. In 249 patients, the indication for stent was tho-
racic aortic aneurysm. This study showed an initial suc-
cess rate of 87.1%, with a 30-day mortality rate of 10%. 
However, if the procedure was done emergently, the 
mortality rate at 30 days was 28%. At 1 year, data were 
available on only 96 of the original 249 patients with 
Review and Self-Assessment
614
degenerative thoracic aneurysms. In these individuals, 
80% continued to have satisfactory outcomes with stent-
ing and 14% showed growth of the aneurysm (LJ Leurs, 
J Vasc Surg 40:670, 2004). Ongoing studies with long-
term follow-up are needed before endovascular stenting 
can be recommended for the treatment of thoracic aortic 
aneurysms, although in individuals who are not candi-
dates for surgery, stenting should be considered.
107.	 The answer is C. 
(Chap. 39) The patient presents with classic signs of 
arterial occlusion with limb pain, physical examination 
showing pallor, and a pulseless, cold leg. She has no risk 
factors for central or peripheral atherosclerotic disease; 
thus angiogram would simply confirm the diagnosis of 
arterial occlusion, not demonstrate her predisposing 
condition. In the absence of fever or systemic symp-
toms, vasculitis and endocarditis are unlikely sources 
of arterial embolization. She likely had a paradoxical 
embolism in the context of an atrial septal defect, which 
was the source of her childhood murmur. Because many 
of these patients develop pulmonary hypertension with 
time, she is now at risk for a paradoxical embolism. 
Although in this context, arterial emboli frequently 
originate from venous thrombus, the thrombi cannot 
produce a paradoxical embolism in the absence of right-
to-left shunt, such as in a large patent foramen ovale or 
an atrial septal defect.
108.	 The answer is E. 
(Chap. 42) Doppler echocardiography uses ultrasound 
reflecting off moving red blood cells to determine flow 
velocity within a structure, in this case the heart or great 
vessels. Thus, it is most useful for determining abnormal 
flow or flow limitation. Specifically, it is useful in defining 
valvular regurgitation or stenosis, cardiac output when 
combined with the cross-sectional area, and diastolic fill-
ing of the ventricle. Heart failure with preserved ejection 
fraction is associated with impaired left ventricle relax-
ation in early diastole and subsequently there is reduced 
early transmitral flow compared to normal individuals. 
Although Doppler might be helpful to determine the 
physiologic consequence of pericardial effusion, i.e., 
tamponade, two-dimensional (2D) echocardiography is 
the preferred mode for effusion diagnosis. Similarly, 2D 
echocardiography is used to calculate ejection fraction 
and diagnose cardiac masses. Diagnosis of ischemia can 
be made with the addition of physiologic or pharmaco-
logic stress to echocardiography, but not with Doppler 
echocardiography.
Bold page number indicates the start of the main discussion of the topic. Page numbers with “f ” or “t” refer to figures and tables, respectively. 
Pages numbers with “V” refer to pages that describe the videos on the website.
615
A band, of sarcomere, 9
ABCA1 deficiency. See Tangier disease 
(ABCA1 deficiency)
Abciximab
in PCI, 434
for UA/NSTEMI, 411t
Abdomen, inspection/palpation of, 65
Abdominal aortic aneurysm, 470–471, 594, 
613. See also Aortic aneurysm
Abdominal radiography, 470
Abduction and external rotation test, 482
Abetalipoproteinemia, 365
ABI (ankle-brachial index), 450, 477, 597
Abiotrophia spp. infections, in endocarditis, 301
Abscess, perivalvular, 297
Acanthosis nigricans, in metabolic 
syndrome, 381
Accelerated idioventricular rhythm, 168, 
430–431, 537f
Accelerated junctional rhythm, 165, 431
Accessory pathway-mediated tachycardia, 
166–167, 166f
ACE (angiotensin-converting enzyme), 
genetic polymorphisms in, 8t
Acebutolol
dosage of, 159t
indications for, 159t
for ischemic heart disease, 399t
pharmacology of, 159t
ACE inhibitors. See Angiotensin-converting 
enzyme (ACE) inhibitors
N-Acetylcysteine, for prevention of 
contrast-induced nephropathy, 118
Acrocyanosis, 484
Acromegaly
cardiac manifestations of, 290t, 292
hypertension in, 451t, 457
Actin, 9f, 10, 249
Action potentials, cardiac
electrophysiology of, 128–129, 129f
phases of, 11–12
regional differences in, 137, 138f
Acute coronary syndromes
diagnosis of, 415, 415f
myocardial infarction
non-ST-segment elevation. See 
Unstable angina/non-ST-segment 
elevation myocardial infarction  
(UA/NSTEMI)
ST-segment elevation. See ST-segment 
elevation myocardial infarction 
(STEMI)
PCI for, 438–439. See also Percutaneous 
coronary interventions (PCI)
pulmonary edema in, 327
unstable angina. See Unstable angina/
non-ST-segment elevation 
myocardial infarction
Acute rheumatic fever. See Rheumatic fever
ADAMTS13, 549t
Adenosine
for accessory pathway-mediated 
tachycardia, 167
adverse effects of, 138t, 143t, 160t
for AV nodal reentrant  
tachycardia, 165
dosage of, 158t
indications for, 158t
for pulmonary vasodilator reactivity 
testing, 491
Adiponectin, 381
Adrenal cancer, aldosteronism in,  
454–455
Adrenalectomy, for adenoma, 455
Adrenal hyperplasia, 454–455
Adrenal insufficiency, AV conduction  
block in, 143t
Adrenal tumor, 454–455
Adrenergic crisis, 465t, 466
Adventitia, 2, 3f
AED (automated external defibrillation), 335
AF. See Atrial fibrillation (AF)
African trypanosomiasis, cardiac 
manifestations of, 258
Afterdepolarization, 131–132
delayed, 131–132, 132f, 152
early, 131–132, 132f, 152
Afterload, 6f, 14–15, 14t
Aging, metabolic syndrome and, 378
Agonal gasps/breathing, 334
AH interval, 146
Air hunger, 42, 43t
Airway clearance, in cardiopulmonary 
resuscitation, 334–335
Airway obstruction, dyspnea in, 44t
Airway resistance (Raw), increased, 45
Ajmaline, for Brugada syndrome, 178
Albumin, in edema, 60
Alcohol abuse or dependence (alcoholism)
atrial fibrillation in, 156
cardiomyopathy in, 261
hypertension and, 459, 460t
palpitations in, 61
Alcohol use, lipoprotein metabolism effects 
of, 368
Aldosterone
excess of, glucocorticoid-remediable,  
455, 456t
plasma aldosterone to plasma renin 
activity, 454
Aldosterone antagonists
adverse effects of, 194
for heart failure, 191t, 194
for hypertension, 461t, 462
α-adrenergic antagonists
adverse effects of, 58t
for hypertension, 461t, 462–463
α-adrenergic receptors, 445
genetic polymorphisms in, 8t
Alveolar hypoventilation, 492t, 496
Ambrisentan, for pulmonary hypertension, 493
American trypanosomiasis. See Chagas’ disease
Amiloride, 460, 461t
Aminoglycosides, for infective endocarditis, 301
Aminophylline, 61
Amiodarone
action of, 135t
adverse effects of, 160t
for arrhythmia in heart failure, 195
for atrial fibrillation, 157
for atrial tachycardia, 164
for cardiac arrest, 335
dosage of, 158t, 159t
ECG changes caused by, 99f
indications for, 158t, 159t
for multifocal atrial tachycardia, 162
for pharmacologic cardioversion, 162
pharmacology of, 158t, 159t
for ventricular tachycardia, 171, 172, 430
Amitriptyline, adverse effects of, 138t
Amlodipine
adverse effects of, 399t
for ischemic heart disease, 399t, 401
for pulmonary hypertension, 493
for Raynaud’s phenomenon, 484
Amoxicillin, for endocarditis prophylaxis, 307t
Amphetamine(s), adverse effects of, 61, 261
INDEX
Index
616
Amphotericin B, for Candida endocarditis, 304
Ampicillin
for infective endocarditis, 301, 302t
for infective endocarditis prophylaxis, 307t
Amyloidosis
cardiac manifestations of, 290t
AV conduction block, 143, 143t
cardiomyopathy, 265–266, 266f, 267f
SA node dysfunction, 139
senile, 139
ventricular tachycardia in, 174t
Anasarca, 54
Androgen abuse, adverse effects of, 58t
Anemia
dyspnea in, 44t, 45
hypoxia in, 50
Aneurysm
aortic. See Aortic aneurysm
aortic sinus of Valsalva, 212
fusiform, 467
mycotic. See Mycotic aneurysm
popliteal artery, 482
saccular, 467, 468
true, 467
ventricular apical, 520V
Angina
microvascular, 386
Prinzmetal’s variant, 386, 401, 413–414
Angina decubitus, 388
Anginal equivalents, 388
Angina pectoris, 34, 35t, 388. See also 
Ischemic heart disease
in aortic stenosis, 233
atherosclerosis and, 344
atypical, 388
duration of, 35t
history in, 388–389
location of, 34, 35t
nuclear cardiology in, 107f, 109f
physical examination in, 389–390
quality of, 35t
severity of, 388, 389t
stable, 388
stable exertional, 388
threshold for development of, 388
treatment of, 396–397, 438
unstable. See Unstable angina/non-
ST-segment elevation myocardial 
infarction (UA/NSTEMI)
Angiogenesis, 7
therapeutic, for peripheral artery disease, 
478–479
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE), 
genetic polymorphisms in, 8t
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) 
inhibitors
adverse effects of, 192–193, 462
angioedema, 193, 462
cough, 193, 462
hyperkalemia, 193
renal, 462
for aortic dissection, 473
for heart failure, 191t, 192, 192f
for hypertension, 461t, 462, 463
in metabolic syndrome, 349, 383
for ischemic heart disease, 401–402
for myocardial infarction
STEMI, 427–428
UA/NSTEMI, 411, 413
in peripheral artery disease, 478
for pulmonary edema, 326
for renal artery stenosis, 453
Angiotensin II, 446–447
Angiotensinogen, 446–447
Angiotensin receptor(s), 8t
Angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs)
adverse effects of, 193, 462
for heart failure, 191t, 193
for hypertension, 461t, 462, 463
in metabolic syndrome, 349, 383
for myocardial infarction, 428
for renal artery stenosis, 453
Angle of Louis, 65
Ankle, pulse measurement in, 69
Ankle-brachial index (ABI), 450, 477, 597
Ankylosing spondylitis
aortic aneurysm in, 469
aortic regurgitation in, 238
aortitis in, 292–293, 474
murmur in, 83
Annulo-aortic ectasia, 83
Anorexiants
adverse effects of, 451t
for metabolic syndrome, 382
pulmonary hypertension and, 495
ANP (atrial natriuretic peptide), in edema, 
56–57
Anthracyclines, adverse effects of, 261
Antiarrhythmics. See also specific drugs
actions of, 134–135, 135t
adverse effects of, 138t, 143t
in heart failure, 195
intravenous dose range/primary 
indication, 158t, 159t
oral dosing/primary indications, 158t, 159t
Vaughan-Williams classification of,  
134–135, 135t
Anticoagulant(s). See also specific drugs
for acute arterial occlusion, 481
for pulmonary arterial hypertension, 493
for superficial vein thrombosis, 487
Antidromic AV reentry, 166
Antihistamines, adverse effects of, 132
Antiphospholipid antibody(ies), testing  
for, 549t
Antiplatelet agents
for ischemic heart disease, 401
for myocardial infarction
STEMI, 426–427
UA/NSTEMI, 411t, 412
for PCI, 436
for peripheral artery disease, 478
Antithrombotic drugs
for STEMI, 426–427
for UA/NSTEMI, 411–412, 411t
Anxiety disorders
dyspnea in, 43
palpitations in, 61
Aorta
atherosclerosis of, 468, 468t, 473
congenital anomalies of, 467
dilated ascending, 521V
diseases of, 467, 468t
rupture of, 287–288, 467, 469
Aortic aneurysm, 467, 468t
abdominal, 470–471, 594, 613
clinical features of, 469–470
CT angiography in, 470f
cystic medial necrosis in, 468
echocardiography in, 517V
etiology of, 467–468, 468t, 594, 613
familial, 468
monitoring expansion of, 469
mycotic, 468, 474
radiography in, 469–470, 469f, 472
rupture of, 469, 470
in spondyloarthropathies, 469
in syphilis, 468
thoracic, 37, 469–470, 594, 613–614
traumatic, 469
treatment of, 470–471, 613
tuberculous, 468
ultrasonography in, 470
Aortic dissection, 468t, 471
acute, 471
aortic regurgitation in, 472
chest pain in, 35t, 36, 38
chronic, 469
classification of, 471, 472f
clinical features of, 471–472
echocardiography in, 103, 103f, 472
intramural hematoma, 471–472
limb perfusion in, 38
murmur in, 83
penetrating atherosclerotic ulcer,  
471–472
physical examination in, 38–39
risk factors for, 471
treatment of, 465t, 473, 594, 613
Aortic occlusion, 473
Aortic regurgitation, 237
in aortic dissection, 472
in aortitis, 474
arterial pulse in, 239
cardiac catheterization in, 240
carotid pulse in, 67–68, 68f
chest radiograph in, 240
Index
617
clinical features of, 239–240, 587, 605
ECG in, 240
echocardiography in, 103f, 240, 570t
etiology of, 220t, 237–238
heart sounds/murmur in, 73, 76–77, 77f, 
83–84, 239–240, 576, 596
history in, 239
palpation in, 239
palpitations in, 61
pathophysiology of, 238–239
severity classification, 570t
treatment of
in acute disease, 240
in chronic disease, 241–242
strategy for, 241f
surgical, 242, 243f
Aortic root diseases, 83, 238
Aortic root–to-right-heart shunts, 212–213
Aortic stenosis, 231
in bicuspid aortic valve, 231–232
cardiac catheterization in, 234–235
carotid pulse in, 67–68, 68f
chest pain in, 34t, 35t, 36, 233
chest radiograph in, 234
clinical features of, 233
congenital, 213, 231
dyspnea in, 44
ECG in, 234
echocardiography in, 102, 102f, 234, 
517V, 546f, 570t
etiology of, 220t, 231, 587, 605
heart sounds/murmur in
characteristics of, 70f, 72, 233–234
duration, 76–77
intensity and radiation, 77f, 79–80
systemic vascular resistance and, 86
hemodynamic measurements in, 120f
myocardial ischemia in, 386
natural history of, 235, 587, 605
palpitations in, 61
pathogenesis of, 231, 232f
pathophysiology of, 232–233
rheumatic, 231
severity classification, 570t
subaortic, 213
supravalvular, 213–214
treatment of
medical, 213, 224t, 235
strategy for, 235f
valvuloplasty, 213, 236, 440
Aortic valve
area measurement, 121–122
bicuspid, 231–232, 468t, 470
Aortic valve replacement
percutaneous, 236, 237f, 440, 545–547, 
545V, 546f
surgical, 213, 236, 242
Aortic valve sclerosis, murmur in, 81
Aortic valvuloplasty, 236
Aortitis, 468t, 474
in giant cell arteritis, 474
idiopathic, 474
infective, 474–475
rheumatic, 474
syphilitic, 474–475
in Takayasu’s arteritis, 474
Aortobifemoral bypass, 479
Aortography
in aortic aneurysm, 469f, 470, 470f
during cardiac catheterization, 122–123
Aortoiliac disease, 479
Apolipoprotein(s), 354–355, 354t
Apolipoprotein(a), 354t, 356
Apolipoprotein(a)-I deficiency, 365
Apolipoprotein A-V deficiency, 358t, 361
Apolipoprotein B
ApoB-100, familial defective, 358t, 360
elevated levels of, 358–363, 358t, 364t
low levels of, 363–365
Apolipoprotein C-II deficiency
clinical features of, 358t, 361
genetic factors in, 358t, 361
Apolipoprotein E, 354t
Apoptosis, of foam cells, 343
ARBs. See Angiotensin receptor 
blockers (ARBs)
Arginine vasopressin (AVP)
for acute heart failure, 197t
for cardiac arrest, 335
in edema, 55
in heart failure, 185f
Arrhythmias. See Cardiac arrhythmias
Arrhythmogenic ventricular dysplasia, 174, 
175f, 263, 264f
Arsenic exposure/poisoning, 562t
Arterial blood gases, 553t
Arterial disorders
acrocyanosis, 484
acute arterial occlusion, 480, 594–595, 614
arteriovenous fistula.  
See Arteriovenous fistula
atheroembolism, 481, 481f
chilblain, 485
erythromelalgia (erythermalgia), 485
of extremities. See Peripheral artery disease
fibromuscular dysplasia, 452–453, 479
Raynaud’s phenomenon.  
See Raynaud’s phenomenon
thoracic outlet compression syndrome, 
481–482
thromboangiitis obliterans, 480, 484
Arterial volume, effective, reduction in, 55
Arteriovenous fistula, 482
acquired, 482
clinical features of, 482–48
congenital, 482
coronary, 213
cyanosis in, 52
diagnosis of, 483
treatment of, 483
Ascites, 54
in cirrhosis, 57–58
in heart failure, 88
ASD. See Atrial septal defect (ASD)
Aspiration, dyspnea in, 44
Aspirin
action of, 412f
for acute pericarditis, 278
adverse effects of, 401
for atherosclerosis prevention, 350
for cardiac catheterization pretreatment, 118
for coronary heart disease  
prevention, 350
for heart failure, 195
for ischemic heart disease, 401
for myocardial infarction
as secondary prevention, 433
STEMI, 420, 426
UA/NSTEMI, 411–412, 411t
in PCI, 403, 434
for peripheral artery disease, 478
for rheumatic fever, 314
for stroke/TIA prevention, 350
Aspirin resistance, 411
Asthma
cardiac, 187
dyspnea in, 44, 44t
Asymmetric septal hypertrophy. See 
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
Asystole, 336f
Atelectasis, 50
Atenolol
dosage of, 159t
for hypertension, 461t
indications for, 159t
for ischemic heart disease, 399t
Atherectomy, 436
Atheroembolism, 481, 481f
Atherosclerosis, 340
aortic, 468, 468t, 473
arterial remodeling in, 344, 345f
atheroma evolution, 341f, 342–343
clinical syndromes of, 344–345
compensatory enlargement in, 344
endothelium in, 3–4
hypertension and, 448
initiation of, 340–342, 341f
insulin resistance and, 349
intermittent claudication and, 344
lipoproteins and, 340–341
myocardial infarction and, 344
pathogenesis of, 340
plaque in
calcification of, 343, 394
evolution of, 342–344, 386, 412f
microvessels in, 343
necrotic core of, 343
Index
618
Atherosclerosis, plaque in (Cont.):
rupture of, 344–346, 345f, 386–387, 
412f, 415–416
stabilization of, 348
prevention of, 346, 351–352
risk factors for, 346t
assessment of, 351–352
diabetes mellitus, 349
dysregulated coagulation and 
fibrinolysis, 350
gender, 349–350
hypercholesterolemia, 340–341
hyperhomocysteinemia, 350
hypertension, 348
inflammation, 350–351, 351f
lipid disorders, 347–350, 347t
obesity, 351
postmenopausal state, 349–350
smoking, 351
sites of predilection for, 342
treatment of, 346, 347t
Atherothrombosis, 343
Athlete(s)
bradycardia in, 580, 600
cardiovascular abnormalities in,  
179–180, 180t
Atorvastatin, 373t
ATP III (National Cholesterol Education 
Project Adult Treatment Panel III), 
346, 346t
Atrial fibrillation (AF), 155
clinical features of, 156, 584, 585, 602, 604
coarse, vs. atrial flutter, 162f
ECG in
after antiarrhythmic therapy, 161f
during antiarrhythmic therapy, 161f
atrial activity in, 156, 156f
with complete heart block, 535f
loop recording, 151, 152f
for monitoring, 158–159
with right-axis deviation and LVH, 535f
with ventricular tachycardia, 171f
in Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome, 
166f, 536f
echocardiography in, 156
in heart failure, 195
mechanism of, 131, 131t, 155–156, 584, 602
palpitations in, 61
rapidly conducting, 166, 166f
in SA node dysfunction, 139
stroke and, 157, 157t, 581, 601
treatment of, 157–161, 581–582, 601
catheter and surgical ablation,  
159–161
rate control, 157–159
ventricular tachycardia in, 171f
Atrial flutter, 152, 161
ECG in, 156f, 159, 162f, 533f, 534f
slow, 161f
treatment of, 161–162, 582, 601
vs. tremor artifact, 530f
Atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP), in edema, 
56–57
Atrial premature complexes, 152, 154, 154f
Atrial septal defect (ASD)
AV conduction block in, 143
chest radiograph in, 210
clinical features of, 209
ECG in, 210, 510f
echocardiography in, 210, 210f, 518V, 547f
heart sounds/murmur in, 70f, 71, 77, 
80–81, 84, 209
vs. mitral stenosis, 222
ostium primum, 80, 143, 209
ostium secundum, 80, 209, 210f
percutaneous closure of, 439–440
physical examination in, 209
sinus venosus, 80, 209
treatment of, 210–211, 547–548, 547f, 
547V, 548f
Atrial tachycardia
automatic, 161
ECG in, 6, 156f, 161, 163f, 530f, 531f, 
532f, 582, 582f, 601
focal, 152, 161
macroreentrant, 152, 161, 164
mechanism of, 131, 152
microreentrant, 164
multifocal, 156f, 162, 530f, 582, 601
treatment of, 162–164
Atriofascicular accessory pathway, 166
Atrioventricular (AV) bundle, 142
Atrioventricular (AV) conduction block, 142
complete, 143
congenital, 143
diagnosis of, 145–147
ECG in
first-degree, 144–145, 144f, 515f
second-degree, 144–145, 144f, 527f, 
528f, 529f, 581, 581f, 600
electrophysiology of, 44–145
epidemiology of, 137
etiology of, 142–144, 143t
first-degree, 144–145, 144f, 515f
high-grade, 144, 145f, 146f
iatrogenic, 143
mechanism of, 131t
murmur in, 84
in myocardial infarction, 431–432
paroxysmal, 145, 145f
progressive familial, 143t
second-degree, 144–145
Mobitz type 1, 144, 144f, 581, 581f, 600
Mobitz type 2, 144–145
treatment of
pacemaker implantation for, 149, 149t, 
150, 150t
pharmacologic, 147
Atrioventricular (AV) dissociation, 169
Atrioventricular (AV) junctional  
tachycardia, 165
Atrioventricular (AV) nodal reentrant 
tachycardia, 156, 161, 163f, 164, 
532f, 582, 601
Atrioventricular (AV) node, 128, 137, 142
Atrioventricular (AV) reentry, 133, 165–166
Atrophie blanche en plaque, 485
Atropine
adverse effects of, 61
for AV conduction block, 145, 147
for cardiac arrest, 336
for SA node dysfunction, 141
Auscultation, cardiac. See Heart murmurs; 
Heart sounds
Austin Flint murmur, 74, 83, 222
Automated external defibrillation (AED), 335
Automaticity, 152
of cardiac conduction system, 130–131
triggered, 131–132
Autonomic nervous system, in blood 
pressure regulation, 445–446
AV conduction block. See Atrioventricular 
(AV) conduction block
AVP. See Arginine vasopressin (AVP)
Axillofemoral bypass, 479
Azithromycin, 307t
Balloon angioplasty, 434–436, 435f
Balloon valvuloplasty, 440
Bariatric surgery, for metabolic  
syndrome, 382
Barlow’s syndrome. See Mitral valve prolapse
Baroreceptors, 446
Baroreflex, 446
Bartonella spp. infections, in endocarditis, 
296, 304, 591, 609
Baseline Dyspnea Index, 43
Basic life support, for cardiac arrest, 334–335
Beck’s triad, 276, 590, 608
Becquerel (Bq), 573t
Bed rest
for myocardial infarction, 426
for rheumatic fever, 314
Behçet’s syndrome, aortic aneurysm in, 468t, 469
Benznidazole, for Chagas’ disease, 318–319
Berardinelli-Seip congenital lipodystrophy, 378
Beriberi, cardiac manifestations of, 59, 262, 
290, 588, 589t, 607
β-adrenergic agonists
actions of, 7, 11, 12f
for pulmonary edema, 327
β-adrenergic antagonists (beta blockers)
for accessory pathway-mediated 
tachycardia, 167
adverse effects of, 194, 400–401
AV conduction block, 143t
bradycardia, 194
Index
619
Raynaud’s phenomenon, 484
SA node dysfunction, 138t, 141
for aortic aneurysm, 469, 471
for aortic dissection, 473
for arrhythmogenic RV cardiomyopathy/
dysplasia, 174–175
for atrial fibrillation, 157
for atrial flutter, 162
for atrial premature complexes, 154
for AV nodal reentrant tachycardia, 165
for catecholaminergic polymorphic 
ventricular tachycardia, 179
for heart failure, 191t, 193–194, 193f
for hypertension, 461t, 462
for ischemic heart disease, 399t, 400–401
for junctional premature complexes, 154
for myocardial infarction
STEMI, 421, 427
UA/NSTEMI, 410t, 411
for palpitations, 62
in peripheral artery disease, 478, 479
for sinus tachycardia, 155
for ventricular tachycardia, 171, 172
β-adrenergic receptors, 8t, 445
Beta blockers. See β-adrenergic antagonists
Betaxolol, for ischemic heart disease, 399t
Bifascicular block, 95, 150, 150t
Bifid pulse, 68
Bigeminy, 167
Biguanides, for insulin resistance, 384
Bile acid sequestrants
adverse effects of, 383
for lipoprotein disorders, 373t, 374
for metabolic syndrome, 383
Biliary disease, chest pain in, 35t, 37
Billowing mitral leaflet syndrome. See Mitral 
valve prolapse
Bisoprolol
for heart failure, 191t
for ischemic heart disease, 399t
Bivalirudin
in PCI, 434
for STEMI, 427
for UA/NSTEMI, 411t, 412
Bleomycin, adverse effects of, 484
Blood, reference values for, 549–552t
Blood culture, in infective endocarditis,  
299, 304
Blood pressure. See also Hypertension
age-related changes in, 443
control of, 4
goals for, 464–465
measurement of, 67, 450–451, 458–459
regulation of, 444–448, 445f
autonomic nervous system in, 445–446
intravascular volume in, 444–445
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system 
in, 446–448, 447f
vascular mechanisms, 448
Blood vessels
biology of, 2
damage to, edema from, 55
origin of vascular cells, 2
pharmacogenetics of, 8, 8t
regeneration of, 7–8
smooth muscles of, 3f, 5–7
vascular cell biology of, 2–7
Blue toe syndrome, 481, 481f
Body fluids, reference values for, 573t
Bone marrow/bone marrow  
examination, 564t
Borrelia burgdorferi. See Lyme borreliosis 
(Lyme disease)
Bosentan, for pulmonary hypertension, 493
Bradyarrhythmias, 137
in athletes, 580, 600
in AV conduction block. See 
Atrioventricular (AV) conduction 
block
junctional bradycardia, 528f
mechanism of, 137, 138f
pacemaker for, 135
in SA node dysfunction. See Sinoatrial 
(SA) node disease/dysfunction
Bradykinin receptors, 8t
Brain natriuretic peptide
in edema, 57
in heart failure, 584, 602–603
in pulmonary edema, 325
Breast cancer, treatment-related 
lymphedema after, 488
Broad β disease (familial 
dysbetalipoproteinemia), 358t, 362
Broadbent’s sign, 281
Bromocriptine, adverse effects of, 485
Bronchiectasis, 53
Brugada syndrome, 178
in athletes, 180t
channelopathy in, 177t
ECG in, 133, 151, 179
genetic factors in, 177t, 178
treatment of, 178–179
B-type natriuretic peptide, 40, 189
Buerger’s disease (thromboangiitis 
obliterans), 480, 484
Bumetanide
for heart failure, 191t
for pulmonary edema, 326
Bundle branch reentrant ventricular 
fibrillation, 173–174, 174f
Bundle branch reentry, 133
Bundle of His, 128, 142
CABG. See Coronary artery bypass grafting 
(CABG)
Cachexia, 188
CAD. See Coronary artery disease (CAD)
Cadmium exposure/poisoning, 562t
Caffeine, adverse effects of, 61
Calcification
of coronary arteries, 523f
in right ventricle, 522f
Calcification, of coronary arteries, 113, 113f, 
352, 394
Calcium
in cardiac contraction, 9f, 10–12
deficiency of, 262–263
in vascular smooth-muscle cell function, 
5–6, 6f
Calcium channel(s)
cardiac, 129–130, 130f
in smooth muscle, 5–6, 6f
Calcium channel blockers (CCBs)
adverse effects of
AV conduction block, 143t
edema, 58t
erythromelalgia, 485
SA node dysfunction, 138t, 141
for aortic dissection, 473
for atrial fibrillation, 158
for AV nodal reentrant tachycardia, 165
for hypertension, 461t, 463
for ischemic heart disease, 399t, 401
for Prinzmetal’s variant angina, 401, 413
for pulmonary hypertension, 491, 493
for UA/NSTEMI, 410t, 411
Calcium sparks, 6
Calsequestrin, 11–12
Calstabin 2, 11
Canadian Cardiovascular Society, 
classification of cardiovascular 
disease, 389t
Cancer chemotherapy, late cardiovascular 
complications of, 261–262
Candesartan
for heart failure, 191t
for hypertension, 461t
Candida spp. infections, in endocarditis, 
295t, 304
Capillary leak syndrome, 3
Captopril
for heart failure, 191t
for hypertension, 461t
for hypertensive emergencies, 466
Carbon monoxide poisoning, 50
Carcinoid syndrome, 245
Carcinoid tumors, cardiac manifestations of, 
268, 290t, 292
Cardiac arrest, 328, 329t
clinical features of, 333–334
death after successful resuscitation, 334
electrical mechanisms of, 328–329
functional contributing factors in,  
329–330, 330t
in-hospital, 334
long-term management of survivors, 337
onset of clinical transition, 333
Index
620
Cardiac arrest (Cont.):
out-of-hospital, 334, 611
prediction of, 331–333, 332f
prevention of, 331–333, 332f
primary, 334
probability of successful resuscitation, 
333–334, 592, 611
prodromal complaints, 333
prognosis of, 333–334
progression to biologic death, 334
secondary, 334
structural causes of, 329–330, 330t
treatment of, 334–337, 336f
advanced life support, 335–336
automated external defibrillation, 335
basic life support, 334–335, 611
initial response, 334–335
postresuscitation care, 336
Cardiac arrhythmias. See also 
specific arrhythmias
approach to the patient, 133–134
bradyarrhythmias. See Bradyarrhythmias
cardiac electrophysiology, 128
in heart failure, 195
hypertension and, 449
in ischemic heart disease, 387
mechanisms of, 130, 131t, 583, 602
abnormal impulse conduction, 131t, 
132–133, 132f
afterdepolarizations and trigger 
automaticity, 130f, 131–132, 131t
alterations in impulse initiation,  
130–131, 131t
in myocardial infarction, 430–432
physical examination in, 133
respiratory sinus, 526f
tachyarrhythmias. See Tachyarrhythmias
treatment of, 134–135, 135t, 136f
warning arrhythmias, 430
Cardiac asthma, 187
Cardiac auscultation. See Heart murmurs; 
Heart sounds
Cardiac biomarkers
in STEMI, 417–419, 418f
in UA/NSTEMI, 408
Cardiac cachexia, 188
Cardiac catheterization, 117
in aortic stenosis, 234–235
aortography during, 122–123
in cardiogenic shock, 324
complications of, 578–579, 599
coronary angiography during, 123–124, 123f
coronary flow reserve during, 124
fractional flow reserve during, 124
hemodynamic assessment in, 119–122
cardiac output, 121
cardiac shunt, 122
normal values, 119t, 567t
normal waveforms, 120f
valve area, 121–122
vascular resistance, 121
indications for, 117–118, 118t
intravascular ultrasound during,  
124, 124f
in ischemic heart disease, 395–396
in mitral stenosis, 223
postprocedure care, 124–125
preprocedure management of, 118
right heart, 579–580, 599
risks of, 117–118
in STEMI, 424
technique of, 118–119
vascular access for, 119
ventriculography during, 122–123, 122f
Cardiac conduction system, 128
automaticity of, 130–131
components of, 89, 89f
embryonic development of, 19
Cardiac contraction, 8, 11–12
cardiac activation in, 11–12, 12f
cardiac ultrastructure and, 8–9
contractile process in, 10–12
excitation-contraction coupling in, 12f
sliding filament model for, 10–11
Cardiac index, in cardiogenic shock, 320
Cardiac jelly, 17
Cardiac output
calculation and normal values, 568t
control of, 13
measurement of, 104–105, 121
Cardiac performance
assessment of, 15
control of, 13
Cardiac resynchronization therapy, 135, 195
Cardiac syndrome X, 36
Cardiac tamponade
cardiogenic shock in. See Cardiogenic shock
clinical features of, 276, 277t, 590, 608
diagnosis of, 277–278
differential diagnosis of, 277t, 596
dyspnea in, 45
hemodynamic patterns in, 323t
low-pressure, 277
paradoxical pulse in, 276–277
pathophysiology of, 276
treatment of, 278
Cardiac tissue, regeneration of, 19
Cardiac transplantation, 201
contraindications to, 202
donor allocation system for, 202
immunosuppression for, 203
indications for, 202
LVADs as bridge to, 204–205, 205f
posttransplant complications
allograft coronary artery disease, 203, 
585, 603
infection, 203–204
malignancy, 203
results of, 202, 202f
surgical technique, 201
Cardiac trauma
aortic rupture in, 287–288, 467, 470
blunt, 179, 287–288, 590, 608
myocardial contusions, 287
nonpenetrating, 287
penetrating, 287, 288
pericarditis following, 279
treatment of, 288
Cardiac tumors
benign, 284t, 286. See also Myxoma
clinical features of, 284–285
echocardiography in, 103, 103f, 285f
imaging tests for, 114t, 115
metastatic, 286–287
MRI in, 286f
sarcoma, 284t, 286
Cardiogenic shock, 320
cardiac catheterization in, 324
chest radiography in, 323
clinical features of, 322, 592, 610
coronary angiography in, 324
diagnosis of, 321–324, 322f
ECG in, 323
echocardiography in, 323
emergency management, 322f
etiology of, 320, 321t, 610
in free wall rupture, 325
hemodynamic patterns in, 323t
iatrogenic, 327
incidence of, 320–321
in mitral regurgitation, 325
in myocardial infarction, 429, 610
in myocarditis, 325
pathophysiology of, 320f, 321
patient profile in, 321
prognosis of, 325
pulmonary artery catheterization  
in, 323
reperfusion-revascularization for, 324
in right ventricular failure, 325
timing of, 321
treatment of, 322f, 324
vasopressors for, 324
in ventricular septal rupture, 325
Cardiomyocytes, 8, 9f
Cardiomyopathy
cardiogenic shock in. See Cardiogenic shock
classification of, 248, 249t
clinical features of, 248–249, 249t
definition of, 248
dilated. See Dilated cardiomyopathy
dyspnea in, 44
fibrotic restrictive, 268
genetic factors in, 249–250, 251–252t, 253f
HIV-associated, 258
hypertrophic. See Hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy
Index
621
idiopathic, 265
initial evaluation of, 250t
overlap between types of, 265
peripartum, 260–261, 588, 606
radiation-related, 268
restrictive. See Restrictive 
cardiomyopathy
tako-tsubo, 264–265
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation, 335
Cardiovascular collapse, 328, 329t
Cardiovascular disease
approach to the patient, 28
arrhythmias in. See Cardiac arrhythmias
biology of, 2
cardiac symptoms in, 28–29
classification of, 389t
congenital. See Congenital heart disease 
(CHD)
coronary artery. See Coronary artery 
disease (CAD)
cyanosis in, 52
deaths from
estimated 2010–2030, 25t
vs. other causes, 23f
in women, 25t
worldwide by income group, 22–24, 23f
worldwide by region, 23f, 24–25
diabetes mellitus and, 289, 290t
cardiomyopathy, 262
global considerations, 26
diagnosis of, 29
imaging tests for. See Cardiovascular 
system, imaging of
physical examination. See 
Cardiovascular system, physical 
examination of
pitfalls in, 31
diet and, 25
dyspnea in, 44–45, 44t
embryogenesis of, 17–19, 18f
epidemiologic transition of, 20, 21t
epidemiology of, 2
exercise and, 25–26
family history in, 30
functional impairment assessment in, 31
genetic factors in, 352
global considerations in, 22–24, 23f
global trends in, 24–25
heart failure. See Heart failure (HF)
hypercholesterolemia and, 26
ischemic. See Ischemic heart disease
as late consequence of cancer/cancer 
therapy, 261–262
metabolic syndrome and, 28, 381
myocardial infarction. See Myocardial 
infarction (MI)
natural history of, 31
NYHA functional classification of, 29, 
29t, 183t, 389t, 585, 603
obesity and, 26
prevention of, 26–27, 31–32
pulmonary edema in, 47–48
rheumatic. See Rheumatic fever, cardiac 
complications of
risk factors for, 346, 346t
behavioral, 25–26
metabolic, 26
regional trends in, 25
smoking and, 25
in syphilis. See Syphilis, secondary
treatment of, 31–32
valvular. See Valvular heart disease
Cardiovascular system
biology of, 2
blood vessels. See Blood vessels
cardiac contraction. See Cardiac 
contraction
imaging of, 114–115, 114t, 116f
CT. See Computed tomography (CT)
echocardiography. See 
Echocardiography
MRI. See Magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI)
nuclear cardiology. See Nuclear 
cardiology
physical examination of, 63
abdomen, 65
approach to, 63–64
arterial pulses, 67–69, 68f
blood pressure, 67
cardiac auscultation
dynamic, 74–75, 74t
heart murmurs, 71–74, 72f, 73f. See 
also Heart murmurs
heart sounds, 69, 70–71. See also 
Heart sounds
in pericardial disease, 75
of prosthetic valves, 75
chest, 64–65
extremities, 65
head and neck, 64
heart inspection and palpation,  
69–70
jugular venous pressure and waveform, 
65–67, 66f
skin, 64
Cardioversion
for accessory pathway-mediated 
tachycardia, 167
for atrial fibrillation, 157
for atrial flutter, 161–162
for atrial tachycardia, 164
for AV nodal reentrant tachycardia, 165
for cardiac arrest, 335
pharmacologic, 162
for pulmonary edema, 327
for ventricular tachycardia, 171
CardioWest total artificial heart, 204
Carey-Coombs murmur, 84
Carney syndrome
myxoma in, 284–285
skin manifestations of, 64
Carnitine metabolism disorders, 262, 267–268
Carotid artery
embryonic development of, 18
percutaneous stenting of, 440, 441f
Carotid artery pulse
configurational changes in, 67–68, 68f
measurement of, 67–68
Carotid body, 42
Carotid sinus hypersensitivity
AV conduction block in, 143t
pacemaker for, 148–149
SA node dysfunction in, 138t, 142
Carotid sinus pressure, for accessory 
pathway-mediated
tachycardia, 167
cART (combination antiretroviral therapy), 
adverse effects of, 378–379
Carvallo’s sign, 79, 200, 222
Carvedilol
for heart failure, 191t
for hypertension, 461t, 462
Caspofungin, for Candida endocarditis, 304
Catecholamine(s), in cardiovascular 
regulation, 446
Catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular 
tachycardia, 153, 179, 179f, 180t
Catheter ablation
for arrhythmogenic RV cardiomyopathy/
dysplasia, 175
for atrial fibrillation, 159–161
for atrial flutter, 162
for atrial premature complexes, 154
for AV nodal reentrant tachycardia, 165
for cardiac arrhythmias, 135, 136f
for focal atrial tachycardia, 164
for sinus tachycardia, 155
for ventricular tachycardia, 171
for Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome, 167
CCBs. See Calcium channel blockers (CCBs)
CEAP classification, chronic venous 
insufficiency, 487, 488t
Cefazolin, for endocarditis prophylaxis, 307t
Ceftriaxone, for infective endocarditis
prophylaxis, 307t
streptococcal, 302t
Cellular metabolism, genetic defects of, 252t
Central nervous system (CNS), in hypoxia, 49
Central venous hum, 74
Central venous pressure, jugular venous 
pulse and, 65–66
Cephalexin, for endocarditis prophylaxis, 307t
Cerebral blood flow, autoregulation of,  
449, 466
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis, reference 
values, 563t
Index
622
CETP (cholesteryl ester transfer protein), 357
CETP (cholesteryl ester transfer protein) 
deficiency, 366
Chagas’ disease, 316
cardiac manifestations of, 143, 143t, 174t, 
258, 318
clinical features of, 258, 317–318
definition of, 316
diagnosis of, 318
epidemiology of, 258, 317
pathogenesis of, 258, 316–317, 316f
prevention of, 319
treatment of, 258, 318–319
Channelopathy(ies)
in cardiomyopathy, 250, 252t
in inherited arrhythmia disorders, 177t
CHD. See Congenital heart disease (CHD)
Chest compression, for cardiac arrest, 335
Chest discomfort/pain, 34. 
See also Angina pectoris
acute, 35t, 38–40
in aortic dissection, 35t, 36
in aortic stenosis, 34t, 35t, 36
approach to the patient, 35t, 38–40,  
38t, 116f
in cardiovascular disease, 28–29
in cervical disk disease, 37
in chest wall syndromes, 34t
ECG in, 39
in esophageal disorders, 34t
exertional, 8
in gallstones, 34t, 35t, 37
in GERD, 34t, 35t, 37
guidelines and critical pathways, 40–41
in herpes zoster, 34t, 35t, 37
history in, 38–39
in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, 34
in intercostal muscle cramps, 37
in ischemic heart disease, 34–36, 34t, 39t
in lung cancer, 34t
in musculoskeletal disease, 35t, 37
in myocardial infarction. See Myocardial 
infarction, chest pain in
in myocardial ischemia, 34, 38–40
nonacute, 41
in peptic ulcer disease, 34t, 35t, 37
in pericarditis, 34t, 36, 273, 388, 416, 432
physical examination in, 38–39
in pleuritis, 34t, 35t, 37
in pneumonia, 34t, 35t, 37
in pneumothorax, 35t, 37, 38
in psychiatric disorders, 35t, 37
in pulmonary embolism, 34t, 35t, 37, 40
in pulmonary hypertension, 35t
in unstable angina, 35t, 36, 38, 39t
Chest pain unit, 408
Chest radiography
in aortic aneurysm, 469, 469f, 472
in cardiogenic shock, 323
in dyspnea, 46
in pulmonary edema, 48
in pulmonary hypertension, 490
Chest tightness, 42, 43t
Chest trauma, SA node dysfunction in, 138t
Chest wall
disorders of, 34t, 44
trauma to, 79
Cheyne-Stokes respiration, in heart failure, 
187, 585, 603
Chilblain, 485
Children
ECG in, 513f
rheumatic fever in, 310f
Chloramphenicol, therapeutic monitoring 
of, 560t
Chlorthalidone, for hypertension, 461t
Cholecystitis
chest pain in, 35t
shoulder pain in, 38
Cholesterol, reverse transport of, 343,  
356–357, 356f
Cholesterol absorption inhibitors,  
373–374, 373t
Cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP), 357
Cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP) 
deficiency, 366
Cholestyramine
adverse effects of, 373t
for hyperlipidemia, 373t
for metabolic syndrome, 383
Chondrosternal syndrome, 37
Chorea(s)
in acute rheumatic fever, 610
Sydenham’s, 312
treatment of, 314
Chronic kidney disease (CKD)
cardiovascular disorders in
hypertension, 445, 449–450, 451t, 452
pericardial disease, 279
contrast agent use in, 118
end-stage, hypertension in, 445, 449
fluid, electrolyte, and acid-base disorders 
in, 55, 58
laboratory studies, 565–566t
lipoprotein metabolism effects on, 
367–368
Chronic mountain sickness, 51
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD)
cor pulmonale in, 199. See also Cor 
pulmonale
dyspnea in, 44, 44t, 45
ECG in, 511f, 530f, 578, 579f, 598, 599
pulmonary hypertension in, 492t, 496
Chronic Respiratory Disease Questionnaire, 43
Chronotropic incompetence, 41
Chylomicronemia syndrome, familial, 361
Cilostazol, for intermittent claudication, 478
Cimetidine, SA node dysfunction with, 138t
Circle of Willis aneurysm, 214
Cirrhosis
clubbing in, 53
cyanosis in, 52
edema in, 57–58
Cisplatin, Raynaud’s phenomenon with, 484
CKD. See Chronic kidney disease (CKD)
Clarithromycin, for endocarditis 
prophylaxis, 307t
Claudication
in aortic occlusion, 473
intermittent
atherosclerosis and, 344
hypertension and, 450
in peripheral artery disease. See 
Peripheral artery disease
in thromboangiitis obliterans, 480
Clindamycin, for endocarditis prophylaxis, 307t
Clinical laboratory tests, reference values for
body fluids, 573t
bone marrow aspirates, 564t
cerebrospinal fluid, 563t
cholesterol, 563t
circulatory function, 568t
clinical chemistry and immunology, 
552–559t
echocardiographic reference limits and 
partition values, 569–570t
gastrointestinal tests, 572t
hematology and coagulation, 549–552t
normal pressures in heart and great 
vessels, 567t
pulmonary physiology, 571t
radiation derived units, 573t
stool analysis, 564t
toxicology and therapeutic drug 
monitoring, 560–562t
urine analysis and renal function, 565–566t
vitamins and trace minerals, 562t
Clonidine
adverse effects of, 58t, 138t
for hypertension, 461t
for hypertensive emergencies, 466
Clopidogrel
action of, 412f
for cardiac catheterization pretreatment, 118
for ischemic heart disease, 401
for myocardial infarction
as secondary prevention, 433
STEMI, 426–427
UA/NSTEMI, 411–412, 411t
in PCI, 434
in peripheral artery disease, 478
Clostridium spp. infections, in myocarditis, 259
Clubbing, of digits, 46, 53
Coagulation disorders
atherosclerosis and, 350
reference values for, 549–552t
Index
623
Coarctation of the aorta
clinical features of, 214, 586, 604
complications of, 215, 586, 604
CT angiogram in, 214f
CT angiography in, 522f
hypertension in, 457
imaging of, 214, 214f
MRI in, 214f
murmur in, 457
treatment of, 215, 457
Cobalamin (vitamin B12)
deficiency of, 290
reference range for, 562t
Cocaine, adverse effects of
arrhythmia, 168
cardiomyopathy, 261
hypertension, 451t
palpitations, 61
Coeur en sabot, 216
Cogan’s syndrome, 468t, 469
Cognitive dysfunction, hypertension-related, 449
Colchicine, for idiopathic acute  
pericarditis, 278
Cold exposure, cyanosis in, 52
Colesevelam, 373t
Colestipol, 373t, 383
Collagen vascular disease
dyspnea in, 45
pulmonary hypertension in, 492t, 494
SA node dysfunction in, 138t
Combination antiretroviral therapy (cART), 
adverse effects of, 378–379
Commotio cordis, 179, 287, 590, 608
Compensatory enlargement, 344
Complete heart block, 144, 529f, 535f. 
See also Atrioventricular (AV) 
conduction block
Compression stockings
for chronic venous insufficiency, 487
for lymphedema, 489
for varicose veins, 487
Computed tomography (CT)
adrenal, 455
cardiac, 112–114
coronary arteries, 113–114, 113f, 394
in pulmonary hypertension, 490
ultrafast/electron beam, 394
Computed tomography (CT) angiography
in aortic aneurysm, 470f
in aortic coarctation, 214f
contrast-enhanced, 113–114, 114f
coronary
in aortic coarctation, 522f
contrast-enhanced, 524f
of normal right coronary  
artery, 524V
for visualization of saphenous vein 
grafts, 525f
in murmur evaluation, 88
Congenital heart disease (CHD). See also 
specific defects
care of survivor of surgical care of, 218
clubbing/hypertrophic osteoarthropathy 
in, 53
complex, 209t
endocarditis prophylaxis in, 218
incidence of, 207
intermediate complexity, 209t
percutaneous interventions for, 439–440
pregnancy and, 207, 211
simple, 208t
Congenitally corrected transposition, 217
Congestive heart failure. See Heart 
failure (HF)
Conn’s syndrome, 593–594, 612–613
Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP)
for pulmonary edema, 326
for sleep apnea, 457
Contrast agents, adverse effects of, 118
COPD. See Chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD)
Copper, reference range for, 562t
Coronary angiography
during cardiac catheterization, 123–124, 123f
cardiogenic shock, 24
in Prinzmetal’s variant angina, 413
in STEMI, 424
Coronary arteriography
in angina pectoris, 394–395
indications for, 394–395
in ischemic heart disease, 394–395
Coronary arteriovenous fistula, 213
Coronary artery(ies)
calcification of, 113, 113f, 352,  
394, 523f
CT angiography of, 113–114, 114f, 524f, 
524V, 525f
embryonic development of, 18
fistula of, 213, 524f
normal, 123, 123f
Coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG)
for cardiogenic shock, 324
CT angiogram reconstruction of, 525f
for ischemic heart disease, 404
indications for, 404–405
minimally invasive, 404
vs. PCI, 405, 405f, 438–439, 439f
for UA/NSTEMI, 412–413
Coronary artery disease (CAD). See also 
Atherosclerosis; Ischemic heart disease
in allografts, 203
angina pectoris in. See Angina pectoris
AV conduction block in, 143–144
cardiac arrest/sudden cardiac death and, 330
cardiac symptoms in, 28–29
clinical features of, 28–29
C-reactive protein in, 350–351, 351f
dyspnea in, 45
ECG in, 506f
estrogen therapy and, 349–350
heart failure in, 182. See also Heart 
failure (HF)
hypertension and, 449
low-density lipoproteins and, 347–348
metabolic syndrome and, 378
palpitations in, 61
pathophysiology of, 385–386
PCI for. See Percutaneous coronary 
interventions (PCI)
peripheral artery disease and, 476
prevention of, 352, 369–371
risk factors for, 346, 346t
SA node dysfunction in, 138t, 139
stress echocardiography in, 518V
Coronary artery spasm, 36
Coronary blood flow
autoregulation of, 385–386
metabolic regulation of, 385–386
Coronary care unit, 425–426
Coronary revascularization, 402. See also 
Coronary artery bypass grafting 
(CABG); Percutaneous coronary 
interventions (PCI)
Cor pulmonale, 198
clinical features of, 199–200
vs. constrictive pericarditis, 281
definition of, 198
diagnosis of, 200
ECG in, 93–94, 200
echocardiography in, 200
etiology of, 198–199, 199t
pathophysiology of, 199
treatment of, 200
Corrigan’s pulse, 68, 83, 587, 605
Corynebacterium infections, in 
endocarditis, 295
Costochondral syndrome, 37
Costoclavicular maneuver, 482
Cough, nocturnal, 186
Coxsackievirus infections, in myocarditis, 254
CPAP. See Continuous positive airway 
pressure (CPAP)
C-reactive protein (CRP)
in coronary artery disease,  
350–351, 351f
high-sensitivity, 352, 554t
in myocardial infarction, 408
reference values, 554t
Creatine kinase, CK-MB
in myocardial infarction
STEMI, 418–419, 418f
UA/NSTEMI, 408
reference values, 554t
Creatine phosphate, 17
Cross-bridge cycling, in cardiac contraction, 
9f, 11
CRP. See C-reactive protein (CRP)
Index
624
Cryomapping, 135
CT. See Computed tomography (CT)
CT angiography. See Computed 
tomography (CT) angiography
Cushing’s response, 139
Cushing’s syndrome
hypertension in, 451t, 455
lipoprotein metabolism effects on, 368
c-v wave, 82
Cyanosis, 51
approach to the patient, 53, 596
central, 52, 52t, 64
in cor pulmonale, 200
degree of, 51
differential diagnosis of, 52, 596
etiology of, 52t
pathophysiology of, 51–52
peripheral, 52–53, 52t, 64, 575, 596
Cyclophosphamide, 262
Cyclosporine
adverse effects of, 451t
therapeutic monitoring of, 560t
Cystic medial necrosis, 468, 468t
Cytokine(s)
in atherosclerosis, 343
proinflammatory, 3, 380–381
Cytoskeleton, genetic defects of, 251t
Danon’s disease, 268
Daptomycin, for endocarditis, 301, 303
DASH diet, 460, 460t
Death
leading causes of, 20
after resuscitated cardiac arrest, 334
sudden cardiac. See Sudden cardiac death
sudden natural, 329
Deconditioning, dyspnea in, 44t, 45
Decongestants, adverse effects of, 451t
Decremental conduction, 142
Defibrillation
automated external, 335
for cardiac arrest, 335
for ventricular tachycardia/fibrillation, 
170–171
Delta wave, 165
Dental care/procedures, prophylactic 
antibiotics for, 307, 307t, 308t,  
586, 604
Dermatomyositis
myocarditis in, 260
Raynaud’s phenomenon in, 484
Desmin, mutations of, 250
Desmosome, genetic defects of, 252t
Dextrocardia, 217, 512, 515f, 586
Diabetes mellitus (DM)
atherosclerosis and, 349
cardiovascular disease in, 289, 290t
aortic stenosis, 587, 605
cardiomyopathy, 262
global considerations, 26
ischemic heart disease, 398
contrast agent risk in, 118
lipoprotein metabolism effects on, 367
metabolic syndrome and, 349, 378, 381
Diastolic blood pressure, 443, 450t
Diastolic dysfunction, 449
Diastolic murmur. See Heart murmurs
Diazepam, for sedation after myocardial 
infarction, 426
Diet
cardiovascular disease and, 25
for lipoprotein disorders, 371
Digitalis
action of, 11
adverse effects of, 143t
for AV nodal reentrant tachycardia, 165
ECG effects of, 99
for pulmonary edema, 326–327
for SA node dysfunction, 141
toxicity of, 131t
Digitoxin intoxication, 168
Digoxin
adverse effects of, 160t
for atrial fibrillation, 158
for atrial flutter, 162
dosage of, 159t, 160t
for heart failure, 191t, 194
indications for, 159t, 160t
pharmacology of, 159t, 160t
for supraventricular arrhythmia, 431
toxicity of, 152, 176, 176f
Dilated cardiomyopathy
alcohol-related, 261
chemotherapy-related, 261–262
clinical features of, 249t
diagnosis of, 256
dyspnea in, 45
echocardiography in, 255f
familial, 256t, 263–264
heart failure in, 182. See also 
Heart failure (HF)
in hemochromatosis, 263, 263f
metabolic causes of, 256t, 262–263
in myocarditis, 256t. See also Myocarditis
parasitic, 258–259
viral, 256
natural history of, 31
pathology of, 254f, 255f
pathophysiology of, 253–254, 257f
toxic, 256t, 261–262
ventricular tachycardia in, 173
Diltiazem
for accessory pathway-mediated 
tachycardia, 167
adverse effects of, 399t
for aortic dissection, 473
for atrial fibrillation, 158
for atrial flutter, 162
dosage of, 159t, 160t
drug interactions of, 401
for hypertension, 461t, 463
indications for, 159t, 160t
for ischemic heart disease,  
399t, 401
pharmacology of, 159t, 160t
for Raynaud’s phenomenon, 484
for supraventricular arrhythmia, 431
for UA/NSTEMI, 411
Diphtheria, cardiac manifestations of,  
143t, 259
Directional atherectomy catheter, 436
Disopyramide
adverse effects of, 160t
dosage of, 159t
indications for, 159t
pharmacology of, 159t
Diuretics
adverse effects of, 191
for heart failure, 190–191, 191t, 429
for hypertension, 460–461, 461t
for hypertensive emergencies, 465t
for pulmonary arterial  
hypertension, 493
for pulmonary edema, 326
DM. See Diabetes mellitus (DM)
Dobutamine
for acute heart failure, 197, 197t
for cardiogenic shock, 324
for pulmonary edema, 326
Dofetilide
action of, 135t
for atrial fibrillation, 157
dosage of, 159t
indications for, 159t
pharmacology of, 159t
Dopamine
for acute heart failure, 197t
for cardiogenic shock, 324
in cardiovascular regulation, 446
for pulmonary edema, 326
Doppler echocardiography
cardiac output measurement in,  
104–105
clinical uses of, 101t, 595, 614
in congenital heart disease, 105
diastolic filling measurement in, 105
intracardiac pressure measurement in, 
104, 105f
in myocardial infarction, 419
normal reference limits and partition 
values, 569–570t
principles of, 104
valve gradients in, 104, 104f
valvular regurgitation on, 104, 105f
Doxazosin
for hypertension, 461t
for Raynaud’s phenomenon, 484
Index
625
Doxorubicin, cardiotoxic effects of, 261, 268
Dronedarone, adverse effects of, 160t
Drug(s), therapeutic monitoring,  
560–562t
Duke criteria, for infective endocarditis, 
298–299, 298t, 590, 609
Dunnigan familial partial lipodystrophy, 378
Dysbetalipoproteinemia, familial, 358t, 362
Dyspnea, 42
anxiety and, 43
in aortic stenosis, 233
approach to the patient, 45–46, 46f, 595
assessment of, 43, 595
in cardiovascular disease, 28, 186–187
cardiovascular system, 44–45, 44t
in cor pulmonale, 199
differential diagnosis of, 43–45
efferent-afferent mismatch in, 42
exertional, 45
intensity and quality of, 43, 43t
nocturnal, 45
pathophysiology of, 42–43, 42f
in pulmonary hypertension, 44, 46, 490
respiratory system, 44, 44t
treatment of, 46–47
Dystrophin, 250
Ebstein anomaly, 134, 217
ECG. See Electrocardiography (ECG)
Echo beat, 166
Echocardiography, 101
clinical uses of, 101t. See also 
specific disorders
Doppler. See Doppler echocardiography
in myocardial function assessment, 15
normal reference limits and partition 
values, 569–570t
stress, 105–106, 106f
transesophageal. See Transesophageal 
echocardiography (TEE)
two-dimensional, 101–103,  
102f, 517V
Eclampsia, 465t
Edema, 54
approach to the patient, 60
arginine vasopressin in, 55
from capillary damage, 55
in cardiovascular disease, 28
in cirrhosis, 58–59
diagnosis of, 58–59, 59t
distribution of, 60
drug-induced, 58, 58t
etiology of, 57–58, 58t, 59t
in heart failure, 57, 187
history in, 59t
inflammatory, 55
in kidney disease, 47, 58
localized, 58
localized hypoxia and, 50
lower extremity, 65
natriuretic peptides in, 56–57
of nutritional origin, 59
pathogenesis of, 54–57, 56f
physical examination in, 59t
pitting, 54
pulmonary. See Pulmonary edema
from reduced effective arterial volume, 55
refeeding, 59
renal factors in, 55
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system in, 55
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
aortic aneurysm in, 468, 468t
aortic dissection in, 36, 471
cardiac manifestations of, 290t
Eisenmenger syndrome
clinical features of, 211, 212, 585–586, 604
hypoxia in, 50
Electrical alternans, 99–100, 276
Electrical remodeling, 132
Electric shock injury, 484
Electrocardiography (ECG).  
See also specific disorders
ambulatory, 133–134
clinical interpretation of, 30, 100
computerized, 100
electrophysiology in, 89, 90f, 128
intervals of, 90, 90f
leads of, 90–91, 91f
normal, 91–92, 93f, 513f, 514f
P wave, 91–92
QRS complex, 90, 91f, 92, 92f, 128, 134
in respiratory sinus arrhythmia, 526f
sensitivity and specificity of, 89
signal-averaged, 134
stress. See Stress electrocardiography
T wave, 92, 128, 134
U wave, 92
waveforms of, 90, 90f
Electrophysiologic studies, cardiac, 128
Embolic protection device, 436
Embolism
in infective endocarditis, 297, 297f, 306
septic, 297, 297f
Embryonic development
of blood vessels, 2
of heart, 17–19, 18f, 207–208
Emergency care, for myocardial infarction, 
419–421, 422f
Emergency rescue system, 334
Emerin proteins, 250
Emphysema
cyanosis in, 52
dyspnea in, 45
ECG in, 577–578, 578f, 598
Enalapril, for heart failure, 191t
Enalaprilat
for aortic dissection, 473
for hypertensive emergencies, 465t
Encephalopathy
anoxic, 336
hypertensive, 449, 465t, 466
Endarterectomy, aortoiliac, 479
Endocardial cushion defect, 143
Endocarditis
acute, 294
infective. See Infective endocarditis
Libman-Sacks, 293
marantic, 296
nonbacterial thrombotic, 296
subacute, 294
Endomyocardial fibrosis, 268
Endothelial lipase, 357
Endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS), 
8t, 342
Endothelin(s), in cardiovascular function, 
3–4, 7
Endothelin antagonists
for pulmonary hypertension, 493
for resistant hypertension, 448
Endothelium
biology of, 2–4
clinical assessment of, 4, 5f
functions of, 3–4
in modulation of vascular tone, 448
Endothelium-derived hyperpolarizing  
factor, 3, 7
Endotracheal intubation, in cardiac arrest, 335
Endotracheal suctioning, SA node 
dysfunction in, 138t, 139
End-systolic left ventricular pressure-volume 
relationship, 6f, 16
Enhanced external counterpulsation, for 
ischemic heart disease, 406
Enoxaparin
for myocardial infarction
STEMI, 427
UA/NSTEMI, 411t, 412
in PCI, 434
Enterobacter spp. infections, in endocarditis, 304
Enterococcal infections, in endocarditis, 
295t, 301, 302t
Entrance block, 131
Epidemiologic transition, 2, 21t
age of degenerative and human-made 
diseases, 20, 21t
age of delayed degenerative diseases,  
20, 21t
age of inactivity and obesity, 20, 21t
age of pestilence and famine, 20, 21t
age of receding pandemics, 20, 21
in United States, 21–22
worldwide variations in, 22–24
Epinephrine
for acute heart failure, 197t
for cardiac arrest, 335
in cardiovascular regulation, 445–446
in vascular smooth-muscle cells, 7
Index
626
Eplerenone
adverse effects of, 194
for heart failure, 191t, 194
for hypertension, 461t, 462
Epoprostenol
adverse effects of, 494
for pulmonary hypertension, 494
for pulmonary vasodilator reactivity 
testing, 491
Eptifibatide
for PCI, 434
for UA/NSTEMI, 411t
Ergot alkaloids, adverse effects of, 484
Erythrocytosis, in cyanotic CHD, 211–212, 
585–586, 604
Erythromelalgia (erythermalgia), 485
Esmolol
for aortic dissection, 473
dosage of, 158t
for hypertensive emergencies, 465t
indications for, 158t
for ischemic heart disease, 399t
Esophageal disease
chest pain in, 34t, 35t, 37
motility disorders, 34t
Esophageal spasm, abdominal pain in,  
35t, 37
Estrogen(s), lipoprotein metabolism effects 
of, 368
Estrogen therapy
adverse effects of, 58t, 59, 451t
coronary heart disease and, 349–350
Ethacrynic acid, for hypertension, 461t
Event monitor, patient-activated, 151
Excitable gap, 133
Excitation-contraction coupling, genetic 
defects of, 251t
Exercise
for atherosclerosis prevention, 351
cardiac response to, 15
cardiovascular disease and, 25–2
energy requirements for common 
activities, 396–397, 397t
for hypertension, 459–460, 460t
for intermittent claudication, 478
for lipoprotein disorders, 371
for metabolic syndrome, 382
tissue oxygen requirements in, 50–51
Exercise testing
in acute chest pain, 40
in dyspnea, 46
in heart failure, 189
Exercise tolerance, in ischemic heart disease, 
396–397
Extracellular space, 54
Extremities
arterial disorders of
acute arterial occlusion, 480
fibromuscular dysplasia, 479
thromboangiitis obliterans, 480
in cardiovascular examination, 65, 69
lymphatic disorders of, 488
venous disorders of, 486
Ezetimibe
action of, 348
adverse effects of, 373t
for hyperlipidemia, 373t
for metabolic syndrome, 383
Fabry disease
restrictive cardiomyopathy in, 267, 267f
ventricular arrhythmia in, 174t
Factor V, screening assays, 550t
Factor VII, screening assays, 550t
Factor VIII, screening assays, 550t
Familial dysbetalipoproteinemia (broad β 
disease), 358t, 362
Familial hypercholesterolemia, 358–359, 
592–593, 611, 612
Fascicular tachycardia, 176, 176f
Fatigue, in heart failure, 186
Fatty acid(s), free
circulating, 16–17
in insulin resistance, 379
myocardial, 16–17
Fatty streak, 341f
Felodipine
adverse effects of, 399t
for ischemic heart disease, 399t, 401
for Raynaud’s phenomenon, 484
Femoral artery
for PCI access, 434
percutaneous intervention for occlusion 
of, 440, 441
Femoral-femoral bypass, 479
Femoral-popliteal artery disease, 479
Fenofibrate
for hyperlipidemia, 373t
for metabolic syndrome, 383
Fever
hypoxia and, 50
in rheumatic fever, 312
Fiberoptic laser catheters, for atherosclerosis, 436
Fibric acid derivatives
adverse effects of, 373t
for lipoprotein disorders, 373t, 374–375
for metabolic syndrome, 383
Fibrinolysis, atherosclerosis and, 350
Fibrinolytic drugs
for acute arterial occlusion, 481
adverse effects of, 424
contraindications to, 424
for myocardial infarction, 422f, 423–424
Fibroelastoma, papillary, 286
Fibroma, cardiac, 286
Fibromuscular dysplasia, 452–453, 479
Fibronectin-binding protein, 296
Fick method, cardiac output measurement, 121
Fish-eye disease, 366
Fish oil supplements, for lipoprotein 
disorders, 373t, 375
Fistula(s)
coronary artery, 524f
Fistula(s), coronary artery, 213
Flail leaflet, 81
Flecainide
action of, 135t
adverse effects of, 160t
for atrial fibrillation, 157
for Brugada syndrome, 179
dosage of, 159t
indications for, 159t
for multifocal atrial tachycardia, 162
pharmacology of, 159t
Floppy-valve syndrome. See Mitral 
valve prolapse
Fluid restriction, for heart failure, 190
Fluid therapy, for prevention of contrast-
induced nephropathy, 118
Fluvastatin, for hyperlipidemia, 373t
Foam cells, 342
Folate
deficiency in pregnancy, 17
reference range for, 562t
Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), 555t
Fondaparinux
for STEMI, 427
for UA/NSTEMI, 411t, 412
Foramen ovale, 208
Foreign body, aspiration of, 334
Framingham Heart Study, 347
Frederickson classification, of 
hyperlipoproteinemias, 357–358, 357t
Free wall rupture, cardiogenic  
shock in, 325
Friedreich’s ataxia
SA node dysfunction in, 138t
ventricular arrhythmia in, 174t
Frostbite, 485
Furosemide
for dyspnea, 47
for heart failure, 191, 191t, 429
for hypertension, 461t
for pulmonary edema, 326
Fusiform aneurysm, 467
Gallavardin effect, 76, 79
Gallstone(s), chest pain in, 34t, 35t, 37
Gas exchange
disturbances in, 45
reference values for, 571t
Gastric juice, 572t
Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), 
chest pain in, 34t, 35t, 37
Gaucher disease, cardiomyopathy in, 267
Gemella morbillorum infections, in 
endocarditis, 301, 302t
Index
627
Gemfibrozil
adverse effects of, 373t
for hyperlipidemia, 373t
for metabolic syndrome, 383
Gentamicin
adverse effects of, 303
for infective endocarditis, 301, 302t, 303
resistance to, 301
Giant cell arteritis (temporal arteritis), 468t, 
469, 474
Giant cell myocarditis, 260
Global health
cardiovascular disease, 23f, 24–25
endocarditis, 294
epidemiologic transition, 22–24
ischemic heart disease, 385
rheumatic fever, 309, 310f
valvular heart disease, 246–247
Glucocorticoid(s)
adverse effects of, 58t, 422
for rheumatic fever, 314
Glucocorticoid-remediable aldosteronism 
(GRA), 455, 456t
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase 
(G6PD) deficiency, 550t
Glucose tolerance, impaired, 380
Glycemic control, in metabolic syndrome, 
349, 384
Glyceryl trinitrate, for Raynaud’s 
phenomenon, 484
Glycogenolysis, myocardial, 16
Glycogen storage diseases, with 
cardiomyopathy, 254t, 267
Glycolysis, in heart muscle, 16–17
Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa antagonists
in PCI, 434
for STEMI, 424, 427
for UA/NSTEMI, 412
Gordon’s syndrome 
(pseudohyperaldosteronism  
type II), 456t
Gorlin formula, valve area measurement, 
121–122
GPIHP1 deficiency, 361
G protein(s), 445
GRA (glucocorticoid-remediable 
aldosteronism), 455, 456t
Graham Steell murmur, 84, 222, 245
Granulicatella spp. infections, in 
endocarditis, 301
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis 
(Wegener’s), 64
Grapefruit juice, 402
Graves’ disease, edema in, 59
Gray (radiation unit), 573t
Group A Streptococcus (GAS) infections, 
rheumatic fever and, 312
Group B Streptococcus (GBS) infections, in 
myocarditis, 259
Guanethidine, adverse effects of, 58t
Guanfacine, for hypertension, 461t
Guillain-Barré syndrome, dyspnea in, 44
HACE (high-altitude cerebral edema), 49
HACEK group infections, in endocarditis
clinical features of, 296
incidence of, 295t
treatment of, 303t, 304
Hakki formula, aortic valve area 
measurement, 123
HAPE (high-altitude pulmonary edema), 
47, 49, 327
hCG (human chorionic gonadotropin), 556t
HDL. See High-density lipoprotein (HDL)
Headache, hypertensive, 458
Head-up tilt test, 134
Heart
electrophysiology of, 128
embryogenesis of, 17–19, 18f, 207–208
fetal development of, 207–208–1921
metabolism in, 16–17, 387
normal pressures in, 567t
regenerative potential of, 19
Heart block. See Atrioventricular (AV) 
conduction block
Heart failure (HF), 182
abdominal examination in, 188
biomarkers in, 189
cardiogenic shock in. See Cardiogenic shock
chest radiograph in, 188
clinical features of
cerebral symptoms, 187
Cheyne-Stokes respiration, 187, 585, 603
dyspnea, 44t, 45, 186–187
edema, 54, 57, 60
fatigue, 186
heart sounds, 188, 576, 596
hypoxia, 50
indigestion, 187
orthopnea, 186
paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, 187
definition of, 182
diagnosis of, 188–189
diastolic dysfunction in, 57, 186, 580, 599
differential diagnosis of, 189, 584, 602
discharge planning, 198
ECG in, 188
epidemiology of, 182
etiology of, 182–183, 183t
global considerations, 183
hypertension and, 449, 462, 463–464
in infective endocarditis, 297, 306
in ischemic heart disease, 387, 402
jugular venous pressure in, 187
left ventricular remodeling in, 184, 185t, 186
myocardial infarction and, 429
NYHA classification of, 183, 183t, 389t, 
585, 603
pathogenesis of, 184, 184f
PET viability study in, 110f
physical examination in, 187–188
prognosis of, 183
pulmonary examination in, 187–188
risk factors for acute decompensation  
in, 190t
systolic dysfunction in, 57, 184–186
treatment of, 429, 584, 603
ACE inhibitors, 191t, 192, 192f
acute decompensated, 196–198,  
196f, 197t
in African Americans, 194
aldosterone antagonists, 194
anticoagulants/antiplatelets, 194–195
approach to, 189–190, 192f
ARBs, 191t, 193
arrhythmia management, 195
beta blockers, 191t, 193–194, 193f
cardiac resynchronization, 195
diet modification, 190
diuretics, 190–191, 191t
exercise program, 190
implantable cardiac defibrillator, 195
LVADs, 204–205, 205f
pharmacologic, 191t
with preserved ejection fraction, 195, 
584–585, 603
preventive measures, 190
in progressive disease, 194
HeartMate II LVAS, 205, 205f
HeartMate XVE LVAD, 205
Heart murmurs
in aortic regurgitation, 73, 77f, 83–84, 
239–240
in aortic root–to-right-heart shunts, 
212–213
in aortic stenosis, 70f, 72, 76, 77f, 79–80, 
85, 233–234
approach to the patient, 76, 597
in atrial septal defect, 70f, 71, 77, 80–81, 
84, 209
auscultation of, 71–74, 72f, 85–87, 85t, 86f
benign, 74
clinical context of, 87
configuration of, 76
continuous, 74, 77f, 78t, 84–85
diastolic, 73–74, 77f, 78t
early, 83–84, 83f
middiastolic, 84
duration of, 76–77
dynamic evaluation of, 74–75, 74t, 
85–87, 87f
echocardiography in, 30f, 31, 87–88
etiology of, 76, 78t
in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, 73, 270
in infective endocarditis, 297
intensity of, 74–75, 74t, 77
location and radiation of, 77, 77f
Index
628
Heart murmurs (Cont.):
in mitral regurgitation, 72, 77–85, 77f, 
227, 597
in mitral stenosis, 74, 76, 77f, 83f, 84, 221
in mitral valve prolapse, 73, 73f, 77–78, 
80, 80f, 81, 86, 230, 576, 597
in patent ductus arteriosus, 74, 77f
in prosthetic valves, 75
in pulmonic regurgitation, 73–741829, 
84, 245
in pulmonic stenosis, 71, 77f, 80, 81f, 215
systolic, 77f, 78t, 79–83
early, 79
holosystolic, 77f, 82–83, 82f
late, 81
midsystolic, 80f, 81
in tricuspid regurgitation, 77f, 79, 82, 597
in tricuspid stenosis, 74, 77f, 244
in ventricular septal defect, 73, 77f, 79–83
Heart rate
intrinsic, 141
resting, 140
Heart rate variability, 133–134
Heart sounds
in aortic regurgitation, 239–240
in aortic stenosis, 233–234
in atrial septal defect, 70f, 71, 209
in chronic pericarditis, 281
diastolic, 71
in heart failure, 188
in hypertension, 459
in ischemic heart disease, 389–390
in mitral regurgitation, 227
in mitral stenosis, 221
in mitral valve prolapse, 230
in myocardial infarction, 417
in myxoma, 84, 285
normal, 70–71, 70f
in pericardial disease, 75
in prosthetic valves, 75
in pulmonary hypertension, 490
in pulmonic stenosis, 215
second, splitting of, 70–71, 70f, 85–86, 
85f, 577, 597–598
systolic, 71
in tricuspid regurgitation, 244
in tricuspid stenosis, 244
Heart transplantation. See Cardiac 
transplantation
Heavy breathing, 43t
Heimlich maneuver, 334
Hemangioma, cardiac, 286
Hematocrit, normal, 551t
Hematologic disease, reference values for, 
549–552t
Hemochromatosis
cardiac manifestations of, 143, 263,  
263f, 290t
ventricular arrhythmia in, 174t
Hemodialysis, pericarditis and, 279
Hemodynamic values
in acute heart failure, 196, 197t
calculation and normal values, 323t
in myocardial infarction, 323t
in shock, 323t
Hemoglobin
normal, 551t
reduced, in cyanosis, 51
Hemoglobin-oxygen dissociation curve, 49
Hemolytic-uremic syndrome (HUS), 4
Hemostasis, endothelium in, 4
Heparan sulfate glycosaminoglycans, 4
Heparin
for acute arterial occlusion, 481
monitoring treatment with, 550t
for myocardial infarction
STEMI, 427
UA/NSTEMI, 411t, 412
in PCI, 434
Hepatic lipase deficiency, 358t, 361–362
Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection, 
cardiomyopathy in, 258
Hepatomegaly, in heart failure, 187
Hepatopulmonary syndrome, 45
Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia, skin 
manifestations of, 64
Herpes zoster (shingles), chest pain in, 34t, 
35t, 37
High-altitude cerebral edema (HACE), 49
High-altitude illness
chronic mountain sickness, 51
hypoxia, 49, 50
High-altitude pulmonary edema (HAPE), 
47, 49, 327
High-density lipoprotein (HDL)
atherosclerosis and, 342, 348
composition of, 353–355, 353f
high levels of, 364t, 366–367
isolated low, 365–366
low levels of, 364t, 365–366. See also 
Lipoprotein disorders
in metabolic syndrome, 380
metabolism of, 355f, 356–357, 365
therapy to increase levels of, 75–376,  
348, 383
in women, 349–350
His bundle, 128, 142
His bundle electrogram, 144f, 146–147, 146f
Histiocytosis, pulmonary hypertension in, 492t
Histotoxic hypoxia, 51
HIV infection
cardiovascular disease in, 258, 278, 290t
lipodystrophy in, 378–379
pulmonary hypertension in, 492t, 497
HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors. See Statins
Hodgkin’s disease, pericardial effusion in, 276f
Hollenhorst plaque, 64
Holter monitoring, 133–134
Holt-Oram syndrome, 65
Human African trypanosomiasis (sleeping 
sickness), cardiac manifestations of, 
258–259
Human chorionic gonadotropin  
(hCG), 556t
HV interval, 147
Hydralazine
adverse effects of, 58t, 463
for hypertension, 461t, 463
for hypertensive emergencies, 465t
Hydralazine/isosorbide dinitrate, for heart 
failure, 191t, 194
Hydrochlorothiazide
for heart failure, 191t
for hypertension, 460, 461t
Hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), in 
endothelium, 3
Hydrothorax, 54
11β-Hydroxylase deficiency
clinical features of, 456t, 458
genetic factors in, 456t
hypertension in, 451t
pathophysiology of, 457f
17α-Hydroxylase deficiency
clinical features of, 456t, 457–458
genetics of, 456t
hypertension in, 451t, 458
pathophysiology of, 457f
11β-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 
deficiency, 456t, 457f, 458
Hyperabduction maneuver, 482
Hyperaldosteronism
diagnosis of, 454
glucocorticoid-remediable, 455, 456t
hypertension in, 447–448, 451t, 454–455
primary, 454–455
Hyperalphalipoproteinemia, familial, 
366–367
Hypercalcemia
ECG in, 99, 99f, 512f, 577, 578f, 598
hypertension in, 451t
Hypercoagulable state, venous thrombosis 
in, 486
Hyperhomocysteinemia
atherosclerosis and, 350
cardiac manifestations of, 290, 290t
Hyperinflation, 43
Hyperkalemia
after adrenalectomy, 455
AV conduction block in, 143t
ECG in, 98–99, 98f, 513f, 577, 578f, 598
Hypermagnesemia, AV conduction block 
in, 143t
Hypersensitivity myocarditis, 260
Hypertension, 443
in acromegaly, 457
in aldosteronism, 447–448, 454–455
approach to the patient, 458–459
Index
629
atherosclerosis and, 348
cardiovascular disease and, 26
chronic kidney disease and
physical examination, 459
renal parenchymal disease, 452
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system 
in, 446–448
renovascular hypertension, 452–453
clinical disorders of, 451
in coarctation of the aorta, 457
cognitive function and, 449
complications of, 593, 612
in Cushing’s syndrome, 455
definition of, 450, 450t
diagnosis of, 458–459, 459t
drug-induced, 451t
dyspnea in, 45
encephalopathy in, 449
encephalopathy of, 465t, 466
epidemiology of, 443–444
essential, 451–452
genetic factors in, 444, 456t
headache in, 458
heart failure and, 182, 449, 463–464. See 
also Heart failure (HF)
heart sounds in, 459
history in, 458, 458t
hypokalemia and, 454
intermittent claudication and, 450
ischemic heart disease and, 398
isolated systolic, 450, 450t
laboratory evaluation of, 458–459, 459t
left ventricular hypertrophy and, 449
malignant. See Malignant hypertension
mechanisms of, 444–448
autonomic nervous system, 445–446
intravascular volume, 444–445
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, 
446–448, 447f
vascular, 448
in metabolic syndrome, 349, 380, 383, 452
mineralocorticoid-mediated, 447
monogenic, 456t, 457–458, 457f
obesity and, 443–444
in paraganglioma, 456
pathologic consequences of, 448–450
peripheral artery disease and, 450
in pheochromocytoma, 446, 455–456
physical examination in, 459
portal, 492t, 494–495
postoperative, 465t
in pregnancy, 456t, 458
pulmonary arterial. See Pulmonary arterial 
hypertension (PAH)
racial differences in complications of, 443
renin-dependent, 446–448
resistant, 464–465, 593–594, 612–613
retinopathy in, 459
risk factors for, 443–444
secondary causes of, 451t
sleep apnea and, 456–457
sodium intake and, 444
stroke and, 449, 466
systolic with wide pulse pressure, 450, 451t
in thyroid disease, 457
treatment of
ACE inhibitors, 461t, 462, 463–464
aldosterone antagonists, 461t, 462
alpha blockers, 461t, 462–463
ARBs, 461t, 462, 463–464
beta blockers, 461t, 462
blood pressure goals in, 464–465
calcium channel blockers, 461t, 463
comparisons of antihypertensives, 
463–464
diuretics, 460–461, 461t, 463–464
lifestyle modifications, 459–460, 460t, 
593, 612
sympatholytics, 461t, 463
vasodilators, 461t, 463
white coat, 451
Hypertensive crisis, 465
Hypertensive emergency, 465–466, 465t
Hypertensive urgency, 465
Hyperthyroidism
cardiac manifestations of, 290t, 291
atrial fibrillation, 156
heart failure, 262
edema in, 59
hypertension in, 451t, 457
pretibial myxedema in, 488–489
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
apical, 270
chest pain in, 34
clinical features of, 249t, 269–270
diagnosis of, 270
differential diagnosis of, 270
dyspnea in, 45
ECG in, 270, 509f
echocardiography in, 269f, 270, 517V
genetic factors in, 270
MRI in, 111f
murmur in, 73, 77f, 80, 86, 589, 607
natural history of, 31
palpitations in, 61
pathophysiology of, 268–270,  
269f, 270f
sudden death in, 272, 272t
treatment of, 271–272, 271f
ventricular tachycardia in, 174
Hypertrophic osteoarthropathy, 53
Hyperuricemia, metabolic syndrome  
and, 381
Hyperviscosity, Raynaud’s phenomenon 
in, 484
Hypoalbuminemia, 57
Hypoalphalipoproteinemia, 366
Hypobetalipoproteinemia, familial, 363
Hypocalcemia
clinical features of, 262–263
ECG in, 99, 99f, 513f
Hypokalemia
in aldosteronism, 454
arrhythmia in, 132
ECG in, 99, 99f, 512f, 577, 598
Hypomagnesemia
arrhythmia in, 132
clinical features of, 263
Hypophosphatemia, 263
Hypoproteinemia, 60
Hypothermia
arrhythmia in, 139
ECG in, 99, 99f
SA node dysfunction in, 138t
Hypothyroidism
cardiac manifestations of, 290t, 291–292
AV conduction block, 143t
heart failure, 262
SA node dysfunction, 138t, 139
edema in, 59
hypertension in, 451t, 457
Hypoventilation, hypoxia in, 50
Hypovolemia, in myocardial infarction, 429
Hypovolemic shock, 323t
Hypoxemia
in pulmonary edema, 48
pulmonary hypertension in, 492t
Hypoxia, 49
effects of, 49
etiology of, 49–51, 575, 595–596
histotoxic, 51
pulmonary hypertension in, 496
SA node dysfunction in, 138t, 139
I band, of sarcomere, 9
Ibuprofen, for idiopathic acute  
pericarditis, 278
Ibutilide
action of, 135t
adverse effects of, 160t
for atrial fibrillation, 157
dosage of, 158t
indications for, 158t
for pharmacologic cardioversion, 162
ICD. See Implantable cardioverter-
defibrillator (ICD)
Idiopathic hypertrophic subaortic stenosis. 
See Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
IDLs (intermediate-density lipoproteins), 
353–355, 353f, 354t, 364t
Ifosfamide, cardiotoxicity of, 262
Iloprost, for pulmonary hypertension, 494
Immune response/immune system
endothelium in, 4
reference values for laboratory tests, 
552–559t
in rheumatic fever, 310, 311f
Index
630
Immunoglobulin(s), 556t
Immunosuppressive therapy, after cardiac 
transplantation, 203
Impella device, 442
Implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD)
for Brugada syndrome, 179
for catecholaminergic polymorphic VT, 179
endocarditis associated with, 295
for heart failure, 195
for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, 272
for long QT syndrome, 177–178
for myocardial infarction, 430, 431f
for short QT syndrome, 178
for ventricular tachycardia, 135, 171, 173
Indomethacin, for idiopathic acute 
pericarditis, 278
Infective endocarditis, 294
Abiotrophia, 301
abscesses in, 297
acute, 294
aortic regurgitation and, 238
AV conduction block in, 143t
Bartonella, 296, 304, 591, 609
blood culture in, 299
Candida, 295t, 304
clinical features of, 296–298, 297f, 576, 
596–597
clubbing/hypertrophic osteoarthropathy 
in, 53
complications of, 306–307
Corynebacterium, 295
culture-negative, 295t, 591, 609
diagnosis of, 297t, 298–299, 298t, 590, 609
echocardiography in, 299, 300f
embolic events in, 297–298, 297f, 306
enterococcal
incidence of, 295t
treatment of, 301, 302t
etiology of, 294–296, 295t, 590, 609
Gemella morbillorum, 301, 302t
global considerations, 294
Granulicatella, 301
HACEK group
clinical features of, 296
incidence of, 295t
treatment of, 303t, 304
health care–associated, 298
heart failure in, 297, 306
implanted defibrillator-associated, 295
in injection drug users, 295, 295t, 296
murmur in, 79
mycotic aneurysm in, 297–298, 307
outcome of, 307
pacemaker-associated, 295
pathogenesis of, 296
perivalvular infection in, 306
pneumococcal, 295t, 304
polymicrobial, 295t
prevention of, 307–308, 590–591, 609
prophylaxis for dental care, 307,  
307t, 308t
prophylaxis in congenital heart disease, 218
septic emboli in, 297, 297f
staphylococcal
clinical features of, 296
echocardiography in, 300f
emboli in, 297, 297f
incidence of, 295t
pathophysiology of, 296
treatment of, 301, 302t, 303, 306
streptococcal
incidence of, 295t
treatment of, 302t, 304
subacute, 294
treatment of
antibiotics after cardiac surgery, 306
antimicrobial therapy, 301–304,  
302–303t, 591, 610
empirical, 304
monitoring, 304
prevention of systemic emboli, 306
surgical, 305–307, 305t
vegetations in, 517V
Inflammation
atherosclerosis and, 340, 350–351, 351f
endothelium in, 4
Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), aortitis 
in, 474
Influenza, myocarditis and, 258
Injection drug users, endocarditis in, 295, 
295t, 297
Inotropes, for acute heart failure,  
197–198, 197t
Insulin resistance
atherosclerosis and, 349
free fatty acids in, 379
lipodystrophy and, 367
treatment of, 384
Intercostal muscle cramps, 37
Interferon-α (IFN-α), adverse effects of, 262
Interleukin-2 (IL-2) therapy, adverse effects 
of, 58t
Intermediate-density lipoproteins (IDLs), 
353–355, 353f, 354t, 364t
Internal cardiac defibrillator (ICD), 337
Interstitial fluid, 54
Interstitial lung diseases (ILDs)
dyspnea in, 44t, 45
pulmonary hypertension in, 492t, 496
Interventional cardiology, 434
Intestinal lymphangiectasia, 488
Intima, 2
Intimal dissection, 435f, 436
Intraaortic balloon, percutaneous, 441–442
Intraaortic balloon pumping, for cardiogenic 
shock, 324, 610–611
Intraaortic counterpulsation, for pulmonary 
edema, 327
Intracranial pressure (ICP), SA node 
dysfunction in increased, 138t, 139
Intravascular volume, effect on blood 
pressure, 444–445
Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg), for 
rheumatic fever, 314
Ion channels, cardiac, 128–129, 129f, 130f
Irbesartan, for heart failure, 191t
Ischemic heart disease, 385
angina pectoris in. See Angina pectoris
arrhythmia in, 387
asymptomatic (silent), 387–388, 406
cardiac catheterization in, 395–396
cardiomegaly in, 387
cardiomyopathy and, 387–388
chest pain in, 34–36, 34t
coronary atherosclerosis in, 386–387. See 
also Coronary artery disease (CAD)
diabetes mellitus and, 398
diagnosis of
approach to, 116f, 391f
coronary arteriography in, 394–395
CT in, 394
ECG in, 95–98, 96f, 97f, 98t, 390, 391f
echocardiography in, 392f
history in, 388–389
laboratory tests in, 390
MRI in, 392f, 394
myocardial perfusion imaging in, 392f, 394
nuclear cardiology in, 107–110, 107f, 
109f, 392f, 394
PET scan in, 109f, 392f, 394
physical examination in, 389–390
stress testing in, 390–394, 391f, 392f, 393t
test selection for, 116f
dyslipidemia and, 398
epidemiology of, 385
family history in, 397
global considerations, 385
heart failure in, 387, 402
hypertension and, 398
obesity and, 397
pathophysiology of, 385–386. See also 
Atherosclerosis
prevalence of, in emergency department 
patient with chest pain, 39t
prognosis of, 395–396
risk factors for, 397–398
smoking and, 398
symptomatic, 387–388
treatment of, 396–402
ACE inhibitors, 401–402
activity adaptation, 396–397, 397t
aggravating conditions, 396
algorithm for, 403f
antiplatelet drugs, 401
beta blockers, 399t, 400–401
CABG, 404–405. See also Coronary 
artery bypass grafting
Index
631
calcium channel blockers, 399t, 401
enhanced external counterpulsation, 406
explanation and reassurance, 396
nicorandil, 402
nitrates, 398–400, 399t
PCI, 402–404. See also Percutaneous 
coronary interventions (PCI)
ranolazine, 402
risk factor management, 397–398
in women, 398
Islet-1, 17
Isoproterenol
for AV conduction block, 145, 147
for Brugada syndrome, 179
for long QT syndrome, 178
for SA node dysfunction, 141
Isosorbide dinitrate
for heart failure, 429
for ischemic heart disease, 399t
for pulmonary edema, 326
Isosorbide mononitrate, for ischemic heart 
disease, 399t
Isradipine
adverse effects of, 399t
for ischemic heart disease, 399t, 401
for Raynaud’s phenomenon, 484
Janeway lesions, 65
Joint disorders, in rheumatic fever,  
311–312
Jones criteria, for acute rheumatic fever, 
312–313, 313t
Jugular venous pressure
in heart failure, 187
measurement of, 65–67, 66f
Junctional bradycardia, ECG in, 528f
Junctional premature complexes, 154
Kearns-Sayre syndrome
AV conduction block in, 143, 143t
clinical features of, 139
SA node dysfunction in, 138t, 139
ventricular arrhythmia in, 174t
Kerley B lines, 222
Keshan disease, 262
Kidney
disease/failure. See Chronic kidney disease 
(CKD)
renin-secreting tumors of, 447
Klinefelter syndrome, lymphedema in, 488
Korotkoff sounds, 458
Kussmaul’s sign, 66, 265, 281
Kwashiorkor (protein-calorie malnutrition), 
cardiac manifestations of, 289, 290t
Kyphoscoliosis, 43t, 44
Labetalol
for aortic dissection, 473
for hypertension, 461t, 462
for hypertensive emergencies, 465t, 466
for ischemic heart disease, 399t
Laboratory tests. See Clinical 
laboratory tests
LAMB syndrome, 284–285
Lamin proteins, 250
Laplace’s law, 14
Laser therapy, for varicose veins, 487
Late potential, 134
LDL. See Low-density lipoprotein (LDL)
Lead poisoning, 562t
Lecithin-cholesterol acyltransferase  
(LCAT), 356f
Lecithin-cholesterol acyltransferase (LCAT) 
deficiency, 366
Left bundle branch, 142
Left bundle branch block
conditions associated with, 95,  
577, 598
ECG in, 94–95, 94f, 515f, 534f
heart sounds in, 70f
Left coronary artery, anomalous origin from 
pulmonary artery, 213
Left ventricular aneurysm
apical, MRI of, 520V, 521f
Left ventricular aneurysm, in myocardial 
infarction, 432
Left ventricular assist devices (LVADs)
as bridge to cardiac transplantation, 
204–205
components of, 205f
for heart failure, 204, 585, 603–604
indications for, 204
for pulmonary edema, 327
results of, 205–206
types of, 204–205
Left ventricular dysfunction
acute, treatment of, 465t
cardiogenic shock in, 320–321
diagnosis of
echocardiography in, 106f, 569t
imaging tests for, 114t, 115
ventriculography in, 122–123, 122f
in heart failure, 184, 184f
pulmonary venous hypertension and, 495
Left ventricular ejection fraction, 16
Left ventricular hypertrophy
ECG in, 94, 94f, 514f, 578, 599
hypertension and, 449, 514f
with myocardial ischemia, 386
Left ventricular noncompaction, 264
Left ventricular remodeling, 185t, 186, 428
Lenègre disease, 143t
Leriche syndrome, 473
Lev disease, 143t
Levine’s sign, 388
Levocardia, isolated, 217
Levosimendan, for acute heart failure, 197t
Libman-Sacks endocarditis, 293
Liddle’s syndrome
clinical features of, 456t
genetic factors in, 456t
pathophysiology of, 458
Lidocaine
adverse effects of, 160t
for cardiac arrest, 335
dosage of, 158t
indications for, 158t
for ventricular tachycardia, 171
Lifestyle modifications
for atherosclerosis prevention, 351
for hypertension, 459–460, 460t
for metabolic syndrome, 382
Lipedema, 489
Lipid(s)
dietary, transport of, 355–356, 355f
hepatic, transport of, 356
Lipid profile, 346–347
Lipoatrophy, in metabolic syndrome, 381
Lipodystrophy
in HIV infection, 378–379
insulin resistance and, 367
Lipoma, cardiac, 286
Lipoprotein(a), 354t, 356, 361, 376
Lipoprotein(s)
classification of, 353–355, 353f, 354t
composition of, 353–355, 354t. See also 
High-density lipoprotein (HDL); 
Low-density lipoprotein (LDL)
metabolism of
disorders of. See Lipoprotein disorders
endogenous pathway (hepatic lipids), 
355f, 356
exogenous pathway (dietary lipids), 
355–356, 355f
HDL and reverse cholesterol transport, 
356–357, 356f
oxidized, 341
proteins associated with, 353–355
Lipoprotein disorders, 357
atherosclerosis and, 340, 346t
cardiovascular disease risk and, 26, 398
diagnosis of, 369
with elevated HDL-C
CETP deficiency, 366
familial hyperalphalipoproteinemia, 
366–367
with elevated LDL–C and normal 
triglycerides, 358–360, 358t
autosomal dominant 
hypercholesterolemia due to 
mutations in PCSK9, 360
autosomal recessive 
hypercholesterolemia, 360
familial defective ApoB-100, 360
familial hypercholesterolemia, 358–360
polygenic hypercholesterolemia, 360–361
sitosterolemia, 360
Index
632
Lipoprotein disorders (Cont.):
with elevated lipoprotein(a), 361
with elevated triglycerides, 358t, 361–363
ApoA-V deficiency, 361
familial chylomicronemia syndrome, 
361, 364t
familial combined hyperlipidemia, 363
familial dysbetalipoproteinemia, 362
familial hypertriglyceridemia, 362–363
GPIHBP1 deficiency, 361
hepatic lipase deficiency, 361–362
in metabolic syndrome, 380, 383
Frederickson classification of, 357–358, 357t
with low ApoB
familial hypobetalipoproteinemia, 363
PCSK9 deficiency, 363–365
with low HDL-C
genetic deficiency of apoA-I, 365
LCAT deficiency, 366
primary hypoalphalipoproteinemia, 366
Tangier disease. See Tangier disease 
(ABCA1 deficiency)
screening for
classification of results, 563t
cutpoints for therapy in, 347t
recommendations, 368–369
secondary forms, 364t
alcohol consumption and, 368
in Cushing’s syndrome, 368
diabetes mellitus and, 349, 367. See also 
Metabolic syndrome
drug-related, 364t, 368
estrogen and, 368
liver disorders and, 368
lysosomal storage diseases and, 368
in obesity, 367
renal disorders and, 67–368
thyroid disease and, 367
treatment of
bile acid sequestrants, 373t, 374
for CHD risk reduction, 369–371
cholesterol absorption inhibitors, 
373–374, 373t
clinical approach to, 371–372, 373t
combination drug therapy, 375
dietary modification, 371
elevated lipoprotein(a) management, 376
ezetimibe for, 348
fibric acid derivatives, 373t, 374–375
foods and dietary additives, 371
LDL apheresis, 375
lifestyle modifications, 348, 371
low HDL–C management, 347, 348, 
375–376
in metabolic syndrome, 383
nicotinic acid, 373t, 374
nonpharmacologic, 371
omega-3 fatty acids, 373t, 375
statins, 347–348, 372, 373t
Lipoprotein lipase (LPL), 355, 356f, 379
Lipoprotein lipase (LPL) deficiency, 361
Lisinopril
for heart failure, 191t
for hypertension, 461t
Lithium
AV conduction block with, 143t
SA node dysfunction with, 138t
Livedo reticularis, 485
Liver disease/failure, lipoprotein metabolism 
effects on, 368
LMWH (low-molecular-weight heparin), 
for myocardial infarction, 427
Loeys-Dietz syndrome, 64, 468, 468t
Löffler’s endocarditis, 268
Long QT syndrome, 176
acquired, 178
arrhythmia in, 132
in athletes, 180t
congenital, 132, 176, 177t, 537f
ECG in, 133, 151, 169f, 537f
mechanism of, 153
treatment of, 132, 178
Long RP tachycardia, 166
Loop diuretics, for heart failure, 190–191
Lorazepam, for sedation after myocardial 
infarction, 426
Losartan
for heart failure, 191t
for hypertension, 461t
Lovastatin
adverse effects of, 373t
for hyperlipidemia, 373t
Low-density lipoprotein (LDL)
atherosclerosis and, 347–348
composition of, 353–355, 353f
coronary heart disease and, 347
elevated, disorders associated with,  
358–360, 358t, 364t, 592, 611–612. 
See also Lipoprotein disorders
estimation of, 368
goal for, 347, 347t, 382–383
lowering levels of, 347–348, 347t. See also 
Lipoprotein disorders, treatment of
in metabolic syndrome, 380
oxidized, 341
reduced, disorders associated with, 364t
Low-density lipoprotein (LDL) apheresis, 375
Low-density lipoprotein (LDL) receptors, 
342, 611
Low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH), 
for myocardial infarction, 427
LPL (lipoprotein lipase), 355, 356f, 379
LPL (lipoprotein lipase) deficiency, 361
Lung cancer
chest pain in, 34t
clubbing in, 53
Lung disease
cyanosis in, 52
pulmonary hypertension in, 492t
pulmonary venous hypertension in, 495
Lung transplantation, for pulmonary 
hypertension, 494
Lung volume(s), 571t
Lusitropic effect, 12f
Luteinizing hormone (LH), 557t
LVADs. See Left ventricular assist 
devices (LVADs)
Lyme borreliosis (Lyme disease)
AV conduction block in, 143, 143t, 529f, 
580–581, 600
myocarditis in, 259
SA node dysfunction in, 138t
Lymphangiography, 489
Lymphangiomatosis, pulmonary 
hypertension in, 492t
Lymphangitis, 58, 488, 488t
Lymphatic filariasis, lymphedema in,  
488, 488t
Lymphatic obstruction, edema and, 57
Lymphedema, 58, 488–489, 488t
Lymphedema praecox, 488, 488t
Lymphedema tarda, 488, 488t
Lymphoid malignancies, AV conduction 
block in, 143t
Lymphoscintigraphy, 489
Lysosomal storage diseases, lipoprotein 
metabolism effects on, 368
Macroalbuminuria, 450
Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA)
in congenital heart disease, 110–111, 
111f, 214f
in peripheral artery disease, 477f
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
in atrial myxoma, 286f
basic principles, 110
clinical applications, 110–112
in cor pulmonale, 200
with gadolinium enhancement, in 
anteroapical infarction, 111f
in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, 111f
limitations, 112
stress testing with, 88, 394
Mahaim fibers, 166
Maladie de Roger, 82–8383
Malignant hypertension
cerebral effects, 449
renal effects, 449–450
treatment of, 465–466, 465t
Mallory-Weiss tears, chest pain in, 37
Mammary souffle, 74, 85
Marantic endocarditis, 296
Marasmus, cardiac manifestations of, 289
Marfan syndrome
cardiac manifestations of, 290t
aortic aneurysm, 468, 468t, 470
aortic dissection, 36, 471, 473
Index
633
hand deformities in, 65
murmur in, 83
oral deformities in, 64
Mastocytosis, palpitations in, 61
MCTD. See Mixed connective tissue disease 
(MCTD)
Means-Lerman scratch, 291
Mechanical ventilation, for pulmonary 
edema, 326
Meige’s disease/syndrome, 488
Melanoma, AV conduction block in, 143t
MEN 2 (multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2), 
pheochromocytoma in, 456t
Mercury exposure/poisoning, 562t
Mesocardia, 217
Mesothelioma
AV conduction block in, 143t, 286
clinical features of, 283
intracardial, 286
Metabolic syndrome, 377
adiponectin in, 381
age and, 378
cardiovascular disease and, 28, 378, 381
clinical features of, 349t, 381–382
cytokines in, 380–381
diabetes mellitus and, 378, 381, 384
diagnosis of, 377t, 382
dyslipidemia in, 349, 380
epidemiology of, 377–378, 378f
fatty liver disease and, 381
glucose intolerance in, 380
hypertension in, 383, 452
hyperuricemia/uric acid stones in, 381
insulin resistance in, 379–380, 384
lipodystrophy and, 378–379
obesity and, 382
pathophysiology of, 379–381, 379f
polycystic ovary syndrome and, 381
risk factors for, 378–379
sedentary lifestyle and, 378
sleep apnea and, 381
treatment of, 349, 382–384
waist circumference and, 380
Metastatic disease, to heart, 286–287
Metformin, for metabolic syndrome, 384
Methadone, adverse effects of, 138t
Methemoglobin, 51
Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus 
(MRSA) infections, in endocarditis, 
302t, 303
Methotrexate, therapeutic monitoring of, 561t
α-Methyldopa
adverse effects of, 58t
for hypertension, 461t
Methysergide, adverse effects of, 484
Metolazone, for heart failure, 191t
Metoprolol
for aortic dissection, 473
dosage of, 158t, 159t
for heart failure, 191t
for hypertension, 461t
indications for, 158t, 159t
for ischemic heart disease, 399t
for myocardial infarction, 421
pharmacology of, 158t, 159t
Mexiletine
adverse effects of, 160t
dosage of, 159t
indications for, 159t
pharmacology of, 159t
MI. See Myocardial infarction (MI)
Microvascular angina, 386
Migraine, Raynaud’s phenomenon and, 484
Milrinone
for acute heart failure, 197–198, 197t
for pulmonary edema, 326
Milroy’s disease, 488, 488t
Mineral(s), 562t
Minoxidil
adverse effects of, 58t, 463
for hypertension, 461t, 463
Mitochondria, genetic defects of, 252t
Mitral regurgitation, 225
cardiogenic shock in, 321, 325
chest radiograph in, 28
clinical features of, 227
in dilated cardiomyopathy, 254
ECG in, 227, 508f
echocardiography in, 227, 517V, 570t
etiology of, 220t, 225–226
heart sounds/murmur in, 72, 77–85, 77f, 
227, 597
hemodynamic patterns in, 323t
left atrial compliance in, 226–227
pathophysiology of, 226
pulmonary venous hypertension in, 495
severity classification, 570t
TEE in, 104f, 227, 517V
treatment of
medical, 224t, 228
percutaneous valve repair, 229–230, 229f
strategy for, 228f
surgical, 228–229, 588, 606
Mitral stenosis, 219
associated lesions, 222
cardiac catheterization in, 223
cardiac output in, 219–220
chest radiograph in, 222
clinical features of, 221
differential diagnosis of, 222, 577, 598
Doppler echocardiography in,  
104f, 107f
ECG in, 222, 507f, 508f
echocardiography in, 222, 517V, 570t
embolization in, 221
etiology of, 219, 220t
heart sounds/murmur in, 74, 76, 77f, 83f, 
84, 221
hemodynamic measurements in, 120f, 
219–220
pathology of, 219
pathophysiology of, 219–221
percutaneous treatment of, 440
pulmonary changes in, 221
pulmonary hypertension in, 220–221, 
495, 586, 604
rheumatic, 84, 219, 310–311, 311f,  
587–588, 598, 605–606
severity classification, 570t
TEE in, 225
treatment of
medical therapy, 223, 224t, 588, 606
strategy for, 223f
valve replacement, 225, 225t
valvotomy, 224–225, 224f, 225t
valvuloplasty, 224f, 225, 225t
Mitral valve prolapse, 230
clinical features of, 230
ECG in, 231
echocardiography in, 517V
etiology of, 230
heart sounds/murmur in, 73, 73f, 77–81, 
80f, 86, 230, 576, 587, 597, 605
imaging in, 231
palpitations in, 61
pathophysiology of, 230
treatment of, 231
Mitral valve replacement, 225, 229
Mitral valvotomy, 224–225, 224f
Mitral valvuloplasty, 224f, 225, 229–230
Mixed connective tissue disease (MCTD)
AV conduction block in, 143, 143t
SA node dysfunction in, 139
Monge’s syndrome (chronic mountain 
sickness), 51
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs), 
hypertension with, 451t
Moricizine, 159t, 160t
Morphine
adverse effects of, 421
for pulmonary edema, 326
for STEMI, 421
for UA/NSTEMI, 410t
Motor efferents, 42
Mountain sickness, chronic, 51
Mouth-to-mouth resuscitation, 335
MRA. See Magnetic resonance 
angiography (MRA)
MRI. See Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
MRSA (methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus 
aureus) infections, in endocarditis, 
302t, 303
MSCRAMMs, 296
Mucopolysaccharidoses, 267
Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN 2), 
pheochromocytoma in, 456t
Multiple myeloma, 593, 612
Index
634
Muscular dystrophy
AV conduction block in, 143, 143t
ventricular arrhythmia in, 174t, 589, 607
Musculoskeletal disease, chest pain in, 35t, 37
Myasthenia gravis, dyspnea in, 44
Mycotic aneurysm
etiology of, 468, 468t
incidence of, 474
in infective endocarditis, 307
symptoms of, 474
Myeloperoxidase, 40
Myocardial contusion, 287
Myocardial infarction (MI)
vs. acute pericarditis, 273–274, 279
arrhythmia in
accelerated idioventricular rhythm, 168
AV conduction block, 143–144
AV conduction block in, 143t
SA node dysfunction, 138t, 139
atherosclerosis and, 344
cardiogenic shock in. See Cardiogenic shock
chest pain in
characteristics of, 39f
duration, 35t
history, 38
location, 35t
onset of, 36
physical examination findings, 36
quality, 35t
STEMI, 416–417, 432
UA/NSTEMI, 408
circadian variations in, 451
diagnosis of
ECG in, 502–506f
MRI in, 111f, 112f
hemodynamic patterns in, 323t
murmur after, 79, 417
natural history of, 31
non-ST segment elevation. See Unstable 
angina/non-ST-segment elevation 
myocardial infarction (UA/
NSTEMI)
pacemaker for, 149–150, 150t
during PCI, 437
prevalence of, in emergency department 
patient with chest pain, 39t
prevention of, 351
Q wave abnormalities in, 96–97, 97f, 
503f, 507f
right ventricular. See Right ventricular 
failure/infarction
ST-segment elevation. See ST-segment 
elevation myocardial infarction 
(STEMI)
Myocardial ischemia. See also Ischemic heart 
disease
anterior wall, 96, 96f, 500f
anterolateral wall, 501f
in aortic stenosis, 386
arrhythmia in, 132
chest pain in, 34–36, 38–40
clinical features of, 28–29
diagnosis of, 29–30
dyspnea in, 43t, 45
ECG in, 95–98, 96f, 97f, 387, 500–501f
effects of, 387
lateral, 501f
with left ventricular hypertrophy, 386
pathophysiology of, 385–386
silent, 387, 406, 413
transmural, 95–96, 96f
Myocardial perfusion imaging
in ischemic heart disease, 108f, 109f,  
392f, 394
in myocardial infarction, 419
nuclear, 107–109, 107f, 109f
Myocardial rupture
cardiogenic shock in, 325
traumatic, 287
Myocarditis
accelerated idioventricular  
rhythm in, 168
acute fulminant, 255, 257f, 325
bacterial, 259
cardiogenic shock in.  
See Cardiogenic shock
endomyocardial biopsy in, 257f
fungal, 259
giant cell, 260
granulomatous, 259–260
in HIV infection, 258
hypersensitivity, 260
lymphocytic, 261
parasitic, 258–259, 588, 606. See also 
Chagas’ disease
rickettsial, 259
SA node dysfunction in, 138t, 139
in sarcoidosis, 259–260, 260f
spirochetal, 259
viral
cardiomyopathy in, 256
clinical features of, 254–256
diagnosis of, 256
pathophysiology of, 254–255
treatment of, 256–257
viruses causing, 258, 588, 606
VT storm in, 171
Myocardium
oxygen supply and demand, 385–386
regenerative potential of, 19
rupture of, cardiogenic shock in, 325
viability assessment of, 108–109
Myocytes, 8
Myosin
in cardiac contraction, 9f, 10
defects in, 249
Myosin light chain, in vascular smooth-
muscle contraction, 6–7
Myotonic dystrophy
AV conduction block in, 143, 143t
SA node dysfunction in, 138t, 139
ventricular tachycardia in, 174
Myxedema
edema in, 59
pericardial effusion in, 280
pretibial, 488–489
Myxoma
clinical features of, 284–285
dyspnea in, 45
echocardiography in, 103f, 285, 285f, 
517V
epidemiology of, 284–285, 284t
heart sounds/murmur in, 84, 285
vs. mitral stenosis, 222
MRI in, 286f, 520f
palpitations in, 61
pathology of, 285
treatment of, 285
Nadolol
dosage of, 159t
indications for, 159t
for ischemic heart disease, 399t
pharmacology of, 159t
Nafcillin, for infective endocarditis, 302t
NAFLD (nonalcoholic fatty liver disease), in 
metabolic syndrome, 381
NAME syndrome, 284–285
National Cholesterol Education Project 
Adult Treatment Panel III (ATP III), 
346t, 347
Naxos disease, 175
NBTE (nonbacterial thrombotic 
endocarditis), 296
Nephropathy, contrast-induced, 118
Nephrosclerosis, 452
Nephrotic syndromes
edema in, 57, 58
hyperlipidemia in, 593, 612
Nesiritide
for acute heart failure, 197, 197t
for pulmonary edema, 326
Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1)
clinical features of, 456t
genetic factors in, 456t
Neurologic disease, arrhythmia in, 174
Neurotransmitter(s), in vascular smooth-
muscle cells, 7
New York Heart Association (NYHA), 
classification of cardiovascular 
disease, 29, 29t, 183t, 389t, 585, 603
Nicardipine
adverse effects of, 399t
for hypertensive emergencies,  
465t, 466
for ischemic heart disease, 399t, 401
Nicoladoni-Branham sign, 483
Index
635
Nicorandil, 402
Nicotinic acid
adverse effects of, 373t
for lipoprotein disorders, 373t, 374
for metabolic syndrome, 383
for raising high-density lipoproteins, 348
Nifedipine
adverse effects of, 59, 399t
for hypertension, 461t, 463
for ischemic heart disease, 399t, 401
for pulmonary hypertension, 493
for Raynaud’s phenomenon, 484
Nifurtimox, for Chagas’ disease, 318
Nisoldipine, for ischemic heart  
disease, 399t
Nitrates
adverse effects of, 421
for heart failure, 429
interaction with phosphodiesterase type 5 
inhibitors, 410, 421
for ischemic heart disease, 398–400, 399t
long-acting, 400
for myocardial infarction
STEMI, 421
UA/NSTEMI, 410, 410t
for Prinzmetal’s variant angina, 414
for pulmonary edema, 326
tolerance to, 400
Nitric oxide
in blood vessels, 4, 7
for pulmonary vasodilator reactivity 
testing, 491
Nitroglycerin
adverse effects of, 197, 400
for angina pectoris, 40
for heart failure, 197, 197t, 429
for hypertensive emergencies, 465t
intravenous, 428
for ischemic heart disease, 399t, 400
for myocardial infarction, 421
for Prinzmetal’s variant angina, 414
for pulmonary edema, 326
Nitroprusside
for acute heart failure, 197, 197t
for adrenergic crisis, 466
for aortic dissection, 473
for hypertensive emergencies, 465t, 466
for pulmonary edema, 326
therapeutic monitoring of, 561t
Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), 
in metabolic syndrome, 381
Nonbacterial thrombotic endocarditis 
(NBTE), 296
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs 
(NSAIDs)
adverse effects of
edema, 58, 58t
hypertension, 451t
in ischemic heart disease, 402
in myocardial infarction, 422
for rheumatic fever, 314
Noonan syndrome, 488
Norepinephrine
in cardiac contraction, 11
for cardiogenic shock, 324
in cardiovascular regulation, 445–446
in vascular smooth-muscle cells, 7
NOTCH1 gene, 231–232
NSAIDs. See Nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
NSTEMI. See Unstable angina/non-ST-
segment elevation myocardial 
infarction (UA/NSTEMI)
N-terminal pro-BNP, in heart failure, 189
Nuclear cardiology
in ischemic heart disease, 392f, 394
in myocardial infarction, 419
principles of, 107
Nuclear membrane, inherited  
defects of, 251t
Nutritional diseases, edema in, 59
Nutritional support/therapy
for hypertension, 459–460, 460t
for lipoprotein disorders, 371
for metabolic syndrome, 382
for myocardial infarction, 426
NYHA (New York Heart Association), 
classification of cardiovascular 
disease, 29, 29t, 183t, 389t, 585, 603
Obesity
cardiovascular disease and, 26, 262,  
290t, 291
central adiposity in, 378
coronary artery disease and, 351
dyspnea in, 45
hypertension and, 443–444
ischemic heart disease and, 397
lipoprotein metabolism effects on, 367
in metabolic syndrome, 377t, 378, 382
Obstructive sleep apnea
hypertension and, 451t, 456–457
in metabolic syndrome, 381
pulmonary hypertension in, 492t, 496
treatment of, 457
OKT3 therapy, adverse effects of, 58t
Omega-3 fatty acids
adverse effects of, 373t
for lipoprotein disorders, 373t, 375
for metabolic syndrome, 383
Orlistat, for metabolic syndrome, 382
Orthodromic AV reentry, 166
Orthopnea, 45, 186
Orthostatic hypotension
definition of, 67
pathophysiology of, 67
in pheochromocytoma, 446
Osler maneuver, 465
Osler’s nodes, 65
Osler-Weber-Rendu syndrome (hereditary 
hemorrhagic telangiectasia), skin 
manifestations of, 64
Ostium primum, 80, 143
Ostium secundum, 80, 208
Oxacillin, for infective endocarditis, 302t
Oxazepam, for sedation after myocardial 
infarction, 426
Oxidative stress hypothesis, 379–380
Oxygen requirement, cardiac, 16
Oxygen therapy
for dyspnea, 47
for myocardial infarction, 420–421
for pulmonary edema, 326
Pacemaker, 147
for AV conduction block, 149, 149t,  
150, 150t
for bradyarrhythmia, 135, 137
for carotid sinus hypersensitivity, 148–149
complications of, 147–148, 295
five-letter codes for, 147
indications for, 135
for myocardial infarction, 149–150, 
150t, 432
nomenclature of, 147
pacing mode, 147, 150
for pulmonary edema, 327
for SA node dysfunction, 137, 148,  
149t, 150
for vasovagal syncope, 148–149
Pacemaker cells, 128–129, 137
Pacemaker syndrome, 148
Paclitaxel, in drug-eluting stents, 436
Paget-Schroetter syndrome, 482
PAH. See Pulmonary arterial hypertension 
(PAH)
PAI-1. See Plasminogen activator inhibitor 
I (PAI-1)
Palmar crease, 64
Palpitations, 61
approach to the patient, 61–62, 581, 600
in arrhythmia, 133
in atrial fibrillation, 156
etiology of, 61
in tachyarrhythmia, 151
treatment of, 62
PANDAS (pediatric autoimmune 
neuropsychiatric disorders associated 
with streptococcal infection), 312
Panic attack, 61
Papillary fibroelastoma, 286
Paradoxical pulse, 276–277
Paraganglioma, hypertension in, 456
Paralysis, edema in, 60
Parkinson’s disease, ECG in, 530f
Paroxysmal AV block, 145, 145f
Paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, 187
Index
636
Paroxysmal supraventricular 
tachyarrhythmia, 152
Parvovirus B19 infections, myocarditis  
in, 258
Parvus et tardus pulse, 80
Pasteur effect, 49
Patent ductus arteriosus
clinical features of, 212
murmur in, 74, 77f
pathophysiology of, 212
treatment of, 212
Patent foramen ovale, 440
PCI. See Percutaneous coronary 
interventions (PCI)
PCOS (polycystic ovarian syndrome), in 
metabolic syndrome, 381
PCSK9 deficiency, 363–365
PCSK9 mutation, 363
PE. See Pulmonary embolism (PE)
Pediatric autoimmune neuropsychiatric 
disorders associated with streptococcal 
infection (PANDAS), 312
Penicillin(s)
for infective endocarditis, 302t, 303
for rheumatic fever, 313–314
Pentaerythritol tetranitrate, for ischemic 
heart disease, 399t
Pentamidine, SA node dysfunction with, 138t
Pentoxifylline, for intermittent  
claudication, 478
Peptic ulcer disease, chest pain in, 34t, 35t, 37
Percutaneous coronary interventions  
(PCI), 434
for adult congenital heart disease,  
439–440
aortic valve replacement, 236–237, 237f, 
440, 545–547, 545V, 546f
aortic valvuloplasty, 236
atherectomy, 436
atrial septic defect repair, 547–548, 547f, 
547V, 548f
balloon angioplasty, 435–436, 435f
balloon angioplasty and stenting,  
434–436, 435f
vs. CABG, 405, 405f, 438–439, 439f
for cardiogenic shock, 324
complications of, 437–438
distal protection device for, 436,  
541–542, 542f, 542V
embolic protection device for, 436
Impella device for, 442
indications and patient selection for, 
438–439
intimal dissection in, 435f, 436
intraaortic balloon for circulatory support 
in, 441–442
vs. medical therapy in acute coronary 
syndromes, 439
mitral balloon valvotomy, 224–225, 224f
mitral valve repair, 229–230, 229f
for myocardial infarction
facilitated, 424, 425f
patient selection, 438–439, 439f
rescue, 424
STEMI, 422f, 423
left main, 542–544, 542f, 543f, 543V
with manual thrombectomy,  
540–541, 541f, 541V
UA/NSTEMI, 412–413
multivessel, 544, 544V
urgent, 424
for revascularization, 402
of bifurcation lesions, 540, 540f, 540V
vs. CABG, 405, 405f
of chronic total occlusion, 539, 539V
efficacy of, 403–404
indications and patient selection for, 
402–403
restenosis after, 403–404
risks of, 403
saphenous vein graft with distal 
protection, 541–542, 542f, 542V
stent thrombosis in proximal LAD 
lesion following, 544–545, 545f, 545V
steerable guidewire in, 435
success of, 436–437, 437f
techniques for, 434–436
transluminal coronary angioplasty, 434
for valvular heart disease, 439–440
Percutaneous interventions
coronary. See Percutaneous coronary 
interventions (PCI)
peripheral artery, 440–442, 441f, 479
transluminal renal angioplasty, 453
Perfusion lung scan, in pulmonary 
hypertension, 490
Pergolide, adverse effects of, 485
Pericardial effusion
cardiac imaging in, 114t, 115
chest radiograph in, 275f
chronic, 276f, 280, 283
echocardiography in, 102, 103f,  
275f, 518V
in pericarditis, 274
physical examination in, 75
Pericardial friction rub
in myocardial infarction, 417, 432
in pericarditis, 75, 274–275
Pericardial tamponade, 75, 575, 596
Pericardiocentesis, 278
Pericarditis
acute
chest radiograph in, 275f
clinical features of, 273–274, 388, 416, 
432, 607
diagnosis of, 275–276
ECG in, 274, 275f, 506f, 507f,  
589–590, 607–608
echocardiography in, 275, 275f
MRI in, 521f
viral/idiopathic, 278–279
cardiac tamponade in. See Cardiac 
tamponade
chest pain in, 34t, 36, 273, 388, 416, 432
in chronic kidney disease, 279
classification of, 274t
in collagen vascular disease, 279,  
292–293
constrictive
calcific, 523f
clinical features of, 277t, 281
CT in, 523f
differential diagnosis of, 277t, 281–283, 
589, 607
dyspnea in, 45
ECG in, 281
echocardiography in, 281, 281f
etiology of, 590, 608
heart sounds in, 281, 608
hemodynamic profile in, 280
mitral and tricuspid flow in, 276f
MRI in, 282f
pathophysiology of, 280, 608
pulse pressure in, 280
treatment of, 282
differential diagnosis of, 279–280
in myocardial infarction, 432
in neoplastic disease, 280
pericardial effusion in, 274
pericardial friction rub in, 75, 273–274
postcardiac injury, 279
pyogenic (purulent), 279
radiation-induced, 280
SA node dysfunction in, 138t, 139
SLE and, 279, 293
subacute effusive–constrictive, 282
Pericardium
calcification of, 112, 113f, 523f
cysts of, 283
structure and function of, 273
tumors of, 283
Pericytes, 2, 3f
Peripheral artery disease, 476
acute occlusion, 480
atheroembolism, 481, 481f
clinical features of, 476–477, 576, 597
coronary heart disease and, 476
cyanosis in, 52
diagnosis of, 477, 477f
hypertension and, 450
pathophysiology of, 476
preoperative risk assessment in, 479
prognosis of, 477–478
treatment of, 478–479
exercise program, 478
percutaneous interventions, 440–442, 
441, 441f, 479
Index
637
pharmacologic, 478–479
revascularization, 479
Pernio (chilblain), 485
PET. See Positron emission tomography (PET)
Pharmacogenomics, vascular, 8, 8t
Phenothiazines, cardiac effects of, 132, 138t
Phenoxybenzamine, for hypertension, 461t
Phentermine, for metabolic syndrome, 382
Phentolamine
for adrenergic crisis, 466
for hypertensive emergencies, 465t
Phenylephrine, for acute heart failure, 197t
Phenytoin, therapeutic monitoring of, 561t
Pheochromocytoma
cardiac manifestations of, 61, 262, 290t, 292
clinical features of, 446, 455, 456t
genetic factors in, 456, 456t
hypertension in, 446, 451t, 455–456
Phlebotomy, for cyanotic CHD, 212
Phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors
interaction with nitrates, 410, 421
for pulmonary hypertension, 493
Phospholamban, 7, 12, 12f
Phospholipid transfer protein (PLTP), 357
Physical activity. See Exercise
Pickwickian syndrome, 291
Pindolol, for ischemic heart disease, 399t
Pitting edema, 54
Plasminogen activator inhibitor I (PAI-1)
in atherosclerosis, 350
in endothelial cells, 4
in vascular smooth-muscle cell, 5
Platelet(s), reference values for, 551t
Platypnea, 46
Pleuritis, chest pain in, 34t, 35t, 37
PLTP (phospholipid transfer protein), 357
Pneumococcal infections, in endocarditis, 
295t, 304
Pneumonia
chest pain in, 34t, 35t, 37
cyanosis in, 52
Pneumothorax
chest pain in, 35t, 37
physical examination in, 38–39
Poisoning/drug overdose, 560–562t
Polycystic kidney disease
clinical features of, 456t
genetic factors in, 456t
physical examination in, 459
Polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS), in 
metabolic syndrome, 381
Polycythemia
as adaptation to hypoxia, 51
erythromelalgia in, 485
secondary, 52
Polycythemia vera, vs. cyanosis, 51
Polygenic hypercholesterolemia, 360–361
Polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNs), in 
STEMI, 419
Polymyositis, Raynaud’s phenomenon in, 484
Polypill, 27
Popliteal artery aneurysm, 482
Popliteal artery entrapment, 482
Popliteal artery pulse, 69
Portal hypertension, pulmonary 
hypertension and, 492t, 494–495
Portal vein-pulmonary vein anastomosis, 52
Positive-pressure ventilation, for pulmonary 
edema, 326
Positron emission tomography (PET)
advantages and disadvantages, 109t
for assessment of myocardial metabolism 
and viability, 108–109, 110f
for assessment of myocardial perfusion 
and coronary artery disease,  
107–110, 108f, 109f, 392f, 394
for assessment of ventricular function, 
109–110
cardiac
for assessment of ventricular function, 518f
Postextrasystolic beat, 61
Postextrasystolic potentiation, 61
Postmenopausal hormone therapy, coronary 
heart disease and, 349–350
Post-premature ventricular contraction,  
86–87
Poststreptococcal reactive arthritis (PSRA), 312
Potassium, in cardiac contraction, 11
Potassium channels, in cardiac contraction, 
128–129, 129f, 130f
PPAR-alpha agonists, 348
Prasugrel
for ischemic heart disease, 401
for STEMI, 427
for UA/NSTEMI, 411t, 412
Pravastatin, for hyperlipidemia, 373t
Prazosin
for hypertension, 461t
for Raynaud’s phenomenon, 484
Precordial thump, 334
Prednisone, for idiopathic acute pericarditis, 
278
Preeclampsia, treatment of, 465t
Preexcitation macroreentry, 166
Pregnancy
cardiomyopathy in, 260–261, 588, 606
congenital heart disease and, 207, 211
edema in, 59
folate requirement in, 17
heart murmurs in, 85
hypertension in, 456t, 458
mitral stenosis in, 587–588, 605–606
Prehypertension, 450, 450t, 459, 593, 612
Preload, 6f, 13, 14t
Premature atrial contractions, palpitations in, 61
Premature ventricular contractions, 
palpitations in, 61
Presacral edema, 188
Pressure-natriuresis phenomenon, 445
Presystolic accentuation, 84
PR interval, 128
Prinzmetal’s variant angina, 387, 401, 413–414
Proarrhythmia, 330
Procainamide
for accessory pathway-mediated 
tachycardia, 167
action of, 135t
adverse effects of, 160t
for atrial fibrillation, 157
for atrial tachycardia, 164
for Brugada syndrome, 179
for cardiac arrest, 335
dosage of, 158t, 159t
indications for, 158t, 159t
for pharmacologic cardioversion, 162
pharmacology of, 158t, 159t
for ventricular tachycardia, 171, 430
Progestins, adverse effects of, 58t
Propafenone
action of, 135t
adverse effects of, 160t
for atrial fibrillation, 157
dosage of, 159t
indications for, 159t
for multifocal atrial tachycardia, 162
pharmacology of, 159t
for ventricular tachycardia, 171
Propranolol
for aortic dissection, 473
for hypertension, 461t
for ischemic heart disease, 399t
Proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 
9 (PCSK9), 358t, 360
Prostacyclin, functions of, 4, 7
Prostacyclin therapy, 493–494
Prostate cancer, lymphedema in, 488
Prostate-specific antigen (PSA), 558t
Prosthetic heart valve
endocarditis in
etiology of, 295, 295t
late-onset, 298
treatment of, 302t, 304, 306
murmurs in, 75
Protein(s), lipoprotein-associated, 353–355
Protein C, reference values for, 551t
Protein kinase A, 7
Protein kinase G, 7
Protein S, reference values for, 551t
Proteinuria, 58, 60
Pseudoaneurysm(s), aortic, 467
Pseudohypertension, 465
Pseudohypoaldosteronism type II (Gordon’s 
syndrome), 456t
Pseudoxanthoma elasticum, 64
Psoriatic arthritis
aortic aneurysm in, 469
aortitis in, 292–293, 474
Index
638
PSRA (poststreptococcal reactive arthritis), 312
Psychiatric/psychological disorders
chest pain in, 35t, 37
palpitations in, 61
Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH), 
491, 492t
in collagen vascular disease, 494
conditions associated with, 492t, 494–495
familial, 491
idiopathic (primary), 491–492, 492t,  
575, 596
natural history of, 492
pathobiology of, 491, 492f
portal hypertension and, 494–495
in systemic-to-pulmonary shunt, 494
treatment of, 493–494, 493t
calcium channel blockers, 493
endothelin receptor antagonists, 493
lung transplantation, 494
phospodiesterase-5 inhibitors, 493
prostacyclins, 493–494
Pulmonary artery catheter
in cardiogenic shock, 323
in pulmonary edema, 325
Pulmonary artery wedge pressure, 67
Pulmonary capillary hemangiomatosis,  
492t, 495
Pulmonary capillary wedge pressure, in 
cardiogenic shock, 320, 321
Pulmonary edema
cardiogenic, 47–48, 325
chest radiography in, 48
clinical features of, 325
complications of, 327
cyanosis in, 52
diagnosis of, 325
differential diagnosis of, 47–48
dyspnea in, 44t, 45
echocardiography in, 325
etiology of, 48t
hemodynamic patterns in, 323t
high-altitude, 47, 49, 327
noncardiogenic, 47, 48t, 325
pathophysiology of, 47–48
physical examination in, 47–48
pulmonary artery catheter in, 325
reexpansion, 327
treatment of, 322f, 326–327
in upper airway obstruction, 327
Pulmonary embolism (PE)
chest pain in, 34t, 35t, 37, 40
diagnosis of
cardiac biomarkers, 408
ECG, 510f
dyspnea in, 46
Pulmonary fibrosis, dyspnea in, 43t, 45
Pulmonary function tests
in pulmonary hypertension, 490
reference values for, 571t
Pulmonary hypertension, 490
in alveolar hypoventilation, 496
anorexigen-induced, 495
arterial. See Pulmonary 
arterial hypertension
cardiac catheterization in, 490–491,  
580, 599
chest pain in, 35t
chest radiography in, 490
in chronic obstructive pulmonary  
disease, 496
clinical classification of, 492t
diagnosis of, 490–491, 491f
dyspnea in, 44, 46, 490
ECG in, 490, 510f
echocardiography in, 490
etiology of, 490
heart sounds in, 70f, 490
in HIV infection, 497
in interstitial lung disease, 496
with lung disease and hypoxemia,  
495–496
in mitral stenosis, 220–221, 495,  
586, 604
pathophysiology of, 490
perfusion lung scan in, 490
in pulmonary capillary  
hemangiomatosis, 495
pulmonary function tests in, 490
Raynaud’s phenomenon in, 484
in sarcoidosis, 497
in schistosomiasis, 497
in sickle cell disease, 497
in sleep-disordered breathing, 496
thromboembolic, 496
tricuspid regurgitation in, 490
venous. See Pulmonary 
venous hypertension
Pulmonary rehabilitation, for dyspnea, 47
Pulmonary vasodilator reactivity, 491
Pulmonary veins, anomalous drainage  
of, 522f
Pulmonary veno-occlusive disease,  
492t, 495
Pulmonary venous hypertension, 492t
left ventricular dysfunction and, 495
in mitral valve disease, 495
in pulmonary veno-occlusive disease, 495
Pulmonic regurgitation
clinical features of, 245
etiology of, 220t, 245
murmur in, 73–74, 84, 245
treatment of, 245
Pulmonic stenosis
congenital, 215
etiology of, 220t, 245
murmur in, 71, 77f, 80, 81f, 215
Pulse
assessment of, 67–69, 68f, 69
in cardiac tamponade, 276–277
in peripheral artery disease, 69, 477
in tachyarrhythmia, 151
Pulseless electrical activity
cardiac arrest/sudden cardiac death in, 
328–329
treatment of, 336, 336f
Pulse pressure, 443
Pulsus alternans, 68–69
Pulsus paradoxus, 45, 68, 590, 608
Pulsus parvus et tardus, 68, 233
Purkinje fibers, 19, 128
Pyridoxine (vitamin B6)
deficiency of, atherosclerosis in, 290
reference range for, 562t
QRS complex
in arrhythmias, 134
normal, 90, 91f, 92, 92f, 93f, 128
QT interval, variability, 133
Quincke’s pulsations, of nailbed, 83–84
Quinidine
action of, 135t
adverse effects of, 160t
for Brugada syndrome, 179
dosage of, 158t, 159t
indications for, 158t, 159t
pharmacology of, 158t, 159t
for short QT syndrome, 178
for ventricular tachycardia, 171
Q wave
characteristics of, 90
in myocardial infarction, 96–97, 97f, 
503f, 507f
RAA system. See Renin-angiotensin-
aldosterone (RAA) system
Rad, 573t
Radial artery, for PCI access, 434
Radiation-derived units, 573t
Radiation dose, 573t
Radiation therapy, adverse effects of
cardiovascular, 268, 280
lymphedema, 488, 488t
pericarditis, 280
Radiofrequency ablation, for varicose  
veins, 487
Rales, 187
Ramipril
for heart failure, 191t
for hypertension, 461t
Ranolazine, for ischemic heart  
disease, 402
Raynaud’s disease, 45, 483–484
Raynaud’s phenomenon, 483
clinical features of, 483
cyanosis in, 52
localized hypoxia in, 50
pathophysiology of, 483
Index
639
secondary causes of, 483t, 484
treatment of, 484
Reactive arthritis (Reiter’s syndrome)
aortic aneurysm in, 469
aortitis in, 292–293, 474
after streptococcal infections, 312
Reactive hyperemia, 483
Reactive oxygen species (ROS), in 
endothelium, 3
Reduviid bugs, 258
Reentry, 132, 132f, 153
excitable gap, 132f, 133
functional, 133
leading circle, 133
Refeeding edema, 59
Reference values, for clinical laboratory 
tests. See Clinical laboratory tests, 
reference values for
Regional wall motion abnormality
in ischemic heart disease, 394
in myocardial infarction, 432
Rehabilitation, pulmonary, 47
Reiter’s syndrome. See Reactive arthritis 
(Reiter’s syndrome)
Relapsing polychondritis
aortic aneurysm in, 469
aortitis in, 474
auricular chondritis in, 64
saddle-nose deformity in, 64
Rem, 573t
Renal artery stenosis, 453
Renal disease/failure. See Chronic kidney 
disease (CKD)
Renal vein, renin ratio, 453
Renin
plasma aldosterone to plasma renin 
activity, 454
renal vein renin ratio, 453
synthesis and secretion of, 446–448
Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone (RAA) 
system
in blood pressure regulation,  
446–448, 447f
in edema, 55
in heart failure pathogenesis, 184, 184f, 185f
Renovascular hypertension, 446–448, 451t, 
452–454, 459
Reserpine, for hypertension, 461t
Respiratory alkalosis, in hypoxia, 51
Respiratory center, 51
Respiratory disorders, dyspnea in, 44, 44t
Respiratory drive, 42
Respiratory failure, hypoxia in, 49–50
Respiratory rate, 45
Respiratory sinus arrhythmia, 526f
Restenosis, 403–404, 434
clinical features of, 437–438
incidence of, 437–438
mechanism of, 435f, 438
Restrictive cardiomyopathy
in amyloidosis, 265–266, 266f, 267f
clinical features of, 249t, 277t
differential diagnosis of, 277t, 282, 589, 607
endomyocardial, 268
etiology of, 265, 265t
fibrotic, 268
infiltrative, 265–266, 266f, 267f
metabolic disorders and, 254t, 265t, 
266–268, 267f
Reteplase
for acute arterial occlusion, 481
for myocardial infarction, 423
Retinopathy, hypertensive, 459
Retroperitoneal fibrosis, 468t
Rhabdomyoma, cardiac, 286
Rheumatic fever, 309
cardiac complications of
aortic valve disease, 231
diagnosis of, 313t
heart failure, 314
mitral regurgitation/stenosis, 84, 219, 
310–311, 311f, 587–588, 598, 
605–606
pathogenesis of, 311f
pericarditis, 279
SA node dysfunction in, 138t, 139
in children, 310f
chorea and, 312, 314, 610
clinical features of, 310–312, 591, 610
diagnosis of, 312–313, 313t, 314t
differential diagnosis of, 312
epidemiology of, 309, 310f
fever in, 312
global considerations, 247, 309, 310f
group A streptococcal infection and, 312
host factors in, 309–310
immune response in, 310, 311f
joint involvement in, 311–312
organism factors in, 309
pathogenesis of, 309–310, 311f
prevention of, 315
prognosis of, 314–315
recurrent, 591–592, 610
skin manifestations of, 312
treatment of, 313–314
antibiotics, 313–314
bed rest, 314
IVIg, 314
NSAIDs, 314
salicylates, 314
Rheumatoid arthritis
cardiovascular disease and, 290t, 292
aortic aneurysm, 469
aortitis, 474
AV conduction block, 143, 143t
SA node dysfunction, 139
Raynaud’s phenomenon in, 484
Riboflavin (vitamin B2), 562t
Rifampin, for infective endocarditis, 302t
Right atrial overload, ECG in, 93f
Right bundle branch, 142
Right bundle branch block
conditions associated with, 95
ECG in, 94–95, 94f, 503f, 504f, 528f
heart sounds in, 70f
Right heart catheterization, 579–580, 599
Right-to-left shunt, intrapulmonary, 50
Right ventricular failure/infarction
cardiogenic shock in, 321, 325
clinical features of, 277t
differential diagnosis of, 277t
in STEMI, 429
Right ventricular hypertrophy, ECG in, 507f
Right ventricular outflow tract obstruction
in pulmonic stenosis, 215
in tetralogy of Fallot, 215–216
in ventricular septal defect, 211
Romaña’s sign, 317
ROS (reactive oxygen species), in 
endothelium, 3
Rosuvastatin, for hyperlipidemia, 373t
Rotational atherectomy, 436
Rubella (German measles), congenital, 215
Rubella embryopathy, 215
R wave, 90
Saccular aneurysm, 467, 468
SA (sinoatrial) conduction time, 141
Saddle-nose deformity, 64
Salicylates, for rheumatic fever, 314
Salmonella spp. infections, in aortitis, 474
Salt intake, hypertension and, 444
Salt-wasting disorders, blood pressure in, 445
SA (sinoatrial) node, 128, 137–139
SA (sinoatrial) node disease/dysfunction. 
See Sinoatrial (SA) node disease/
dysfunction
Saphenous vein bypass graft, 479
Sarcoidosis, clinical features of
cardiac, 290t
AV conduction block, 143, 143t
myocarditis, 259–260, 260f
ventricular arrhythmia, 174t
pulmonary hypertension, 492t, 497
Sarcoma, cardiac, 284t, 286
Sarcomere, 9, 251t
Sarcoplasmic reticulum, 11, 13f
Scalene maneuver, 482
Scavenger receptors, 341f, 342
Schistosomiasis, pulmonary features of,  
492t, 497
Scimitar syndrome, 111f
Scintigraphy, adrenal, 455
Sclerodactyly, 484
“Sclerosis of the left cardioskeleton,” 143
Sclerotherapy, for varicose veins, 487
Sedation, for myocardial infarction, 426
Index
640
Selenium
deficiency of, 262
reference range for, 562t
Sensory afferents, 42–43
Sepsis/septic shock, hemodynamic patterns 
in, 323t
Septum primum, 208
Septum secundum, 208
Shingles (herpes zoster), chest pain in, 34t
Shock
cyanosis in, 52
hypoxia in, 50
Short QT syndrome, 151, 177t, 178
Shoulder, pain in, 38
Sibutramine, for metabolic syndrome, 382
Sickle cell anemia, pulmonary hypertension 
in, 497
Sick sinus syndrome
ECG in, 528f
SA node dysfunction in, 138t, 139
thromboembolism in, 580, 599–600
Sievert (Sv), 573t
Sildenafil
adverse effects of, 493
interaction with nitrates, 410, 421, 493
for pulmonary hypertension, 493
Simvastatin, 373t
Single photon emission computed 
tomography (SPECT), 518f
advantages and disadvantages of, 109t
in assessment of myocardial metabolism 
and viability, 109
in assessment of myocardial perfusion  
and coronary artery disease,  
107–109, 109f
in assessment of ventricular  
function, 109
Single ventricle, 217
Sinoatrial (SA) conduction time, 141
Sinoatrial (SA) node, 128, 137–139
Sinoatrial (SA) node disease/dysfunction, 137
clinical features of, 39–140, 137
diagnostic testing in, 141
ECG in, 140–141, 140f
epidemiology of, 137
etiology of, 138t, 139
extrinsic, 138t, 139, 600
inherited forms of, 139
intrinsic, 138t, 139, 600
pacemaker for, 148, 149t
treatment of, 141–142, 580, 600
Sinus arrest, 140
Sinus bradycardia
mechanism of, 131t
in myocardial infarction, 431
Sinus exit block, 140, 140f
Sinus node, 140f, 141
Sinus node recovery time, 141
Sinus of Valsalva aneurysm, 212
Sinus pause, 140, 140f
Sinus tachycardia, 155
ECG in, 155, 163f, 502f, 527f
inappropriate, 155
mechanism of, 131t, 132
physiologic, 155, 581, 600–601
treatment of, 155, 581, 600–601
Sinus venosus, 208, 209
Sirolimus
in drug-eluting stents, 436, 437f
therapeutic monitoring of, 561t
Sitosterolemia, 358t, 360
Skin
in cardiovascular system examination, 64
in cyanosis, 51
SLE. See Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
Sleep apnea, SA node dysfunction in, 138t, 139
Sleep-disordered breathing syndrome,  
492t, 496
Sleeping sickness (human African 
trypanosomiasis), 258–259
Sliding filament model, for muscle 
contraction, 10–11
Smoking
atherosclerosis and, 351
cardiovascular disease and, 25
ischemic heart disease and, 398
peripheral artery disease and, 478
Smoking cessation
for atherosclerosis prevention, 351
in ischemic heart disease treatment, 398
in peripheral artery disease, 478
in thromboangiitis obliterans, 480
Smooth muscle, vascular, 448
in atherosclerosis, 343
calcium in, 5–6, 6f
contraction of, 6–7, 6f
control of cell tone, 7
functions of, 5–7
structure of, 3f
Sodium
blood pressure regulation and, 445
in cardiac contraction, 11
intake, hypertension and, 444
renal transport of, 445
Sodium channel, 129, 130f
Sodium current, in cardiac action  
potential, 129f
Sodium restriction
for heart failure, 190
for hypertension, 460, 460t
Sodium retention, edema and, 55, 56f
Solid organ transplantation
donor allocation system for, 202
heart. See Cardiac transplantation
lung, for pulmonary hypertension, 494
Somatization, 61
Sotalol
action of, 135t
adverse effects of, 160t
for atrial fibrillation, 157
dosage of, 159t
indications for, 159t
pharmacology of, 159t
for ventricular tachycardia, 171, 172, 173
SPECT. See Single photon emission 
computed tomography (SPECT)
SPECT (single photon emission computed 
tomography), 518f
Spirometry, reference values for, 571t
Spironolactone
adverse effects of, 194, 462
for heart failure, 191t, 194
for hypertension, 452, 461t, 462
Splenic abscess, in infective endocarditis, 307
Square root sign, 280
Staphylococcal infections
in aortitis, 474
in endocarditis. See Infective endocarditis, 
staphylococcal
Staphylococcus lugdunensis infections, 296
Starling forces, 54
Statins
adverse effects of, 373t
hepatotoxicity, 372
myopathy, 372
anti-inflammatory effect of, 350–351, 351f
for intermittent claudication, 478
LDL-lowering effect of, 347–348, 351f
for lipoprotein disorders, 372, 373t
for metabolic syndrome, 349, 383
for UA/NSTEMI, 411, 413
STEMI. See ST-segment elevation 
myocardial infarction (STEMI)
Stent(s)
coronary artery
characteristics of, 435f, 436
drug-eluting, 403–404, 436
restenosis in, 403–404, 437–438,  
544–545, 544f, 545f, 545V
vascular
for aortic dissection, 473
for peripheral artery disease, 479
for renal artery stenosis, 453
Still’s murmur, 81
Stool analysis, reference values for, 564t
Streptococcal infections
in aortitis, 474
in endocarditis, 295t, 302t, 304
global considerations, 247
Streptokinase
adverse effects of, 424
for myocardial infarction, 424
Stress echocardiography, 101t, 105–106, 
106f, 394, 518V
Stress electrocardiography
in arrhythmia evaluation, 134
in ischemic heart disease, 391f, 392f, 393t
Index
641
in myocardial infarction, 408
pharmacologic, 394
Stroke
aspirin for prevention of, 350
atrial fibrillation and, 157–158, 157t
circadian variations in, 451
deaths from, 25t
hypertension and, 448, 466
treatment of, 465t, 466
Stroke volume, 6f, 13f, 14–15, 14t
ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction 
(STEMI), 415
accelerated idioventricular rhythm in, 
430–431
accelerated junctional rhythm in, 431
arrhythmia in, 417, 430–432
atrioventricular block in, 431–432
biomarkers in, 417–419, 418f
cardiogenic shock in, 429
chest pain in, 416–417, 432
circadian variations in, 416
clinical features of, 416–417
complications of, 419, 428–432, 587, 605
ECG in, 96–98, 98t, 417, 502f, 503f, 541f
echocardiography in, 419
epidemiology of, 415
heart failure and, 429
heart sounds in, 417
hemodynamic assessment in, 428–429
hypovolemia in, 429
left ventricular aneurysm in, 432
MRI in, 419
murmur in, 417
myocardial perfusion imaging in, 419
nonspecific reaction to, 419
nuclear cardiology in, 419
pain characteristics in, 416–417
painless, 417
pathophysiology of, 415–416
pericarditis in, 432
physical examination in, 417
recurrent, 433
right ventricular infarction in, 429
risk factors for, 416
risk stratification and management after, 
432–433
secondary prevention after, 433
sinus bradycardia in, 431
supraventricular arrhythmias in, 431
TIMI grading system, 423
treatment of, 465t
ACE inhibitors, 427–428
activity restriction, 426
antiplatelet agents, 420, 426–427
antithrombotic therapy, 426–427
ARBs, 428
beta blockers, 421, 427
bowel management, 426
diet therapy, 426
in emergency department, 420–421, 
610–611
fibrinolytic therapy, 422f, 423–424
hospital phase, 426
implantable cardioverter-defibrillator, 
430, 431f
integrated approach to, 424, 425f
limitation of infarct size, 421–422, 610
management strategies, 344, 422f
morphine, 421
nitrates, 421, 428
oxygen therapy, 420–421
pacemaker, 431–432
pain control, 421
PCI. See Percutaneous coronary 
interventions (PCI)
prehospital care, 419–420, 422f
reperfusion therapy, 421–722, 422f
sedation, 426
ventricular aneurysm in, 432
ventricular dysfunction in, 428
ventricular fibrillation in, 419, 430
ventricular premature beats in, 430
ventricular tachycardia in, 430
Subaortic stenosis, 213
Subarachnoid hemorrhage, ECG in, 98, 99f
Subfascial endoscopic perforator  
surgery, 488
Sudden cardiac death, 152, 328, 329t
epidemiology of, 329–330, 331f
etiology of, 329–330, 330t, 592, 611
functional contributing factors in,  
329–330, 330t
genetic factors in, 329–330
pathology of, 330
prediction of, 331–333, 332f
prevention of, 331–333, 332f, 337
structural causes of, 329–330, 330t
in young athletes, 333
Sulfhemoglobin, 51
Superior vena cava obstruction, 60
Superoxide dismutase, 342
Supraventricular arrhythmia
in myocardial infarction, 431
palpitations in, 61
Supraventricular tachyarrhythmias
accessory-pathway mediated tachycardias, 
166–167, 166f
atrial fibrillation. See Atrial fibrillation
atrial flutter. See Atrial flutter
atrial premature complexes, 153, 154, 154f
atrial tachycardia. See Atrial tachycardia
atrioventricular nodal tachycardias, 
164–165
junctional premature complexes, 154
mechanism of, 152–153
sinus tachycardia. See Sinus tachycardia
Surgical ablation, for atrial fibrillation, 
159–161
S wave, 90
Sydenham’s chorea, 312
Sympathectomy, for Raynaud’s 
phenomenon, 484
Sympatholytic agents, for hypertension, 
461t, 463
Syncope
in aortic stenosis, 233
in arrhythmias, 133, 134
in cardiovascular disease, 28–29
cough, 143
micturition, 143
in tachyarrhythmias, 151
vasovagal
AV conduction block in, 143
pacemaker for, 148–149
Syphilis, secondary
aortic aneurysm in, 468, 468t
aortitis in, 474–475
AV conduction block in, 143, 143t
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
cardiac manifestations of, 139, 143, 143t, 
279, 290t, 293
Raynaud’s phenomenon in, 484
Systemic sclerosis (scleroderma)
AV conduction block in, 143, 143t
cardiac involvement in, 268
Raynaud’s phenomenon in, 484
Systemic-to-pulmonary shunt, congenital, 
492t, 494
Systemic vascular resistance, effect on 
murmurs, 86
Systolic blood pressure, 443, 450t, 458
Systolic click-murmur syndrome. See Mitral 
valve prolapse
Systolic murmurs. See Heart murmurs
Tachyarrhythmias, 151
asymptomatic, 152
in athletes, 179–180, 180t
clinical features of, 151
definition of, 151
diagnostic tests in, 151–152, 152f
ECG in, 152
mechanism of, 152–153, 153f
supraventricular. See Supraventricular 
tachyarrhythmias
treatment of, 158t, 159t, 160t
ventricular. See Ventricular 
tachyarrhythmias; Ventricular 
tachycardia
Tachycardia-bradycardia syndrome, 139
Tacrolimus, therapeutic monitoring  
of, 561t
Tadalafil
drug interactions of, 493
for pulmonary hypertension, 493
Takayasu’s arteritis, 468t, 469, 474
Tako-tsubo cardiomyopathy, 264–265
Index
642
Tangier disease (ABCA1 deficiency)
clinical features of, 366
genetic factors in, 342
oral manifestations of, 64
pathogenesis of, 365–366
Target lesion revascularization, 438
Target vessel revascularization, 438
TAVI (transcatheter aortic valve 
implantation), 236–237, 237f, 440, 
545–547, 545V, 546f
TB. See Tuberculosis (TB)
TEE. See Transesophageal 
echocardiography (TEE)
Telangiectasia(s), in cardiovascular disease, 64
Tenecteplase
for acute arterial occlusion, 481
for myocardial infarction, 423
Terazosin
for hypertension, 461t
for Raynaud’s phenomenon, 484
Tetralogy of Fallot
clinical features of, 215–216
hypoxia in, 50
imaging of, 16, 216f
murmur in, 81f
pathophysiology of, 215–216
treatment of, 216
ventricular tachycardia after, 176
TGF-β (transforming growth factor-β), in 
cardiac development, 17–18
Theophylline
for SA node dysfunction, 141
therapeutic monitoring of, 562t
Thiamine (vitamin B1)
deficiency of, cardiac manifestations of, 
52, 290, 290t, 588, 589t, 607
reference range for, 562t
Thiazide diuretics
action of, 191
for heart failure, 191
for hypertension, 460
Thiazolidinediones
adverse effects of, 58t
for insulin resistance in metabolic 
syndrome, 384
Thioredoxin, 342
Thoracic aortic aneurysm, 37, 469–470, 
594, 613–614. See also Aortic 
aneurysm
Thoracic outlet compression syndrome, 
481–482
Thoratec LVAD, 204
Thrombectomy, percutaneous mechanical
for acute arterial occlusion, 481
in STEMI, 540–541, 540V, 541f
Thromboangiitis obliterans, 480, 484
Thrombocytosis, erythromelalgia in, 485
Thromboembolectomy, for acute arterial 
occlusion, 481
Thromboembolic disease
acute arterial occlusion in extremity, 480
in myocardial infarction, 432
pulmonary hypertension in, 492t, 496
in sick sinus syndrome, 580, 599–600
Thromboendarterectomy, 479, 497
Thrombolytic therapy, for acute arterial 
occlusion, 481
Thrombomodulin, 4
Thrombosis, endothelium in, 4
Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura 
(TTP), 4
Thromboxane A2, in myocardial 
infarction, 416
Thyroid disorders
hypertension in, 457
lipoprotein metabolism effects on, 367
Thyrotoxicosis
heart failure in, 584, 602
hypoxia in, 50
palpitations in, 61
Thyroxine therapy, adverse effects of, 61
Ticagrelor, 412, 427
TIMI frame count, 423
TIMI grading system, 423
TIMI myocardial perfusion grade, 423
TIMI risk score, 408, 409f
Timolol, for ischemic heart disease, 399t
Tirofiban
in PCI, 434
for UA/NSTEMI, 411t
Tissue plasminogen activator (tPA)
for acute arterial occlusion, 481
for myocardial infarction, 423–424
Titin, 10–11
To-fro murmur, 85, 85f
Torsades de pointes
ECG in, 169f, 583, 583f, 602
mechanism of, 131t, 132, 152
in myocardial infarction, 430
treatment of, 583, 602
in ventricular tachycardia, 169
Torsemide
for heart failure, 191t
for pulmonary edema, 326
Toxoplasma gondii infection, cardiac features 
of, 143t, 259
Trandolapril, for heart failure, 191t
Transcatheter aortic valve implantation 
(TAVI), 236–237, 237f, 440,  
545–547, 545V, 546f
Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE), 106
in atrial fibrillation, 157
in atrial septal defect, 210f
clinical uses for, 101t
in infective endocarditis, 299, 300f
in murmur evaluation, 88
Transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β), in 
cardiac development, 17–18
Transposition of the great arteries
AV conduction block in, 143
clinical features of, 216
hypoxia in, 50
pathophysiology of, 216
treatment of, 216
Transthoracic (transtracheal) 
echocardiography, in infective 
endocarditis, 299
Trastuzumab, cardiotoxicity of, 261–262
Trauma
aortic, 287–288, 467, 469
chest, SA node dysfunction in, 138t
chest wall, 79
Treprostinil, for pulmonary hypertension, 494
Triamterene, for hypertension, 460, 461t
Trichinella/trichinellosis, 259
Tricuspid atresia, 217
Tricuspid regurgitation, 244
clinical features of, 244
ECG in, 244
echocardiography in, 244
etiology of, 220t, 244, 588, 606
murmur in, 77f, 79, 82, 597
in pulmonary hypertension, 490
treatment of, 245
Tricuspid stenosis, 242
clinical features of, 243–244
vs. constrictive pericarditis, 281
ECG in, 244
echocardiography in, 244
etiology of, 220t, 242
heart sounds/murmur in, 74, 77f, 244
pathophysiology of, 242–243
treatment of, 244
Tricuspid valve, Ebstein anomaly of, 217
Tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs)
adverse effects of, 451t
overdosage/poisoning with, 516f
Trifascicular block, 95, 150, 150t
Trigeminy, 167
Triglycerides
atherosclerosis and, 348
elevated, lipid disorders associated with, 
361–363, 364t
lowering level of, 347–348, 383
normal, elevated LDL–C and, 358–360, 358t
of VLDLs, 356
Tropheryma whippelii. See Whipple’s disease
Tropomyosin, 10
Troponins, 39
in cardiac contraction, 9f, 10–11
defects in, 249
in heart failure, 189
in myocardial infarction
STEMI, 418, 418f
UA/NSTEMI, 408
Trypanosoma brucei. See Sleeping sickness 
(human African trypanosomiasis)
Index
643
Trypanosoma cruzi, 316. See also 
Chagas’ disease
Tuberculosis (TB)
aortic aneurysm in, 468, 468t
AV conduction block in, 143t
endothelium in, 4
extrapulmonary
lymphedema, 488, 488t
myocarditis, 259
pericardial, 278, 283
Tunica media, 2, 3
Turner syndrome
coarctation of the aorta in, 457
lymphedema in, 488
T wave, 92, 128, 134
T wave alternans, 169f
Twiddler’s syndrome, 147
Tyrosine kinase inhibitors, adverse effects 
of, 262
Ultrasonography, coronary artery,  
124, 124f
United Network of Organ Sharing 
(UNOS), in cadaver donor  
selection, 202
Unstable angina/non-ST-segment elevation 
myocardial infarction (UA/
NSTEMI), 407
cardiac biomarkers in, 408
chest pain in, 35t, 36, 38–39, 39t
clinical features of, 408
definition of, 407
diagnosis of, 408, 409f
ECG in, 408, 542f, 543f
pathophysiology of, 407
prognosis of, 408–409
risk stratification in, 408–409, 409f
treatment of, 409–413
ACE inhibitors, 411
antithrombotic therapy, 411–412, 411t
beta blockers, 410t, 411, 465t
calcium channel blockers, 410t, 411
invasive vs. conservative strategy, 
412–413, 413t
long-term management, 413
morphine sulfate, 410t
nitrates, 410, 410t, 465t
PCI. See Percutaneous coronary 
interventions (PCI)
statins, 411
Urinalysis, reference ranges for, 565–566t
U wave, 92
Valproate/valproic acid, therapeutic 
monitoring of, 562t
Valsalva maneuver
for accessory pathway-mediated 
tachycardia, 167
heart murmurs and, 74t, 75, 86, 576, 597
Valsartan
for heart failure, 191t
for hypertension, 461t
Valve area, measurement of, 121–122
Valvular heart disease. See also 
specific conditions
dyspnea in, 46
global burden of, 246–247
imaging tests for, 114t, 115
multiple and mixed, 245
murmurs in, 76
natural history of, 31
replacement and repair procedures for, 
225t, 246, 588, 606
Vancomycin
for infective endocarditis, 303
therapeutic monitoring of, 562t
Varicose veins, 487
Vascular compliance, 448
Vascular remodeling, 448
Vascular resistance, measurement of, 121
Vascular tone, 9, 448
Vascular volume, effect on blood pressure, 
444–445
Vasoconstriction
cyanosis in, 52
localized hypoxia and, 50
Vasoconstrictor response, paradoxical, 4
Vasoconstrictors, for acute heart failure, 
197t, 198
Vasodilation
as adaptation to hypoxia, 51
endothelium-dependent, 448
in exercising muscle, 15
Vasodilators
for acute heart failure, 197, 197t
adverse effects of, 59
for cor pulmonale, 200
for hypertension, 461t, 463
Vasopressin antagonists (vaptans), for acute 
heart failure, 198
Vasopressors, for cardiogenic shock, 324
Vasovagal stimulation, SA node dysfunction 
in, 138t
Vaughan-Williams classification, of 
antiarrhythmic drugs, 134–135
Vegetations
characteristics of, 294, 591, 609–610
mitral valve, 294f
Venous disorders, of extremities, 486
chronic venous insufficiency, 487–488, 
487f, 488t
varicose veins, 487
venous thrombosis. See Venous 
thromboembolism (VTE)
Venous drainage, obstructed, 57
Venous hum, 85
Venous pressure, edema and, 57, 60
Venous return, 86
Venous thromboembolism (VTE), 486. See 
also Pulmonary embolism (PE)
cyanosis in, 52
risk factors for, 486, 486t
superficial, 486
treatment of, 486
Ventilation-perfusion mismatch/
heterogeneity
in asthma, 44
in cardiogenic pulmonary edema, 48
in COPD, 44
in hypoxia, 50
Ventilatory muscles, 42
Ventilatory pump, disorders of, 42, 42f
Ventricular dysplasia, arrhythmogenic, 174, 
175f, 263, 264f
Ventricular end-diastolic pressure, 13
Ventricular end-diastolic volume,  
13f, 16
Ventricular fibrillation
cardiac arrest/sudden cardiac death in, 
328–329, 592, 611
in ischemic heart disease, 387
mechanism of, 133
in myocardial infarction, 419, 430
postresuscitation care, 336
treatment of, 170–172, 335–336, 336f
Ventricular filling, assessment of, 15–16
Ventricular flutter, 169
Ventricular function, assessment of,  
109–110
Ventricular function curve, 13
Ventricular premature beats
in ischemic heart disease, 387
in myocardial infarction, 430
Ventricular premature complexes, 152,  
154f, 167
Ventricular remodeling, 428
Ventricular septal defect (VSD)
AV conduction block in, 143
erythrocytosis in, 211–212
murmur in, 73, 77f, 79–83
natural history of, 211–212
pregnancy and, 211
pulmonary hypertension and, 211
RV outflow tract obstruction in, 211
treatment of, 211–212
Ventricular septal rupture, 321, 323t, 325
Ventricular tachyarrhythmias
accelerated idioventricular rhythm, 168
Brugada syndrome. See Brugada 
syndrome
long QT syndrome. See Long QT 
syndrome
short QT syndrome, 151, 177t, 178
ventricular premature complexes, 152, 
154f, 167
ventricular tachycardia. See Ventricular 
tachycardia
Index
644
Ventricular tachycardia
with atrial fibrillation, 171f
bundle branch reentrant, 173–174, 174f
cardiac arrest/sudden cardiac death in, 
328–329
catecholaminergic polymorphic, 179, 
179f, 180t
ECG in, 151–152, 169, 169f, 170f, 170t, 
171f, 538f, 583, 601
with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, 174
idiopathic LV septal/fascicular, 173, 173f
idiopathic outflow tract, 172–173, 173f
implantable cardioverter-defibrillator  
for, 135
with infiltrative/inflammatory and 
neuromuscular disorders, 174, 174t
in ischemic heart disease, 387
with LV dilated cardiomyopathy, 174
mechanism of, 131, 131t, 133, 152–153
monomorphic, 169, 538f
in myocardial infarction, 430
nonsustained, 151, 169, 180t
polymorphic, 132, 153, 169
prevention of, 171
slow, 169
sustained, 169
after tetralogy of Fallot repair, 176
treatment of, 170–172
Ventricular tachycardia storm, 171–172
Verapamil
for accessory pathway-mediated 
tachycardia, 167
adverse effects of, 399t
for aortic dissection, 473
for atrial fibrillation, 158
for atrial flutter, 162
dosage of, 158t, 159t
for hypertension, 461t, 463
for idiopathic LV septal ventricular 
tachycardia, 171
indications for, 158t, 159t
interaction with beta blockers, 401
for ischemic heart disease, 399t
for multifocal atrial tachycardia, 162
pharmacology of, 158t, 159t
for supraventricular arrhythmia, 431
for UA/NSTEMI, 411
Very low–density lipoproteins (VLDLs), 
353–355, 353f, 354t, 356, 364t
Vibration injury, 484
Vinblastine, adverse effects of, 484
Vitamin(s)
reference ranges for, 562t
Vitamin A
maternal deficiency of, 18
reference range for, 562t
Vitamin B1. See Thiamine
Vitamin B2 (riboflavin), reference range for, 562t
Vitamin B3. See Nicotinic acid
Vitamin B6. See Pyridoxine
Vitamin B12. See Cobalamin
Vitamin C, reference range for, 562t
Vitamin D, reference range for, 562t
Vitamin E, reference range for, 562t
Vitamin K, reference range for, 562t
VLDLs (very low–density lipoproteins), 
353–355, 353f, 354t, 356, 364t
von Hippel-Lindau disease
clinical features of, 456t
genetic factors in, 456t
VSD. See Ventricular septal defect (VSD)
Waist circumference, in metabolic 
syndrome, 377t, 380
Waldenström’s macroglobulinemia, 
Raynaud’s phenomenon in, 484
Warfarin
for acute arterial occlusion, 481
for heart failure, 195
for myocardial infarction, 427, 433
for stroke prevention in atrial fibrillation, 157
for thromboembolic pulmonary 
hypertension, 497
Water-hammer (Corrigan’s) pulse, 68, 83, 
587, 605
Weight gain, in edema, 54
Weight loss
for hypertension, 460t
for lipoprotein disorders, 371
for metabolic syndrome, 382
Whipple’s disease, cardiac manifestations of, 
259, 296
White coat hypertension, 67, 452
Williams-Beuren syndrome, 214
Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome
asymptomatic, in athletes, 180t
atrial fibrillation in, 166, 166f, 598–599
developmental defects in, 19
ECG in, 133, 152, 166f, 536f, 578, 579f, 
598–599
mechanism of, 153
tachycardias in, 166, 166f
treatment of, 167
Women’s health
atherosclerosis, 349–350
ischemic heart disease, 398
Xanthoma, palmar crease, 64
Yamaguchi’s syndrome, ECG in, 509f
Yellow nail syndrome, 488
Z-disk, genetic defects of, 251t
Z lines, of sarcomere, 9
