SECTION I
Cardinal Manifestations of  
Gastrointestinal Disease
  1	 Abdominal Pain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
William Silen
  2	 Oral Manifestations of Disease. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
Samuel C. Durso
  3	 Atlas of Oral Manifestations of 
Disease. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
Samuel C. Durso, Janet A. Yellowitz
  4	 Dysphagia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
Ikuo Hirano, Peter J. Kahrilas
  5	 Nausea, Vomiting, and Indigestion. . . . . . . . . . . 32
William L. Hasler
  6	 Diarrhea and Constipation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
Michael Camilleri, Joseph A. Murray
  7	 Gastrointestinal Bleeding. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
Loren Laine
  8	 Jaundice. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
Daniel S. Pratt, Marshall M. Kaplan
  9	 Abdominal Swelling and Ascites. . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
Kathleen E. Corey, Lawrence S. Friedman
10	 Involuntary Weight Loss. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
Russell G. Robertson, J. Larry Jameson
SECTION II
Evaluation of the Patient  
with Alimentary Tract  
Syndromes
11	 Approach to the Patient with 
Gastrointestinal Disease. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80
William L. Hasler, Chung Owyang
12	 Gastrointestinal Endoscopy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .89
Louis Michel Wong Kee Song,  
Mark Topazian
SECTION III
Disorders of the Alimentary Tract
13	 Diseases of the Esophagus. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112
Peter J. Kahrilas, Ikuo Hirano
14	 Peptic Ulcer Disease and Related Disorders . . . 127
John Del Valle
15	 Disorders of Absorption. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 156
Henry J. Binder
16	 The Schilling Test. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 177
Henry J. Binder
17	 Inflammatory Bowel Disease. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 179
Sonia Friedman, Richard S. Blumberg
18	 Irritable Bowel Syndrome. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 204
Chung Owyang
19	 Diverticular Disease and Common 
Anorectal Disorders. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 212
Susan L. Gearhart
20	 Mesenteric Vascular Insufficiency. . . . . . . . . . . 223
Susan L. Gearhart
21	 Acute Intestinal Obstruction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 227
William Silen
22	 Acute Appendicitis and Peritonitis. . . . . . . . . . 231
William Silen
SECTION IV
Infections of the Alimentary Tract
23	 Acute Infectious Diarrheal Diseases and 
Bacterial Food Poisoning. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 238
Regina C. LaRocque, Edward T. Ryan,  
Stephen B. Calderwood
24	 Clostridium difficile Infection, Including 
Pseudomembranous Colitis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 247
Dale N. Gerding, Stuart Johnson
25	 Intraabdominal Infections and Abscesses. . . . . . 253
Miriam J. Baron, Dennis L. Kasper
26	 Helicobacter pylori Infections. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 262
John C. Atherton, Martin J. Blaser
27	 Salmonellosis. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 269
David A. Pegues, Samuel I. Miller
Contents
v
28	 Shigellosis. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 279
Philippe Sansonetti, Jean Bergounioux
29	 Infections Due to Campylobacter and 
Related Organisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 285
Martin J. Blaser
30	 Cholera and Other Vibrioses. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 290
Matthew K. Waldor, Edward T. Ryan
31	 Viral Gastroenteritis. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 299
Umesh D. Parashar, Roger I. Glass
32	 Amebiasis and Infection with 
Free-Living Amebas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 306
Samuel L. Stanley, Jr.
33	 Protozoal Intestinal Infections 
and Trichomoniasis. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 313
Peter F. Weller
34	 Intestinal Nematode Infections. . . . . . . . . . . . . 320
Peter F. Weller, Thomas B. Nutman
SECTION V
Evaluation of the Patient with  
Liver Disease
35	 Approach to the Patient with 
Liver Disease. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 330
Marc Ghany, Jay H. Hoofnagle
36	 Evaluation of Liver Function. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 340
Daniel S. Pratt, Marshall M. Kaplan
SECTION VI
Disorders of the Liver and  
Biliary Tree
37	 The Hyperbilirubinemias. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 348
Allan W. Wolkoff
38	 Acute Viral Hepatitis. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 357
Jules L. Dienstag
39	 Toxic and Drug-Induced Hepatitis. . . . . . . . . . 385
Jules L. Dienstag
40	 Chronic Hepatitis. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 397
Jules L. Dienstag
41	 Alcoholic Liver Disease. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 427
Mark E. Mailliard, Michael F. Sorrell
42	 Cirrhosis and Its Complications. . . . . . . . . . . . 431
Bruce R. Bacon
43	 Atlas of Liver Biopsies. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 446
Jules L. Dienstag, Atul K. Bhan
44	 Genetic, Metabolic, and Infiltrative Diseases 
Affecting the Liver. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 453
Bruce R. Bacon
45	 Diseases of the Gallbladder and 
Bile Ducts. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 458
Norton J. Greenberger, Gustav Paumgartner
SECTION VII
Liver Transplantation
46	 Liver Transplantation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 476
Jules L. Dienstag, Raymond T. Chung
SECTION VIII
Disorders of the pancreas
47	 Approach to the Patient with 
Pancreatic Disease. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 490
Norton J. Greenberger, Darwin L. Conwell, 
Peter A. Banks
48	 Acute and Chronic Pancreatitis . . . . . . . . . . . . 496
Norton J. Greenberger, Darwin L. Conwell
Bechien U. Wu, Peter A. Banks
SECTION IX
Neoplastic Diseases of the  
Gastrointestinal System
49	 Gastrointestinal Tract Cancer. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 518
Robert J. Mayer
50	 Tumors of the Liver and Biliary Tree. . . . . . . . 535
Brian I. Carr
51	 Pancreatic Cancer. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 547
Irene Chong, David Cunningham
52	 Endocrine Tumors of the Gastrointestinal 
Tract and Pancreas. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 552
Robert T. Jensen
SECTION X
Nutrition
53	 Nutrient Requirements and Dietary 
Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 576
Johanna Dwyer
Contents
vi
54	 Vitamin and Trace Mineral Deficiency 
and Excess. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 585
Robert M. Russell, Paolo M. Suter
55	 Malnutrition and Nutritional Assessment . . . . . 601
Douglas C. Heimburger
56	 Enteral and Parenteral Nutrition 
Therapy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 610
Bruce R. Bistrian, David F. Driscoll
SECTION XI
Obesity and Eating Disorders
57	 Biology of Obesity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 624
Jeffrey S. Flier, Eleftheria Maratos-Flier
58	 Evaluation and Management of Obesity. . . . . . 634
Robert F. Kushner
59	 Eating Disorders. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 643
B. Timothy Walsh, Evelyn Attia
60	 The Metabolic Syndrome . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 650
Robert H. Eckel
Appendix 
	
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance. . . . . . . . 659
Alexander Kratz, Michael A. Pesce,  
Robert C. Basner, Andrew J. Einstein
Review and Self-Assessment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 685
Charles Wiener, Cynthia D. Brown, Anna R. Hemnes
Index. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 729
Contents
vii
This page intentionally left blank 
ix
John C. Atherton, MD, FRCP
Nottingham Digestive Diseases Centre Biomedical Research Unit 
(NDDC BRU), University of Nottingham and Nottingham University 
Hospitals NHS Trust, Nottingham, United Kingdom [26]
Evelyn Attia, MD
Professor of Clinical Psychiatry, Columbia College of Physicians and 
Surgeons; Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York 
[59]
Bruce R. Bacon, MD
James F. King, MD Endowed Chair in Gastroenterology; Professor 
of Internal Medicine, St. Louis University Liver Center, St. Louis 
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri [42, 44]
Peter A. Banks, MD
Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Senior Physician, 
Division of Gastroenterology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, 
Boston, Massachusetts [47, 48]
Miriam J. Baron, MD
Assistant Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School;  
Associate Physician, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston,  
Massachusetts [25]
Robert C. Basner, MD
Professor of Clinical Medicine, Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and 
Critical Care Medicine, Columbia University College of Physicians 
and Surgeons, New York, New York [Appendix]
Jean Bergounioux, MD, PhD
Pediatric Intensive Care Unit, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, 
Paris, France [28]
Atul K. Bhan, MBBS, MD
Professor of Pathology, Harvard Medical School; Director of  
Immunopathology, Department of Pathology, Massachusetts  
General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts [43]
Henry J. Binder, MD
Professor Emeritus of Medicine; Senior Research Scientist, Yale 
University, New Haven, Connecticut [15, 16]
Bruce R. Bistrian, MD, PhD
Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Chief, Clinical 
Nutrition, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston,  
Massachusetts [56]
Martin J. Blaser, MD
Frederick H. King Professor of Internal Medicine; Chair,  
Department of Medicine; Professor of Microbiology, New York 
University School of Medicine, New York, New York [26, 29]
Richard S. Blumberg, MD
Chief, Division of Gastroenterology, Brigham and Women’s  
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts [17]
Cynthia D. Brown, MD
Assistant Professor of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary and Critical 
Care Medicine, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia 
[Review and Self-Assessment]
Stephen B. Calderwood, MD
Morton Swartz MD Academy Professor of Medicine (Microbiology 
and Molecular Genetics), Harvard Medical School; Chief, Division 
of Infectious Diseases, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,  
Massachusetts [23]
Michael Camilleri, MD
Atherton and Winifred W. Bean Professor; Professor of Medicine and 
Physiology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, Minnesota [6]
Brian I. Carr, MD, PhD, FRCP
Professor of Oncology and Hepatology, IRCCS De Bellis Medical 
Research Institute, Castellana Grotte, Italy [50]
Irene Chong, MRCP, FRCR
Clinical Research Fellow, Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust, 
London and Sutton, United Kingdom [51]
Raymond T. Chung, MD
Associate Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Director 
of Hepatology; Vice Chief, Gastrointestinal Unit, Massachusetts 
General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts [46]
Darwin L. Conwell, MD
Associate Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Associate 
Physician, Division of Gastroenterology, Brigham and Women’s 
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts [47, 48]
Kathleen E. Corey, MD, MPH
Clinical and Research Fellow, Harvard Medical School; Fellow,  
Gastrointestinal Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,  
Massachusetts [9]
David Cunningham, MD, FRCP
Professor of Cancer Medicine, Royal Marsden NHS Foundation 
Trust, London and Sutton, United Kingdom [51]
John Del Valle, MD
Professor and Senior Associate Chair of Medicine, Department of 
Internal Medicine, University of Michigan School of Medicine,  
Ann Arbor, Michigan [14]
Jules L. Dienstag, MD
Carl W. Walter Professor of Medicine and Dean for Medical  
Education, Harvard Medical School; Physician, Gastrointestinal 
Unit, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Boston, Massachusetts [38-40, 43, 46]
David F. Driscoll, PhD
Associate Professor of Medicine, University of Massachusetts  
Medical School, Worchester, Massachusetts [56]
Samuel C. Durso, MD, MBA
Mason F. Lord Professor of Medicine; Director, Division of  
Geriatric Medicine and Gerontology, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland [2, 3]
Johanna Dwyer, DSc, RD
Professor of Medicine (Nutrition), Friedman School of Nutrition 
Science and Policy, Tufts University School of Medicine;  
Director, Frances Stern Nutrition Center, Tufts Medical Center, 
Boston, Massachusetts [53]
CONTRIBUTORS
Numbers in brackets refer to the chapter(s) written or co-written by the contributor.
Contributors
x
Robert H. Eckel, MD
Professor of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism and  
Diabetes, Division of Cardiology; Professor of Physiology and  
Biophysics, Charles A. Boettcher, II Chair in Atherosclerosis, University 
of Colorado School of Medicine, Anschutz Medical Campus, Director 
Lipid Clinic, University of Colorado Hospital, Aurora, Colorado [60]
Andrew J. Einstein, MD, PhD
Assistant Professor of Clinical Medicine, Columbia University  
College of Physicians and Surgeons; Department of Medicine,  
Division of Cardiology, Department of Radiology, Columbia  
University Medical Center and New York-Presbyterian Hospital, 
New York, New York [Appendix]
Jeffrey S. Flier, MD
Caroline Shields Walker Professor of Medicine and Dean, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts [57]
Lawrence S. Friedman, MD
Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Professor of  
Medicine, Tufts University School of Medicine; Assistant Chief of 
Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts; 
Chair, Department of Medicine, Newton-Wellesley Hospital,  
Newton, Massachusetts [9]
Sonia Friedman, MD
Assistant Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts [17]
Susan L. Gearhart, MD
Assistant Professor of Colorectal Surgery and Oncology, The 
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,  
Maryland [19, 20]
Dale N. Gerding, MD
Professor of Medicine, Loyola University Chicago Stritch School of 
Medicine; Associate Chief of Staff for Research and Development, 
Edward Hines, Jr. VA Hospital, Hines, Illinois [24]
Marc G. Ghany, MD, MHSc
Staff Physician, Liver Diseases Branch, National Institute of Diabetes 
and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, Maryland [35]
Roger I. Glass, MD, PhD
Director, Fogarty International Center, Bethesda, Maryland [31]
Norton J. Greenberger, MD
Clinical Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Senior 
Physician, Division of Gastroenterology, Brigham and Women’s 
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts [45, 47, 48]
William L. Hasler, MD
Professor of Internal Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology,  
University of Michigan Health System, Ann Arbor,  
Michigan [5, 11]
Douglas C. Heimburger, MD, MS
Professor of Medicine; Associate Director for Education and  
Training, Vanderbilt Institute for Global Health, Vanderbilt  
University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee [55]
Anna R. Hemnes, MD
Assistant Professor, Division of Allergy, Pulmonary,  
and Critical Care Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center,  
Nashville, Tennessee [Review and Self-Assessment]
Ikuo Hirano, MD
Professor of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology and  
Hepatology, Department of Medicine, Northwestern University 
Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois [4, 13]
Jay H. Hoofnagle, MD
Director, Liver Diseases Research Branch, National Institute of  
Diabetes, Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, Maryland [35]
J. Larry Jameson, MD, PhD
Robert G. Dunlop Professor of Medicine; Dean, University of 
Pennsylvania School of Medicine; Executive Vice President of the 
University of Pennsylvania for the Health System, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania [10]
Robert T. Jensen, MD
Digestive Diseases Branch, National Institute of Diabetes;  
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, Maryland [52]
Stuart Johnson, MD
Associate Professor of Medicine, Loyola University Chicago Stritch 
School of Medicine; Staff Physician, Edward Hines, Jr. VA Hospital, 
Hines, Illinois [24]
Peter J. Kahrilas, MD
Gilbert H. Marquardt Professor in Medicine, Division of  
Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Northwestern  
University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois [4, 13]
Marshall M. Kaplan, MD
Professor of Medicine, Tufts University School of Medicine,  
Boston, Massachusetts [8, 36]
Dennis L. Kasper, MD, MA (Hon)
William Ellery Channing Professor of Medicine and Professor of 
Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Harvard Medical School; 
Director, Channing Laboratory, Department of Medicine,  
Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts [25]
Alexander Kratz, MD, PhD, MPH
Associate Professor of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia  
University College of Physicians and Surgeons; Director, Core 
Laboratory, Columbia University Medical Center, New York,  
New York [Appendix]
Robert F. Kushner, MD, MS
Professor of Medicine, Northwestern University Feinberg School of 
Medicine, Chicago, Illinois [58]
Loren Laine, MD
Professor of Medicine, University of Southern California Keck 
School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California [7]
Regina C. LaRocque, MD
Assistant Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Assistant 
Physician, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts [23]
Mark E. Mailliard, MD
Frederick F. Paustian Professor; Chief, Division of Gastroenterology 
and Hepatology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of 
Nebraska College of Medicine, Omaha, Nebraska [41]
Eleftheria Maratos-Flier, MD
Associate Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Division 
of Endocrinology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, 
Massachusetts [57]
Robert J. Mayer, MD
Stephen B. Kay Family Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts [49]
Samuel I. Miller, MD
Professor of Genome Sciences, Medicine, and Microbiology,  
University of Washington, Seattle, Washington [27]
Joseph A. Murray, MD
Professor of Medicine, Departments of Internal Medicine and  
Immunology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota [6]
Thomas B. Nutman, MD
Head, Helminth Immunology Section; Head, Clinical Parasitology 
Unit, Laboratory of Parasitic Diseases, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, Maryland [34]
Chung Owyang, MD
H. Marvin Pollard Professor of Internal Medicine; Chief, Division 
of Gastroenterology, University of Michigan Health System, Ann 
Arbor, Michigan [11, 18]
Umesh D. Parashar, MBBS, MPH
Lead, Viral Gastroenteritis Epidemiology Team, Division of Viral 
Diseases, National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia [31]
Gustav Paumgartner, MD
Professor Emeritus of Medicine, University of Munich, Munich, 
Germany [45]
David A. Pegues, MD
Hospital Epidemiologist, David Geffen School of Medicine,  
University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California [27]
Michael A. Pesce, PhD
Professor Emeritus of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia  
University College of Physicians and Surgeons; Columbia  
University Medical Center, New York, New York [Appendix]
Daniel S. Pratt, MD
Assistant Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School;  
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts [8, 36]
Russell G. Robertson, MD
Vice President for Medical Affairs, Rosalind Franklin University of 
Medicine and Science; Dean, Chicago Medical School, Chicago, 
Illinois [10]
Robert M. Russell, MD
Professor Emeritus of Medicine and Nutrition, Tufts University, 
Boston, Massachusetts; Office of Dietary Supplements, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland [54]
Edward T. Ryan, MD, DTM&H
Associate Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Associate 
Professor of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of 
Public Health; Director, Tropical and Geographic Medicine,  
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts [23, 30]
Philippe Sansonetti, MD, MS
Professor, Collège de France; Institut Pasteur, Paris, France [28]
William Silen, MD
Johnson and Johnson Professor Emeritus of Surgery, Harvard  
Medical School, Auburndale, Massachusetts [1, 21, 22]
Michael F. Sorrell, MD
Robert L. Grissom Professor of Medicine, University of Nebraska 
Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska [41]
Samuel L. Stanley, Jr., MD
President, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York [32]
Paolo M. Suter, MD, MS
Professor, Clinic and Policlinic of Internal Medicine, University 
Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland [54]
Mark Topazian, MD
Professor of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota [12]
Matthew K. Waldor, MD, PhD
Edward H. Kass Professor of Medicine, Channing Laboratory, 
Brigham and Women’s Hospital; Harvard Medical School  
and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Boston,  
Massachusetts [30]
B. Timothy Walsh, MD
Professor, Department of Psychiatry, College of Physicians and  
Surgeons, Columbia University; New York State Psychiatric  
Institute, New York, New York [59]
Peter F. Weller, MD
Chief, Infectious Disease Division; Chief, Allergy and Inflammation 
Division, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston,  
Massachusetts [33, 34]
Charles M. Wiener, MD
Dean/CEO Perdana University Graduate School of Medicine,  
Selangor, Malaysia; Professor of Medicine and Physiology,  
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,  
Maryland [Review and Self-Assessment]
Allan W. Wolkoff, MD
Professor of Medicine and Anatomy and Structural Biology;  
Associate Chair of Medicine for Research; Chief, Division of  
Gastroenterology and Liver Diseases, Albert Einstein  
College of Medicine and Montefiore Medical Center, Bronx,  
New York [37]
Louis Michel Wong Kee Song, MD
Associate Professor, Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota [12]
Bechien U. Wu, MD
Instructor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School; Associate  
Physician, Division of Gastroenterology, Brigham and Women’s 
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts [48]
Janet A. Yellowitz, DMD, MPH
Associate Professor; Director, Geriatric Dentistry, University of 
Maryland Dental School, Baltimore, Maryland [3]
Contributors
xi
This page intentionally left blank 
xiii
Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine (HPIM) has long 
been a major source of information related to the 
principles and practice of medicine for many practitioners 
and trainees. Yet, in its aim to cover the broad spectrum 
of medicine, the book has become more than 3000 pages 
in length and is pushing the envelope of “portability.” 
HPIM has spawned several offspring tailored to diverse 
uses for sources of medical information. The entire book 
plus a large cache of supplemental visual and textual 
information are available as Harrison’s Online, a component 
of McGraw-Hill’s Access Medicine offering. In addition, 
the 18th edition of HPIM is now available on iPad. A 
condensed version of HPIM, called Harrison’s Manual of 
Medicine, has been published in print format suitable for 
carrying in a white coat pocket and in several electronic 
formats (PDA, Blackberry, iPhone). A companion to 
HPIM that serves as a study guide for standardized tests 
in medicine, HPIM Self-Assessment and Board Review, is 
an effective teaching tool that highlights important areas 
of medicine discussed in HPIM. All of these products 
retain the broad spectrum of topics presented in the 
HPIM “mother book” in variable degrees of depth.
In 2006, for the first time, the Editors of HPIM 
experimented with extracting portions of HPIM that were 
focused on a specific subspecialty of internal medicine. 
The products of that effort, Harrison’s Endocrinology, 
Harrison’s Rheumatology, and Harrison’s Neurology, were 
very well-received by audiences keenly interested in the 
respective subspecialties of internal medicine. Accord-
ingly, we extended the concept of sectional publication 
2009 with the publication of books in other internal 
medicine subspecialties including Harrison’s Gastroenterology 
and Hepatology based on the 17th edition of HPIM. These 
volumes, too, appeared to serve the needs of many readers. 
Therefore, we are continuing the publication of books 
with a subspecialty focus.
According to a report from the National Institute 
of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, for 
every 100 residents of the United States, there were 35 
ambulatory care contacts and 5 overnight hospital stays at 
which a digestive disease diagnosis was noted. In 2004, 
digestive diseases accounted for more than 236,000 
deaths. Thus, training in the disciplines of gastroenter-
ology and hepatology are essential to any primary care 
physician or general internist and even to practitioners of 
other internal medicine subspecialties. 
This book is aimed at bringing together the chapters 
of the current and 18th edition of HPIM related to 
gastroenterology and hepatology in a conveniently sized 
book for a focused study of this medical subspecialty. 
The book is organized into 60 chapters and eleven 
sections: (I) Cardinal Manifestations of Gastrointestinal 
Disease; (II) Evaluation of the Patient with Alimentary 
Tract Symptoms; (III) Disorders of the Alimentary Tract; 
(IV) Infections of the Alimentary Tract; (V) Evaluation 
of the Patient with Liver Disease; (VI) Disorders of 
the Liver and Biliary Tree; (VII) Liver Transplantation; 
(VIII) Disorders of the Pancreas; (IX) Neoplastic Diseases 
of the Gastrointestinal System; (X) Nutrition; and (XI) 
Obesity and Eating Disorders.
The information presented here is contributed by 
physician/authors who have personally made notable 
advances in the fields of their expertise. The chapters 
reflect authoritative analyses by individuals who have 
been active participants in the extraordinary surge of new 
information on genetics, cell biology, pathophysiology, 
and treatment that has characterized all of medicine in 
the last 20 years. In addition to the didactic value of the 
chapters, a section of test questions, answers, and an 
explanation of the correct answers is provided to facilitate 
learning and assist the reader in preparing for standardized 
examinations.
Gastroenterology and hepatology, like many other 
areas of medicine, are changing rapidly. Novel technol-
ogies of imaging, development of new drugs, and the 
application of molecular pathogenesis information to detect 
disease early and prevent disease in people at risk are just 
a few of the advances that have made an impact on the 
practice of gastroenterology. Physicians are now applying 
endoscopic techniques in ways that were once unimagina-
ble including performing operations successfully without 
an incision; operations that once required major surgery 
with attendant morbidity and expense. The pace of 
discovery demands that physicians undertake nearly 
continuous self-education. It is our hope that this book 
will help physicians in this process.
We are grateful to Kim Davis and James Shanahan at 
McGraw-Hill for their help in producing this book.
We thank Chung Owyang, MD, from the University 
of Michigan, Jay Hoofnagle, MD, from the National 
Institutes of Health, and Dennis Kasper, MD, from 
Harvard Medical School, for helpful discussions in shaping 
the content of this volume.
Dan L. Longo, MD
Anthony S. Fauci, MD
PREFACE
NOTICE
Medicine is an ever-changing science. As new research and clinical experi-
ence broaden our knowledge, changes in treatment and drug therapy are 
required. The authors and the publisher of this work have checked with 
sources believed to be reliable in their efforts to provide information that is 
complete and generally in accord with the standards accepted at the time of 
publication. However, in view of the possibility of human error or changes 
in medical sciences, neither the authors nor the publisher nor any other party 
who has been involved in the preparation or publication of this work 
warrants that the information contained herein is in every respect accurate or 
complete, and they disclaim all responsibility for any errors or omissions or 
for the results obtained from use of the information contained in this work. 
Readers are encouraged to confirm the information contained herein with 
other sources. For example and in particular, readers are advised to check the 
product information sheet included in the package of each drug they plan to 
administer to be certain that the information contained in this work is 
accurate and that changes have not been made in the recommended dose or in 
the contraindications for administration. This recommendation is of particular 
importance in connection with new or infrequently used drugs. 
The global icons call greater attention to key epidemiologic and clinical differences in the practice of medicine 
throughout the world.
The genetic icons identify a clinical issue with an explicit genetic relationship.
Review and self-assessment questions and answers were taken from Wiener CM, 
Brown CD, Hemnes AR (eds). Harrison’s Self-Assessment and Board Review, 18th ed. 
New York, McGraw-Hill, 2012, ISBN 978-0-07-177195-5.
SECTION I
Cardinal 
Manifestations of 
Gastrointestinal 
Disease
 William silen 
2
 The correct interpretation of acute abdominal pain 
is challenging. Few other clinical situations demand 
greater judgment, because the most catastrophic of 
events may be forecast by the subtlest of symptoms and 
signs. A meticulously executed, detailed history and 
physical examination are of the greatest importance. 
The etiologic classifi cation in  Table 1-1 , although 
not complete, forms a useful basis for the evaluation of 
patients with abdominal pain. 
 The diagnosis of “acute or surgical abdomen” is not 
an acceptable one because of its often misleading and 
erroneous connotation. The most obvious of “acute 
abdomens” may not require operative intervention, and 
the mildest of abdominal pains may herald an urgently 
correctable lesion. Any patient with abdominal pain of 
recent onset requires early and thorough evaluation and 
accurate diagnosis. 
 SOmE mECHaNISmS Of paIN OrIgINaTINg 
IN THE abdOmEN 
 Inﬂ ammation of the parietal peritoneum 
 The pain of parietal peritoneal infl ammation is steady 
and aching in character and is located directly over the 
infl amed area, its exact reference being possible because 
it is transmitted by somatic nerves supplying the pari-
etal peritoneum. The intensity of the pain is dependent 
on the type and amount of material to which the peri-
toneal surfaces are exposed in a given time period. For 
example, the sudden release into the peritoneal cav-
ity of a small quantity of  sterile acid gastric juice causes 
much more pain than the same amount of grossly con-
taminated neutral feces. Enzymatically active pancre-
atic juice incites more pain and infl ammation than does 
the same amount of sterile bile containing no potent 
enzymes. Blood and urine are often so bland as to go 
undetected if their contact with the peritoneum has 
not been sudden and massive. In the case of bacterial 
 ABDOMINAL PAIN 
 CHAPTER 1 
contamination, such as in pelvic infl ammatory disease, 
the pain is frequently of low intensity early in the illness 
until bacterial multiplication has caused the elaboration 
of irritating substances. 
 The rate at which the irritating material is applied 
to the peritoneum is important. Perforated peptic ulcer 
may be associated with entirely different clinical pictures 
dependent only on the rapidity with which the gastric 
juice enters the peritoneal cavity. 
The pain of peritoneal inﬂ ammation is invariably accen-
tuated by pressure or changes in tension of the peritoneum , 
whether produced by palpation or by movement, as in 
coughing or sneezing. The patient with peritonitis lies 
quietly in bed, preferring to avoid motion, in contrast 
to the patient with colic, who may writhe incessantly. 
 Another characteristic feature of peritoneal irrita-
tion is tonic refl ex spasm of the abdominal musculature, 
localized to the involved body segment. The inten-
sity of the tonic muscle spasm accompanying perito-
neal infl ammation is dependent on the location of the 
infl ammatory process, the rate at which it develops, and 
the integrity of the nervous system. Spasm over a per-
forated retrocecal appendix or perforated ulcer into the 
lesser peritoneal sac may be minimal or absent because 
of the protective effect of overlying viscera. A slowly 
developing process often greatly attenuates the degree 
of muscle spasm. Catastrophic abdominal emergencies 
such as a perforated ulcer may be associated with mini-
mal or no detectable pain or muscle spasm in obtunded, 
seriously ill, debilitated elderly patients or in psychotic 
patients. 
 Obstruction of hollow viscera 
 The pain of obstruction of hollow abdominal viscera 
is classically described as intermittent, or colicky. Yet 
the lack of a truly cramping character should not be 
misleading, because distention of a hollow viscus may 
 
CHAPTER 1
Abdominal Pain
3
produce steady pain with only very occasional exacer-
bations. It is not nearly as well localized as the pain of 
parietal peritoneal inflammation.
The colicky pain of obstruction of the small intes-
tine is usually periumbilical or supraumbilical and is 
poorly localized. As the intestine becomes progressively 
dilated with loss of muscular tone, the colicky nature of 
the pain may diminish. With superimposed strangulat-
ing obstruction, pain may spread to the lower lumbar 
region if there is traction on the root of the mesentery. 
The colicky pain of colonic obstruction is of lesser 
intensity than that of the small intestine and is often 
located in the infraumbilical area. Lumbar radiation of 
pain is common in colonic obstruction.
Sudden distention of the biliary tree produces a steady 
rather than colicky type of pain; hence, the term biliary 
colic is misleading. Acute distention of the gallbladder 
usually causes pain in the right upper quadrant with 
radiation to the right posterior region of the thorax or 
to the tip of the right scapula, but is not uncommonly 
Table 1-1 
Some Important Causes of Abdominal Pain
Pain Originating in the Abdomen
Parietal peritoneal inflammation
  Bacterial contamination
    Perforated appendix or other perforated viscus
    Pelvic inflammatory disease
  Chemical irritation
    Perforated ulcer
    Pancreatitis
    Mittelschmerz
  Mechanical obstruction of hollow viscera
    Obstruction of the small or large intestine
    Obstruction of the biliary tree
    Obstruction of the ureter
Vascular disturbances
  Embolism or thrombosis
  Vascular rupture
  Pressure or torsional occlusion
  Sickle cell anemia
Abdominal wall
  Distortion or traction of mesentery
  Trauma or infection of muscles
Distention of visceral surfaces, e.g., by hemorrhage
  Hepatic or renal capsules
Inflammation of a viscus
  Appendicitis
  Typhoid fever
  Typhlitis
Pain Referred from Extraabdominal Source
Cardiothoracic
  Acute myocardial infarction
  Myocarditis, endocarditis, pericarditis
  Congestive heart failure
  Pneumonia
  Pulmonary embolus
  Pleurodynia
  Pneumothorax
  Empyema
  Esophageal disease, spasm, rupture, inflammation
Genitalia
  Torsion of the testis
Metabolic Causes
Diabetes
Uremia
Hyperlipidemia
Hyperparathyroidism
Acute adrenal insufficiency
Familial Mediterranean fever
Porphyria
C′1 esterase inhibitor deficiency (angioneurotic edema)
Neurologic/Psychiatric Causes
Herpes zoster
Tabes dorsalis
Causalgia
Radiculitis from infection or arthritis
Spinal cord or nerve root compression
Functional disorders
Psychiatric disorders
Toxic Causes
Lead poisoning
Insect or animal envenomations
  Black widow spiders
  Snake bites
Uncertain Mechanisms
Narcotic withdrawal
Heat stroke
SECTION I
Cardinal Manifestations of Gastrointestinal Disease
4
midline. Distention of the common bile duct is often 
associated with pain in the epigastrium radiating to the 
upper part of the lumbar region. Considerable variation 
is common, however, so that differentiation between 
these may be impossible. The typical subscapular pain 
or lumbar radiation is frequently absent. Gradual dila-
tation of the biliary tree, as in carcinoma of the head 
of the pancreas, may cause no pain or only a mild ach-
ing sensation in the epigastrium or right upper quadrant. 
The pain of distention of the pancreatic ducts is simi-
lar to that described for distention of the common bile 
duct but, in addition, is very frequently accentuated by 
recumbency and relieved by the upright position.
Obstruction of the urinary bladder results in dull 
suprapubic pain, usually low in intensity. Restlessness 
without specific complaint of pain may be the only 
sign of a distended bladder in an obtunded patient. In 
contrast, acute obstruction of the intravesicular portion 
of the ureter is characterized by severe suprapubic and 
flank pain that radiates to the penis, scrotum, or inner 
aspect of the upper thigh. Obstruction of the uretero-
pelvic junction is felt as pain in the costovertebral angle, 
whereas obstruction of the remainder of the ureter is 
associated with flank pain that often extends into the 
same side of the abdomen.
Vascular disturbances
A frequent misconception, despite abundant expe-
rience to the contrary, is that pain associated with 
intraabdominal vascular disturbances is sudden and cata-
strophic in nature. The pain of embolism or thrombosis 
of the superior mesenteric artery or that of impend-
ing rupture of an abdominal aortic aneurysm certainly 
may be severe and diffuse. Yet, just as frequently, the 
patient with occlusion of the superior mesenteric artery 
has only mild continuous or cramping diffuse pain 
for 2 or 3 days before vascular collapse or findings of 
peritoneal inflammation appear. The early, seemingly 
insignificant discomfort is caused by hyperperistalsis 
rather than peritoneal inflammation. Indeed, absence 
of tenderness and rigidity in the presence of continu-
ous, diffuse pain in a patient likely to have vascular dis-
ease is quite characteristic of occlusion of the superior 
mesenteric artery. Abdominal pain with radiation to 
the sacral region, flank, or genitalia should always signal 
the possible presence of a rupturing abdominal aortic 
aneurysm. This pain may persist over a period of several 
days before rupture and collapse occur.
Abdominal wall
Pain arising from the abdominal wall is usually constant 
and aching. Movement, prolonged standing, and pres-
sure accentuate the discomfort and muscle spasm. In 
the case of hematoma of the rectus sheath, now most 
frequently encountered in association with anticoagulant 
therapy, a mass may be present in the lower quadrants 
of the abdomen. Simultaneous involvement of muscles 
in other parts of the body usually serves to differentiate 
myositis of the abdominal wall from an intraabdominal 
process that might cause pain in the same region.
Referred Pain in Abdominal Diseases
Pain referred to the abdomen from the thorax, spine, 
or genitalia may prove a vexing diagnostic problem, 
because diseases of the upper part of the abdominal cav-
ity such as acute cholecystitis or perforated ulcer are 
frequently associated with intrathoracic complications. 
A most important, yet often forgotten, dictum is that 
the possibility of intrathoracic disease must be consid-
ered in every patient with abdominal pain, especially if 
the pain is in the upper part of the abdomen. Systematic 
questioning and examination directed toward detecting 
myocardial or pulmonary infarction, pneumonia, peri-
carditis, or esophageal disease (the intrathoracic diseases 
that most often masquerade as abdominal emergencies) 
will often provide sufficient clues to establish the proper 
diagnosis. Diaphragmatic pleuritis resulting from pneu-
monia or pulmonary infarction may cause pain in the 
right upper quadrant and pain in the supraclavicular 
area, the latter radiation to be distinguished from the 
referred subscapular pain caused by acute distention of 
the extrahepatic biliary tree. The ultimate decision as 
to the origin of abdominal pain may require deliberate 
and planned observation over a period of several hours, 
during which repeated questioning and examination 
will provide the diagnosis or suggest the appropriate 
studies.
Referred pain of thoracic origin is often accompanied 
by splinting of the involved hemithorax with respira-
tory lag and decrease in excursion more marked than 
that seen in the presence of intraabdominal disease. In 
addition, apparent abdominal muscle spasm caused 
by referred pain will diminish during the inspiratory 
phase of respiration, whereas it is persistent through-
out both respiratory phases if it is of abdominal origin. 
Palpation over the area of referred pain in the abdomen 
also does not usually accentuate the pain and in many 
instances actually seems to relieve it. Thoracic disease 
and abdominal disease frequently coexist and may be 
difficult or impossible to differentiate. For example, the 
patient with known biliary tract disease often has epi-
gastric pain during myocardial infarction, or biliary 
colic may be referred to the precordium or left shoul-
der in a patient who has suffered previously from angina 
pectoris. 
Referred pain from the spine, which usually involves 
compression or irritation of nerve roots, is character-
istically intensified by certain motions such as cough, 
sneeze, or strain and is associated with hyperesthesia 
 
CHAPTER 1
Abdominal Pain
5
abdominal distention, or changes in respiration. Severe 
muscle spasm, as in the gastric crises of tabes dorsalis, 
is common but is either relieved or is not accentuated 
by abdominal palpation. The pain is made worse by 
movement of the spine and is usually confined to a few 
dermatomes. Hyperesthesia is very common.
Pain due to functional causes conforms to none of 
the aforementioned patterns. Mechanism is hard to 
define. Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is a functional 
gastrointestinal disorder characterized by abdominal 
pain and altered bowel habits. The diagnosis is made on 
the basis of clinical criteria (Chap. 18) and after exclu-
sion of demonstrable structural abnormalities. The epi-
sodes of abdominal pain are often brought on by stress, 
and the pain varies considerably in type and location. 
Nausea and vomiting are rare. Localized tenderness and 
muscle spasm are inconsistent or absent. The causes of 
IBS or related functional disorders are not known.
APPROACH TO THE
PATIENT	
Abdominal Pain
Few abdominal conditions require such urgent opera-
tive intervention that an orderly approach need be 
abandoned, no matter how ill the patient. Only those 
patients with exsanguinating intraabdominal hemor-
rhage (e.g., ruptured aneurysm) must be rushed to the 
operating room immediately, but in such instances only 
a few minutes are required to assess the critical nature 
of the problem. Under these circumstances, all obstacles 
must be swept aside, adequate venous access for fluid 
replacement obtained, and the operation begun. Many 
patients of this type have died in the radiology depart-
ment or the emergency room while awaiting such 
unnecessary examinations as electrocardiograms or CT 
scans. There are no contraindications to operation when 
massive intraabdominal hemorrhage is present. Fortu-
nately, this situation is relatively rare. These comments 
do not pertain to gastrointestinal hemorrhage, which 
can often be managed by other means (Chap. 7).
Nothing will supplant an orderly, painstakingly 
detailed history, which is far more valuable than any 
laboratory or radiographic examination. This kind of 
history is laborious and time-consuming, making it not 
especially popular, even though a reasonably accu-
rate diagnosis can be made on the basis of the history 
alone in the majority of cases. Computer-aided diag-
nosis of abdominal pain provides no advantage over 
clinical assessment alone. In cases of acute abdominal 
pain, a diagnosis is readily established in most instances, 
whereas success is not so frequent in patients with 
chronic pain. IBS is one of the most common causes 
of abdominal pain and must always be kept in mind 
(Chap. 18). The location of the pain can assist in nar-
rowing the differential diagnosis (Table 1-2); however, 
over the involved dermatomes. Pain referred to the 
abdomen from the testes or seminal vesicles is generally 
accentuated by the slightest pressure on either of these 
organs. The abdominal discomfort is of dull, aching 
character and is poorly localized.
Metabolic Abdominal Crises
Pain of metabolic origin may simulate almost any other 
type of intraabdominal disease. Several mechanisms may 
be at work. In certain instances, such as hyperlipidemia, 
the metabolic disease itself may be accompanied by an 
intraabdominal process such as pancreatitis, which can 
lead to unnecessary laparotomy unless recognized. C′1 
esterase deficiency associated with angioneurotic edema 
is often associated with episodes of severe abdominal 
pain. Whenever the cause of abdominal pain is obscure, 
a metabolic origin always must be considered. Abdomi-
nal pain is also the hallmark of familial Mediterranean 
fever.
The problem of differential diagnosis is often not 
readily resolved. The pain of porphyria and of lead colic 
is usually difficult to distinguish from that of intestinal 
obstruction, because severe hyperperistalsis is a promi-
nent feature of both. The pain of uremia or diabetes 
is nonspecific, and the pain and tenderness frequently 
shift in location and intensity. Diabetic acidosis may be 
precipitated by acute appendicitis or intestinal obstruc-
tion, so if prompt resolution of the abdominal pain 
does not result from correction of the metabolic abnor-
malities, an underlying organic problem should be sus-
pected. Black widow spider bites produce intense pain 
and rigidity of the abdominal muscles and back, an area 
infrequently involved in intraabdominal disease.
Neurogenic Causes
Causalgic pain may occur in diseases that injure sensory 
nerves. It has a burning character and is usually limited 
to the distribution of a given peripheral nerve. Normal 
stimuli such as touch or change in temperature may be 
transformed into this type of pain, which is frequently 
present in a patient at rest. The demonstration of irreg-
ularly spaced cutaneous pain spots may be the only indi-
cation of an old nerve lesion underlying causalgic pain. 
Even though the pain may be precipitated by gentle 
palpation, rigidity of the abdominal muscles is absent, 
and the respirations are not disturbed. Distention of the 
abdomen is uncommon, and the pain has no relation-
ship to the intake of food.
Pain arising from spinal nerves or roots comes 
and goes suddenly and is of a lancinating type. It may 
be caused by herpes zoster, impingement by arthri-
tis, tumors, herniated nucleus pulposus, diabetes, 
or syphilis. It is not associated with food intake, 
SECTION I
Cardinal Manifestations of Gastrointestinal Disease
6
the chronological sequence of events in the patient’s 
history is often more important than emphasis on the 
location of pain. If the examiner is sufficiently open-
minded and unhurried, asks the proper questions, and 
listens, the patient will usually provide the diagnosis. 
Careful attention should be paid to the extraabdominal 
regions that may be responsible for abdominal pain. An 
accurate menstrual history in a female patient is essen-
tial. Narcotics or analgesics should not be withheld until 
a definitive diagnosis or a definitive plan has been for-
mulated; obfuscation of the diagnosis by adequate anal-
gesia is unlikely.
In the examination, simple critical inspection of the 
patient, e.g., of facies, position in bed, and respiratory 
activity, provides valuable clues. The amount of infor-
mation to be gleaned is directly proportional to the 
gentleness and thoroughness of the examiner. Once a 
patient with peritoneal inflammation has been examined 
brusquely, accurate assessment by the next examiner 
becomes almost impossible. Eliciting rebound tender-
ness by sudden release of a deeply palpating hand in a 
patient with suspected peritonitis is cruel and unneces-
sary. The same information can be obtained by gentle 
percussion of the abdomen (rebound tenderness on a 
miniature scale), a maneuver that can be far more precise 
and localizing. Asking the patient to cough will elicit true 
rebound tenderness without the need for placing a hand 
on the abdomen. Furthermore, the forceful demonstra-
tion of rebound tenderness will startle and induce pro-
tective spasm in a nervous or worried patient in whom 
true rebound tenderness is not present. A palpable gall-
bladder will be missed if palpation is so brusque that vol-
untary muscle spasm becomes superimposed on invol-
untary muscular rigidity.
As with history taking, sufficient time should be 
spent in the examination. Abdominal signs may be 
minimal but nevertheless, if accompanied by consistent 
symptoms, may be exceptionally meaningful. Abdomi-
nal signs may be virtually or totally absent in cases of 
pelvic peritonitis, so careful pelvic and rectal examina-
tions are mandatory in every patient with abdominal 
pain. Tenderness on pelvic or rectal examination in the 
absence of other abdominal signs can be caused by 
operative indications such as perforated appendicitis, 
diverticulitis, twisted ovarian cyst, and many others.
Much attention has been paid to the presence or 
absence of peristaltic sounds, their quality, and their 
frequency. Auscultation of the abdomen is one of the 
least revealing aspects of the physical examination of 
a patient with abdominal pain. Catastrophes such as 
Table 1-2 
Differential Diagnoses of Abdominal Pain by Location
Right Upper Quadrant
Epigastric
Left Upper Quadrant
Cholecystitis
Cholangitis
Pancreatitis
Pneumonia/empyema
Pleurisy/pleurodynia
Subdiaphragmatic abscess
Hepatitis
Budd-Chiari syndrome
Peptic ulcer disease
Gastritis
GERD
Pancreatitis
Myocardial infarction
Pericarditis
Ruptured aortic aneurysm
Esophagitis
Splenic infarct
Splenic rupture
Splenic abscess
Gastritis
Gastric ulcer
Pancreatitis
Subdiaphragmatic abscess
Right Lower Quadrant
Periumbilical
Left Lower Quadrant
Appendicitis
Salpingitis
Inguinal hernia
Ectopic pregnancy
Nephrolithiasis
Inflammatory bowel disease
Mesenteric lymphadenitis
Typhlitis
Early appendicitis
Gastroenteritis
Bowel obstruction
Ruptured aortic aneurysm
Diverticulitis
Salpingitis
Inguinal hernia
Ectopic pregnancy
Nephrolithiasis
Irritable bowel syndrome
Inflammatory bowel disease
Diffuse Nonlocalized Pain
Gastroenteritis
Mesenteric ischemia
Bowel obstruction
Irritable bowel syndrome
Peritonitis 
Diabetes
Malaria
Familial Mediterranean fever
Metabolic diseases
Psychiatric disease
Abbreviation: GERD, gastroesophageal reflux disease.
 
CHAPTER 1
Abdominal Pain
7
strangulating small intestinal obstruction or perforated 
appendicitis may occur in the presence of normal peri-
staltic sounds. Conversely, when the proximal part of 
the intestine above an obstruction becomes markedly 
distended and edematous, peristaltic sounds may lose 
the characteristics of borborygmi and become weak or 
absent, even when peritonitis is not present. It is usually 
the severe chemical peritonitis of sudden onset that is 
associated with the truly silent abdomen. Assessment of 
the patient’s state of hydration is important.
Laboratory examinations may be valuable in assessing 
the patient with abdominal pain, yet, with few exceptions, 
they rarely establish a diagnosis. Leukocytosis should 
never be the single deciding factor as to whether or not 
operation is indicated. A white blood cell count >20,000/μL 
may be observed with perforation of a viscus, but pan-
creatitis, acute cholecystitis, pelvic inflammatory disease, 
and intestinal infarction may be associated with marked 
leukocytosis. A normal white blood cell count is not rare 
in cases of perforation of abdominal viscera. The diagnosis 
of anemia may be more helpful than the white blood cell 
count, especially when combined with the history.
The urinalysis may reveal the state of hydration  
or rule out severe renal disease, diabetes, or urinary 
infection. Blood urea nitrogen, glucose, and serum  
bilirubin levels may be helpful. Serum amylase levels 
may be increased by many diseases other than pan-
creatitis, e.g., perforated ulcer, strangulating intestinal 
obstruction, and acute cholecystitis; thus, elevations of 
serum amylase do not rule out the need for an opera-
tion. The determination of the serum lipase may have 
greater accuracy than that of the serum amylase.
Plain and upright or lateral decubitus radiographs 
of the abdomen may be of value in cases of intestinal 
obstruction, perforated ulcer, and a variety of other con-
ditions. They are usually unnecessary in patients with 
acute appendicitis or strangulated external hernias. In 
rare instances, barium or water-soluble contrast study 
of the upper part of the gastrointestinal tract may dem-
onstrate partial intestinal obstruction that may elude 
diagnosis by other means. If there is any question of 
obstruction of the colon, oral administration of barium 
sulfate should be avoided. On the other hand, in cases 
of suspected colonic obstruction (without perforation), 
contrast enema may be diagnostic.
In the absence of trauma, peritoneal lavage has been 
replaced as a diagnostic tool by ultrasound, CT, and lap-
aroscopy. Ultrasonography has proved to be useful in 
detecting an enlarged gallbladder or pancreas, the pres-
ence of gallstones, an enlarged ovary, or a tubal preg-
nancy. Laparoscopy is especially helpful in diagnosing 
pelvic conditions, such as ovarian cysts, tubal pregnan-
cies, salpingitis, and acute appendicitis. Radioisotopic 
hepatobiliary iminodiacetic acid scans (HIDAs) may help 
differentiate acute cholecystitis from acute pancreatitis. 
A CT scan may demonstrate an enlarged pancreas, rup-
tured spleen, or thickened colonic or appendiceal wall 
and streaking of the mesocolon or mesoappendix char-
acteristic of diverticulitis or appendicitis.
Sometimes, even under the best circumstances with 
all available aids and with the greatest of clinical skill, a 
definitive diagnosis cannot be established at the time of 
the initial examination. Nevertheless, despite lack of a 
clear anatomic diagnosis, it may be abundantly clear to 
an experienced and thoughtful physician and surgeon 
that on clinical grounds alone operation is indicated. 
Should that decision be questionable, watchful waiting 
with repeated questioning and examination will often 
elucidate the true nature of the illness and indicate the 
proper course of action.
 Samuel C. Durso 
8
 As primary care physicians and consultants, internists are 
often asked to evaluate patients with disease of the oral 
soft tissues, teeth, and pharynx. Knowledge of the oral 
milieu and its unique structures is necessary to guide 
preventive services and recognize oral manifestations of 
local or systemic disease ( Chap. 3 ). Furthermore, inter­
nists frequently collaborate with dentists in the care of 
patients who have a variety of medical conditions that 
affect oral health or who undergo dental procedures that 
increase their risk of medical complications. 
 Diseases of the teeth aND 
PerioDoNtal structures 
 tooth and Periodontal structure 
 Tooth formation begins during the sixth week of 
embryonic life and continues through the fi rst 17 years 
of age. Tooth development begins in utero and contin­
ues until after the tooth erupts. Normally, all 20 decidu­
ous teeth have erupted by age 3 and have been shed by 
age 13. Permanent teeth, eventually totaling 2, begin to 
erupt by age 6 and have completely erupted by age 14, 
though third molars (wisdom teeth) may erupt later. 
 The erupted tooth consists of the visible crown cov­
ered with enamel and the root submerged below the 
gum line and covered with bonelike cementum.  Dentin , 
a material that is denser than bone and exquisitely sensi­
tive to pain, forms the majority of the tooth substance. 
Dentin surrounds a core of myxomatous  pulp containing 
the vascular and nerve supply. The tooth is held fi rmly 
in the alveolar socket by the  periodontium , supporting 
structures that consist of the gingivae, alveolar bone, 
cementum, and periodontal ligament. The periodontal 
ligament tenaciously binds the tooth’s cementum to the 
alveolar bone. Above this ligament is a collar of attached 
gingiva just below the crown. A few millimeters of 
unattached or free gingiva (1–3 mm) overlap the base 
of the crown, forming a shallow sulcus along the gum­
tooth margin. 
 Dental caries, pulpal and periapical disease, 
and complications 
 Dental caries begin asymptomatically as a destruc­
tive process of the hard surface of the tooth.  Streptococcus 
mutans , principally, along with other bacteria colo­
nize the organic buffering fi lm on the tooth surface to 
produce  plaque . If not removed by brushing or the 
natural cleaning action of saliva and oral soft tissues, 
bacterial acids demineralize the enamel. Fissures and 
pits on the occlusion surfaces are the most frequent 
sites of decay. Surfaces adjacent to tooth restorations 
and exposed roots are also vulnerable, particularly as 
teeth are retained in an aging population. Over time, 
dental caries extend to the underlying dentin, leading 
to cavitation of the enamel and, ultimately, penetra­
tion to the tooth pulp, producing  acute pulpitis . At this 
early stage, when the pulp infection is limited, the tooth 
becomes sensitive to percussion and hot or cold, and 
pain resolves immediately when the irritating stimulus 
is removed. Should the infection spread throughout the 
pulp,  irreversible pulpitis occurs, leading to pulp necro­
sis. At this late stage, pain is severe and has a sharp or 
throbbing visceral quality that may be worse when the 
patient lies down. Once pulp necrosis is complete, pain 
may be constant or intermittent, but cold sensitivity is 
lost. 
 Treatment of caries involves removal of the softened 
and infected hard tissue; sealing the exposed dentin; and 
restoration of the tooth structure with silver amalgam, 
composite resin, gold, or porcelain. Once irrevers­
ible pulpitis occurs, root canal therapy is necessary, and 
the contents of the pulp chamber and root canals are 
removed, followed by thorough cleaning, antisepsis, and 
 ORAL MANIFESTATIONS OF DISEASE 
 chaPter 2 
 
CHAPTER 2
Oral Manifestations of Disease
9
filling with an inert material. Alternatively, the tooth 
may be extracted.
Pulpal infection, if it does not egress through the 
decayed enamel, leads to periapical abscess formation, 
which produces pain on chewing. If the infection 
is mild and chronic, a periapical granuloma or eventu­
ally a periapical cyst forms, either of which produces 
radiolucency at the root apex. When unchecked, a 
periapical abscess can erode into the alveolar bone 
producing osteomyelitis, penetrate and drain through 
the gingivae (parulis or gumboil), or track along deep 
fascial planes, producing a virulent cellulitis (Ludwig’s 
angina) involving the submandibular space and floor of 
the mouth. Elderly patients, those with diabetes mel­
litus, and patients taking glucocorticoids may experi­
ence little or no pain and fever as these complications 
develop.
Periodontal disease
Periodontal disease accounts for more tooth loss than 
caries, particularly in the elderly. Like dental caries, 
chronic infection of the gingiva and anchoring struc­
tures of the tooth begins with formation of bacterial 
plaque. The process begins invisibly above the gum line 
and in the gingival sulcus. Plaque, including mineralized 
plaque (calculus), is preventable by appropriate dental 
hygiene, including periodic professional cleaning. Left 
undisturbed, chronic inflammation ensues and produces 
a painless hyperemia of the free and attached gingivae 
(gingivitis) that typically bleeds with brushing. If ignored, 
severe periodontitis occurs, leading to deepening of the 
physiologic sulcus and destruction of the periodontal 
ligament. Pockets develop around the teeth and become 
filled with pus and debris. As the periodontium is 
destroyed, teeth loosen and exfoliate. Eventually, there 
is resorption of the alveolar bone. A role for the chronic 
inflammation resulting from chronic periodontal disease 
in promoting coronary heart disease and stroke has been 
proposed. Epidemiologic studies demonstrate a mod­
erate but significant association between chronic peri­
odontal inflammation and atherogenesis, though a causal 
role remains unproven.
Acute and aggressive forms of periodontal disease are 
less common than the chronic forms described earlier. 
However, if the host is stressed or exposed to a new 
pathogen, rapidly progressive and destructive disease of 
the periodontal tissue can occur. A virulent example is 
acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis (ANUG) or Vincent’s 
infection. Stress, poor oral hygiene, and tobacco and 
alcohol use are risk factors. The presentation includes 
sudden gingival inflammation, ulceration, bleeding, 
interdental gingival necrosis, and fetid halitosis. Localized 
juvenile periodontitis, seen in adolescents, is particularly des­
tructive and appears to be associated with impaired neu­
trophil chemotaxis. AIDS-related periodontitis resembles 
ANUG in some patients or a more destructive form of 
adult chronic periodontitis in others. It may also pro­
duce a gangrene-like destructive process of the oral soft 
tissues and bone that resembles noma, seen in severely 
malnourished children in developing nations.
Prevention of tooth decay and  
periodontal infection
Despite the reduced prevalence of dental caries and 
periodontal disease in the United States due in large 
part to water fluoridation and improved dental care, 
respectively, both diseases constitute a major public 
health problem worldwide and for certain groups. The 
internist should promote preventive dental care and 
hygiene as part of health maintenance. Special popu­
lations at high risk for dental caries and periodontal 
disease include those with xerostomia, diabetics, alco­
holics, tobacco users, those with Down’s syndrome, and 
those with gingival hyperplasia. Furthermore, patients 
lacking dental-care access (low socioeconomic status) 
and those with reduced ability to provide self-care 
(e.g., nursing home residents and those with dementia 
or upper-extremity disability) suffer at a disproportion­
ate rate. It is important to provide counseling regard­
ing regular dental hygiene and professional cleaning, use 
of fluoride-containing toothpaste, professional fluoride 
treatments, and use of electric toothbrushes for patients 
with limited dexterity and to give instruction to care­
givers for those unable to perform self-care. Internists 
caring for international students studying in the United 
States should be aware of the high prevalence of dental 
decay in this population. Cost, fear of dental care, and 
language and cultural differences may create barriers that 
prevent some from seeking preventive dental services.
Developmental and systemic disease affecting 
the teeth and periodontium
Malocclusion is the most common developmental prob­
lem, which, in addition to a problem with cosmesis, 
can interfere with mastication unless corrected through 
orthodontic techniques. Impacted third molars are com­
mon and occasionally become infected. Acquired prog­
nathism due to acromegaly may also lead to malocclu­
sion, as may deformity of the maxilla and mandible due 
to Paget’s disease of the bone. Delayed tooth eruption, 
receding chin, and a protruding tongue are occasional 
features of cretinism and hypopituitarism. Congenital syph­
ilis produces tapering, notched (Hutchinson’s) incisors 
and finely nodular (mulberry) molar crowns.
Enamel hypoplasia results in crown defects rang­
ing from pits to deep fissures of primary or perma­
nent teeth. Intrauterine infection (syphilis, rubella), 
vitamin deficiency (A, C, or D), disorders of calcium 
metabolism (malabsorption, vitamin D–resistant rickets, 
SECTION I
Cardinal Manifestations of Gastrointestinal Disease
10
hypoparathyroidism), prematurity, high fever, or rare 
inherited defects (amelogenesis imperfecta) are all causes. 
Tetracycline, given in sufficiently high doses during 
the first 8 years, may produce enamel hypoplasia and 
discoloration. Exposure to endogenous pigments can 
discolor developing teeth: erythroblastosis fetalis (green or 
bluish-black), congenital liver disease (green or yellow-
brown), and porphyria (red or brown that fluoresces 
with ultraviolet light). Mottled enamel occurs if excessive 
fluoride is ingested during development. Worn enamel 
is seen with age, bruxism, or excessive acid exposure 
(e.g., chronic gastric reflux or bulimia).
Premature tooth loss resulting from periodontitis is 
seen with cyclic neutropenia, Papillon-Lefèvre syn­
drome, Chédiak-Higashi syndrome, and leukemia. 
Rapid focal tooth loosening is most often due to infec­
tion, but rarer causes include Langerhans cell histio­
cytosis, Ewing’s sarcoma, osteosarcoma, or Burkitt’s 
lymphoma. Early loss of primary teeth is a feature of 
hypophosphatasia, a rare inborn error of metabolism.
Pregnancy may produce severe gingivitis and localized 
pyogenic granulomas. Severe periodontal disease occurs 
with Down’s syndrome and diabetes mellitus. Gingival 
hyperplasia may be caused by phenytoin, calcium channel 
blockers (e.g., nifedipine), and cyclosporine. Idiopathic 
familial gingival fibromatosis and several syndrome-related 
disorders appear similar. Removal of the medication 
often reverses the drug-induced form, though surgery 
may be needed to control both. Linear gingival erythema 
is variably seen in patients with advanced HIV infec­
tion and probably represents immune deficiency and 
decreased neutrophil activity. Diffuse or focal gingival 
swelling may be a feature of early or late acute myelo­
monocytic leukemia (AMML) as well as of other lym­
phoproliferative disorders. A rare, but pathognomonic, 
sign of Wegener’s granulomatosis is a red-purplish, 
granular gingivitis (strawberry gums).
Diseases of the Oral Mucosa
Infection
Most oral mucosal diseases involve microorganisms 
(Table 2-1).
Pigmented lesions
See Table 2-2.
Dermatologic diseases
See Tables 2-1, 2-2, and 2-3.
Diseases of the tongue
See Table 2-4.
HIV disease and AIDS
See Tables 2-1, 2-2, 2-3, and 2-5.
Ulcers
Ulceration is the most common oral mucosal lesion. 
Although there are many causes, the host and pattern 
of lesions, including the presence of systemic features, 
narrow the differential diagnosis (Table 2-1). Most 
acute ulcers are painful and self-limited. Recurrent 
aphthous ulcers and herpes simplex infection consti­
tute the majority. Persistent and deep aphthous ulcers 
can be idiopathic or seen with HIV/AIDS. Aphthous 
lesions are often the presenting symptom in Behçet’s 
syndrome. Similar-appearing, though less painful, lesions 
may occur with reactive arthritis (formerly known as 
Reiter’s syndrome), and aphthous ulcers are occasion­
ally present during phases of discoid or systemic lupus 
erythematosus. Aphthous-like ulcers are seen in Crohn’s 
disease (Chap. 17), but unlike the common aphthous 
variety, they may exhibit granulomatous inflammation 
histologically. Recurrent aphthae in some patients with 
celiac disease have been reported to remit with elimina­
tion of gluten.
Of major concern are chronic, relatively painless 
ulcers and mixed red/white patches (erythroplakia and 
leukoplakia) of more than 2 weeks’ duration. Squa­
mous cell carcinoma and premalignant dysplasia should 
be considered early and a diagnostic biopsy obtained. 
The importance is underscored because early-stage 
malignancy is vastly more treatable than late-stage 
disease. High-risk sites include the lower lip, floor of 
the mouth, ventral and lateral tongue, and soft pal­
ate–tonsillar pillar complex. Significant risk factors for 
oral cancer in Western countries include sun expo­
sure (lower lip) and tobacco and alcohol use. In India 
and some other Asian countries, smokeless tobacco 
mixed with betel nut, slaked lime, and spices is a com­
mon cause of oral cancer. Less common etiologies 
include syphilis and Plummer-Vinson syndrome (iron 
deficiency).
Rarer causes of chronic oral ulcer such as tubercu­
losis, fungal infection, granulomatosis with polyangiitis 
(Wegener’s), and midline granuloma may look identical 
to carcinoma. Making the correct diagnosis depends on 
recognizing other clinical features and biopsy of the 
lesion. The syphilitic chancre is typically painless and 
therefore easily missed. Regional lymphadenopathy is 
invariably present. Confirmation is achieved using appro­
priate bacterial and serologic tests.
Disorders of mucosal fragility often produce pain­
ful oral ulcers that fail to heal within 2 weeks. Mucous 
membrane pemphigoid and pemphigus vulgaris are the major 
acquired disorders. While clinical features are often dis­
tinctive, immunohistochemical examination should be 
 
CHAPTER 2
Oral Manifestations of Disease
11
Table 2-1 
Vesicular, Bullous, or Ulcerative Lesions of the Oral Mucosa
Condition
Usual Location
Clinical Features
Course
Viral Diseases
Primary acute herpetic gingi-
vostomatitis [herpes simplex 
virus (HSV) type 1, rarely 
type 2]
Lip and oral mucosa 
(buccal, gingival,  
lingual mucosa)
Labial vesicles that rupture and 
crust, and intraoral vesicles that 
quickly ulcerate; extremely painful; 
acute gingivitis, fever, malaise, foul 
odor, and cervical lymphadenopa-
thy; occurs primarily in infants, 
children, and young adults
Heals spontaneously in  
10–14 days. Unless second-
arily infected, lesions lasting 
>3 weeks are not due to  
primary HSV infection
Recurrent herpes labialis
Mucocutaneous  
junction of lip,  
perioral skin
Eruption of groups of vesicles that 
may coalesce, then rupture and 
crust; painful to pressure or spicy 
foods
Lasts about 1 week, but  
condition may be prolonged 
if secondarily infected. If 
severe, topical or oral antiviral 
may reduce healing time
Recurrent intraoral herpes 
simplex
Palate and gingiva
Small vesicles on keratinized  
epithelium that rupture and 
coalesce; painful
Heals spontaneously in about 
1 week. If severe, topical 
or oral antiviral may reduce 
healing time.
Chickenpox (varicella-zoster 
virus)
Gingiva and oral 
mucosa
Skin lesions may be accompanied 
by small vesicles on oral mucosa 
that rupture to form shallow ulcers; 
may coalesce to form large bullous 
lesions that ulcerate; mucosa may 
have generalized erythema
Lesions heal spontaneously 
within 2 weeks
Herpes zoster (reactivation of 
varicella-zoster virus)
Cheek, tongue, gingiva, 
or palate
Unilateral vesicular eruptions and 
ulceration in linear pattern follow-
ing sensory distribution of trigemi-
nal nerve or one of its branches
Gradual healing without 
scarring unless secondarily 
infected; postherpetic  
neuralgia is common. Oral 
acyclovir, famciclovir, or vala-
cyclovir reduce healing time 
and postherpetic neuralgia
Infectious mononucleosis 
(Epstein-Barr virus)
Oral mucosa
Fatigue, sore throat, malaise, fever, 
and cervical lymphadenopathy; 
numerous small ulcers usually 
appear several days before lymph-
adenopathy; gingival bleeding and 
multiple petechiae at junction of 
hard and soft palates
Oral lesions disappear during 
convalescence; no treat-
ment though glucocorticoids 
indicated if tonsillar swelling 
compromises airway
Herpangina (coxsackievirus A; 
also possibly coxsackie B 
and echovirus)
Oral mucosa, pharynx, 
tongue
Sudden onset of fever, sore throat, 
and oropharyngeal vesicles,  
usually in children under 4 years, 
during summer months; diffuse  
pharyngeal congestion and 
vesicles (1–2 mm), grayish-white 
surrounded by red areola; vesicles 
enlarge and ulcerate
Incubation period 2–9 days; 
fever for 1–4 days; recovery 
uneventful
Hand, foot, and mouth  
disease (coxsackievirus  
A16 most common)
Oral mucosa, pharynx, 
palms, and soles
Fever, malaise, headache with  
oropharyngeal vesicles that 
become painful, shallow ulcers; 
highly infectious; usually affects 
children under age 10
Incubation period 2–18 days; 
lesions heal spontaneously 
in 2–4 weeks
Primary HIV infection
Gingiva, palate, and 
pharynx
Acute gingivitis and oropharyngeal 
ulceration, associated with febrile 
illness resembling mononucleosis 
and including lymphadenopathy
Followed by HIV seroconver-
sion, asymptomatic HIV 
infection, and usually ulti-
mately by HIV disease
(continued )
SECTION I
Cardinal Manifestations of Gastrointestinal Disease
12
Table 2-1 
Vesicular, Bullous, or Ulcerative Lesions of the Oral Mucosa
Condition
Usual Location
Clinical Features
Course
Bacterial or Fungal Diseases
Acute necrotizing ulcerative 
gingivitis (“trench mouth,” 
Vincent’s infection)
Gingiva
Painful, bleeding gingiva character-
ized by necrosis and ulceration of 
gingival papillae and margins plus 
lymphadenopathy and foul odor
Debridement and diluted (1:3) 
peroxide lavage provide 
relief within 24 h; antibiotics 
in acutely ill patients; relapse 
may occur
Prenatal (congenital) syphilis
Palate, jaws, tongue, 
and teeth
Gummatous involvement of palate, 
jaws, and facial bones; Hutchinson’s 
incisors, mulberry molars, glossitis, 
mucous patches, and fissures on 
corner of mouth
Tooth deformities in perma-
nent dentition irreversible
Primary syphilis (chancre)
Lesion appears where 
organism enters body; 
may occur on lips, 
tongue, or tonsillar 
area
Small papule developing rapidly 
into a large, painless ulcer with 
indurated border; unilateral lymph-
adenopathy; chancre and lymph 
nodes containing spirochetes; 
serologic tests positive by third to 
fourth weeks
Healing of chancre in  
1–2 months, followed by 
secondary syphilis in  
6–8 weeks
Secondary syphilis
Oral mucosa frequently 
involved with mucous 
patches, primarily on 
palate, also at com-
missures of mouth
Maculopapular lesions of oral 
mucosa, 5–10 mm in diameter with 
central ulceration covered by  
grayish membrane; eruptions 
occurring on various mucosal  
surfaces and skin accompanied by 
fever, malaise, and sore throat
Lesions may persist from sev-
eral weeks to a year
Tertiary syphilis
Palate and tongue
Gummatous infiltration of palate or 
tongue followed by ulceration and 
fibrosis; atrophy of tongue papil-
lae produces characteristic bald 
tongue and glossitis
Gumma may destroy palate, 
causing complete  
perforation
Gonorrhea
Lesions may occur in 
mouth at site of inocu-
lation or secondarily 
by hematogenous 
spread from a primary 
focus elsewhere
Most pharyngeal infection is asymp-
tomatic; may produce burning or 
itching sensation; oropharynx and 
tonsils may be ulcerated and ery-
thematous; saliva viscous and fetid
More difficult to eradicate 
than urogenital infection, 
though pharyngitis usually 
resolves with appropriate 
antimicrobial treatment
Tuberculosis
Tongue, tonsillar area, 
soft palate
A painless, solitary, 1–5 cm, irregu-
lar ulcer covered with a persistent 
exudate; ulcer has a firm under-
mined border
Autoinoculation from pulmo-
nary infection usual; lesions 
resolve with appropriate 
antimicrobial therapy
Cervicofacial actinomycosis
Swellings in region of 
face, neck, and floor 
of mouth
Infection may be associated with 
an extraction, jaw fracture, or 
eruption of molar tooth; in acute 
form resembles an acute pyogenic 
abscess, but contains yellow  
“sulfur granules” (gram-positive 
mycelia and their hyphae)
Typically, swelling is hard and 
grows painlessly; multiple 
abscesses with draining 
tracts develop; penicillin 
first choice; surgery usually 
necessary
Histoplasmosis
Any area of the mouth, 
particularly tongue, 
gingiva, or palate
Nodular, verrucous, or granuloma-
tous lesions; ulcers are indurated 
and painful; usual source hema-
togenous or pulmonary, but may 
be primary
Systemic antifungal therapy 
necessary to treat
Candidiasis (Table 2-3)
(Continued )
(continued )
 
CHAPTER 2
Oral Manifestations of Disease
13
Table 2-1 
Vesicular, Bullous, or Ulcerative Lesions of the Oral Mucosa
Condition
Usual Location
Clinical Features
Course
Dermatologic Diseases
Mucous membrane  
pemphigoid
Typically produces 
marked gingival ery-
thema and ulceration; 
other areas of oral 
cavity, esophagus, 
and vagina may be 
affected
Painful, grayish-white collapsed 
vesicles or bullae of full-thickness 
epithelium with peripheral ery-
thematous zone; gingival lesions 
desquamate, leaving ulcerated 
area
Protracted course with remis-
sions and exacerbations; 
involvement of different 
sites occurs slowly; gluco-
corticoids may temporarily 
reduce symptoms but do not 
control the disease
Erythema multiforme (EM) 
minor and major (Stevens 
Johnson syndrome)
Primarily the oral 
mucosa and the skin 
of hands and feet
Intraoral ruptured bullae surrounded 
by an inflammatory area; lips may 
show hemorrhagic crusts; the 
“iris,” or “target,” lesion on the skin 
is pathognomonic; patient may 
have severe signs of toxicity
Onset very rapid; usually 
idiopathic, but may be asso-
ciated with trigger such as 
drug reaction; condition 
may last 3–6 weeks; mortal-
ity with EM major 5–15% if 
untreated
Pemphigus vulgaris
Oral mucosa and skin; 
sites of mechanical 
trauma (soft/hard  
palate, frenulum, lips, 
buccal mucosa)
Usually (>70%) presents with oral 
lesions; fragile, ruptured bullae 
and ulcerated oral areas; mostly in 
older adults
With repeated occurrence 
of bullae, toxicity may lead 
to cachexia, infection, and 
death within 2 years; often 
controllable with oral  
glucocorticoids
Lichen planus
Oral mucosa and skin
White striae in mouth; purplish 
nodules on skin at sites of friction; 
occasionally causes oral mucosal 
ulcers and erosive gingivitis
White striae alone usually 
asymptomatic; erosive 
lesions often difficult to treat, 
but may respond to  
glucocorticoids
Other Conditions
Recurrent aphthous ulcers
Usually on nonkera-
tinized oral mucosa 
(buccal and labial 
mucosa, floor of 
mouth, soft palate, 
lateral and ventral 
tongue)
Single or clusters of painful ulcers 
with surrounding erythematous 
border; lesions may be 1–2 mm 
in diameter in crops (herpetiform), 
1–5 mm (minor), or 5–15 mm 
(major)
Lesions heal in 1–2 weeks but 
may recur monthly or several 
times a year; protective bar-
rier with orabase and topical 
steroids give symptomatic 
relief; systemic glucocor-
ticoids may be needed in 
severe cases
Behçet’s syndrome
Oral mucosa, eyes, 
genitalia, gut, and 
CNS
Multiple aphthous ulcers in mouth; 
inflammatory ocular changes, 
ulcerative lesions on genitalia; 
inflammatory bowel disease and 
CNS disease
Oral lesions often first mani-
festation; persist several 
weeks and heal without 
scarring
Traumatic ulcers
Anywhere on oral 
mucosa; dentures 
frequently responsible 
for ulcers in vestibule
Localized, discrete ulcerated lesions 
with red border; produced by acci-
dental biting of mucosa, penetra-
tion by a foreign object, or chronic 
irritation by a denture
Lesions usually heal in 
7–10 days when irritant is 
removed, unless secondarily 
infected
Squamous cell carcinoma
Any area in the mouth, 
most commonly on 
lower lip, tongue, and 
floor of mouth
Ulcer with elevated, indurated  
border; failure to heal, pain not 
prominent; lesions tend to arise in 
areas of erythro/leukoplakia or in 
smooth atrophic tongue
Invades and destroys under-
lying tissues; frequently 
metastasizes to regional 
lymph nodes
(Continued )
(continued )
SECTION I
Cardinal Manifestations of Gastrointestinal Disease
14
Table 2-1 
Vesicular, Bullous, or Ulcerative Lesions of the Oral Mucosa
Condition
Usual Location
Clinical Features
Course
Acute myeloid leukemia  
(usually monocytic)
Gingiva
Gingival swelling and superficial 
ulceration followed by hyperplasia 
of gingiva with extensive necrosis 
and hemorrhage; deep ulcers may 
occur elsewhere on the mucosa 
complicated by secondary  
infection
Usually responds to systemic 
treatment of leukemia;  
occasionally requires local 
radiation therapy
Lymphoma
Gingiva, tongue, palate 
and tonsillar area
Elevated, ulcerated area that may 
proliferate rapidly, giving the 
appearance of traumatic  
inflammation
Fatal if untreated; may  
indicate underlying HIV 
infection
Chemical or thermal burns
Any area in mouth
White slough due to contact with 
corrosive agents (e.g., aspirin, hot 
cheese) applied locally; removal of 
slough leaves raw, painful surface
Lesion heals in several weeks 
if not secondarily infected
Abbreviation: CNS, central nervous system.
Table 2-2 
Pigmented Lesions of the Oral Mucosa
Condition
Usual Location
Clinical Features
Course
Oral melanotic macule
Any area of the mouth
Discrete or diffuse localized,  
brown to black macule
Remains indefinitely; no 
growth
Diffuse melanin  
pigmentation
Any area of the mouth
Diffuse pale to dark-brown  
pigmentation; may be physiologic 
(“racial”) or due to smoking
Remains indefinitely
Nevi
Any area of the mouth
Discrete, localized, brown to black 
pigmentation
Remains indefinitely
Malignant melanoma
Any area of the mouth
Can be flat and diffuse, painless, 
brown to black, or can be raised and 
nodular
Expands and invades early; 
metastasis leads to death
Addison’s disease
Any area of the mouth, 
but mostly buccal 
mucosa
Blotches or spots of bluish-black to 
dark-brown pigmentation occurring 
early in the disease, accompanied 
by diffuse pigmentation of skin; 
other symptoms of adrenal 
 insufficiency
Condition controlled by adre-
nal steroid replacement
Peutz-Jeghers syndrome
Any area of the mouth
Dark-brown spots on lips, buccal 
mucosa, with characteristic distribu-
tion of pigment around lips, nose, 
eyes, and on hands; concomitant 
intestinal polyposis
Oral pigmented lesions 
remain indefinitely; gastroin-
testinal polyps may become 
malignant
Drug ingestion (neurolep-
tics, oral contraceptives, 
minocycline, zidovudine, 
quinine derivatives)
Any area of the mouth
Brown, black, or gray areas of  
pigmentation
Gradually disappears follow-
ing cessation of drug
Amalgam tattoo
Gingiva and alveolar 
mucosa
Small blue-black pigmented areas 
associated with embedded amalgam 
particles in soft tissues; these may 
show up on radiographs as radi-
opaque particles in some cases
Remains indefinitely
(Continued )
(continued )
 
CHAPTER 2
Oral Manifestations of Disease
15
Table 2-2 
Pigmented Lesions of the Oral Mucosa
Condition
Usual Location
Clinical Features
Course
Heavy metal pigmentation 
(bismuth, mercury, lead)
Gingival margin
Thin blue-black pigmented line along 
gingival margin; rarely seen except 
for children exposed to lead-based 
paint
Indicative of systemic absorp-
tion; no significance for oral 
health
Black hairy tongue
Dorsum of tongue
Elongation of filiform papillae of 
tongue, which become stained by 
coffee, tea, tobacco, or pigmented 
bacteria
Improves within 1–2 weeks 
with gentle brushing of 
tongue or discontinuation of 
antibiotic if due to bacterial 
overgrowth
Fordyce “spots”
Buccal and labial 
mucosa
Numerous small yellowish spots just 
beneath mucosal surface; no symp-
toms; due to hyperplasia of seba-
ceous glands
Benign; remains without 
apparent change
Kaposi’s sarcoma
Palate most common, 
but may occur in any 
other site
Red or blue plaques of variable size 
and shape; often enlarge, become 
nodular and may ulcerate
Usually indicative of HIV 
infection or non-Hodgkin’s 
lymphoma; rarely fatal, but 
may require treatment for 
comfort or cosmesis
Mucous retention cysts
Buccal and labial 
mucosa
Bluish-clear fluid-filled cyst due to 
extravasated mucous from injured 
minor salivary gland
Benign; painless unless  
traumatized; may be 
removed surgically
Table 2-3 
White Lesions of Oral Mucosa
Condition
Usual Location
Clinical Features
Course
Lichen planus
Buccal mucosa, tongue,  
gingiva, and lips; skin
Striae, white plaques, red areas, 
ulcers in mouth; purplish papules on 
skin; may be asymptomatic, sore, 
or painful; lichenoid drug reactions 
may look similar
Protracted; responds to  
topical glucocorticoids
White sponge nevus
Oral mucosa, vagina, anal 
mucosa
Painless white thickening of epithe-
lium; adolescent/early adult onset; 
familial
Benign and permanent
Smoker’s leukoplakia  
and smokeless 
tobacco lesions
Any area of oral mucosa, 
sometimes related to  
location of habit
White patch that may become firm, 
rough, or red-fissured and ulcer-
ated; may become sore and painful 
but usually painless
May or may not resolve with 
cessation of habit; 2% 
develop squamous cell 
carcinoma; early biopsy 
essential
Erythroplakia with 
or without white 
patches
Floor of mouth common in 
men; tongue and buccal 
mucosa in women
Velvety, reddish plaque; occasionally 
mixed with white patches or smooth 
red areas
High risk of squamous  
cell cancer; early biopsy 
essential
Candidiasis
Any area in mouth
Pseudomembranous type (“thrush”): 
creamy white curdlike patches 
that reveal a raw, bleeding surface 
when scraped; found in sick infants, 
debilitated elderly patients  
receiving high doses of glucocorti-
coids or broad-spectrum antibiotics, 
or in patients with AIDS
Responds favorably to  
antifungal therapy and  
correction of predisposing 
causes where possible
(Continued )
(continued )
SECTION I
Cardinal Manifestations of Gastrointestinal Disease
16
Table 2-3 
White Lesions of Oral Mucosa
Condition
Usual Location
Clinical Features
Course
Erythematous type: flat, red, some-
times sore areas in same groups of 
patients
Course same as for pseudo-
membranous type
Candidal leukoplakia: nonremovable 
white thickening of epithelium due 
to Candida
Responds to prolonged anti-
fungal therapy
Angular cheilitis: sore fissures at 
corner of mouth
Responds to topical antifun-
gal therapy
Hairy leukoplakia
Usually lateral tongue, rarely 
elsewhere on oral mucosa
White areas ranging from small and 
flat to extensive accentuation of 
vertical folds; found in HIV carriers 
in all risk groups for AIDS
Due to EBV; responds to 
high-dose acyclovir but 
recurs; rarely causes dis-
comfort unless secondarily 
infected with Candida
Warts (papillomavirus)
Anywhere on skin and oral 
mucosa
Single or multiple papillary lesions, 
with thick, white keratinized  
surfaces containing many pointed 
projections; cauliflower lesions cov-
ered with normal-colored mucosa or 
multiple pink or pale bumps (focal 
epithelial hyperplasia)
Lesions grow rapidly and 
spread; consider squamous 
cell carcinoma and rule out 
with biopsy; excision or laser 
therapy; may regress in HIV-
infected patients on anti­
retroviral therapy
Abbreviation: EBV, Epstein-Barr virus.
Table 2-4 
Alterations of the Tongue
Type of Change
Clinical Features
Size or Morphology Changes
Macroglossia
Enlarged tongue that may be part of a syndrome found in developmental conditions such as 
Down’s syndrome, Simpson-Golabi-Behmel syndrome, or Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome  
may be due to tumor (hemangioma or lymphangioma), metabolic disease (such as primary 
amyloidosis), or endocrine disturbance (such as acromegaly or cretinism)
Fissured (“scrotal”) tongue
Dorsal surface and sides of tongue covered by painless shallow or deep fissures that may col-
lect debris and become irritated
Median rhomboid glossitis
Congenital abnormality of tongue with ovoid, denuded area in median posterior portion of the 
tongue; may be associated with candidiasis and may respond to antifungals
Color Changes
“Geographic” tongue 
(benign migratory glossitis)
Asymptomatic inflammatory condition of the tongue, with rapid loss and regrowth of filiform 
papillae, leading to appearance of denuded red patches “wandering” across the surface of the 
tongue
Hairy tongue
Elongation of filiform papillae of the medial dorsal surface area due to failure of keratin layer 
of the papillae to desquamate normally; brownish-black coloration may be due to staining by 
tobacco, food, or chromogenic organisms
“Strawberry” and  
“raspberry” tongue
Appearance of tongue during scarlet fever due to the hypertrophy of fungiform papillae plus 
changes in the filiform papillae
“Bald” tongue
Atrophy may be associated with xerostomia, pernicious anemia, iron-deficiency anemia,  
pellagra, or syphilis; may be accompanied by painful burning sensation; may be an expression 
of erythematous candidiasis and respond to antifungals
(Continued )
 
CHAPTER 2
Oral Manifestations of Disease
17
performed for diagnosis and to distinguish these entities 
from lichen planus and drug reactions.
Hematologic and nutritional disease
Internists are more likely to encounter patients with 
acquired, rather than congenital, bleeding disorders. 
Bleeding after minor trauma should stop after 15 min 
and within an hour of tooth extraction if local pres­
sure is applied. More prolonged bleeding, if not due 
to continued injury or rupture of a large vessel, should 
lead to investigation for a clotting abnormality. In addi­
tion to bleeding, petechiae and ecchymoses are prone 
to occur at the line of vibration between the soft and 
hard palates in patients with platelet dysfunction or 
thrombocytopenia.
All forms of leukemia, but particularly acute myelo­
monocyticleukemia, can produce gingival bleeding, 
ulcers, and gingival enlargement. Oral ulcers are a fea­
ture of agranulocytosis, and ulcers and mucositis are 
often severe complications of chemotherapy and radia­
tion therapy for hematologic and other malignancies. 
Plummer-Vinson syndrome (iron deficiency, angular 
stomatitis, glossitis, and dysphagia) raises the risk of 
oral squamous cell cancer and esophageal cancer at the 
postcricoidal tissue web. Atrophic papillae and a red, 
Table 2-5
Oral Lesions Associated With HIV Infection
Lesion Morphology
Etiologies
Papules, nodules, plaques
Candidiasis (hyperplastic and pseudomembranous)a
Condyloma acuminatum (human papillomavirus infection)
Squamous cell carcinoma (preinvasive and invasive)
Non-Hodgkin’s lymphomaa
Hairy leukoplakiaa
Ulcers
Recurrent aphthous ulcersa
Angular cheilitis
Squamous cell carcinoma
Acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitisa
Necrotizing ulcerative periodontitisa
Necrotizing ulcerative stomatitis
Non-Hodgkin’s lymphomaa
Viral infection (herpes simplex, herpes zoster, cytomegalovirus)
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare
Fungal infection (histoplasmosis, cryptococcosis, candidiasis, geotrichosis, aspergillosis)
Bacterial infection (Escherichia coli, Enterobacter cloacae, Klebsiella pneumoniae, 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa)
Drug reactions (single or multiple ulcers)
Pigmented lesions
Kaposi’s sarcomaa
Bacillary angiomatosis (skin and visceral lesions more common than oral)
Zidovudine pigmentation (skin, nails, and occasionally oral mucosa)
Addison’s disease
Miscellaneous
Linear gingival erythemaa
aStrongly associated with HIV infection.
burning tongue may occur with pernicious anemia. 
B-group vitamin deficiencies produce many of these 
same symptoms as well as oral ulceration and cheilosis. 
Swollen, bleeding gums, ulcers, and loosening of the 
teeth are a consequence of scurvy.
Nondental Causes of Oral Pain
Most, but not all, oral pain emanates from inflamed or 
injured tooth pulp or periodontal tissues. Nonodon­
togenic causes may be overlooked. In most instances, 
toothache is predictable and proportional to the stimulus 
applied, and an identifiable condition (e.g., caries, 
abscess) is found. Local anesthesia eliminates pain origi­
nating from dental or periodontal structures, but not 
referred pains. The most common nondental origin 
is myofascial pain referred from muscles of mastica­
tion, which become tender and ache with increased 
use. Many sufferers exhibit bruxism (the grinding of 
teeth, often during sleep) that is secondary to stress and 
anxiety. Temporomandibular disorder is closely related. It 
affects both sexes with a higher prevalence in women. 
Features include pain, limited mandibular movement, 
and temporomandibular joint sounds. The etiologies are 
SECTION I
Cardinal Manifestations of Gastrointestinal Disease
18
complex, and malocclusion does not play the primary 
role once attributed to it. Osteoarthritis is a common 
cause of masticatory pain. Anti-inflammatory medica­
tion, jaw rest, soft foods, and heat provide relief. The 
temporomandibular joint is involved in 50% of patients 
with rheumatoid arthritis and is usually a late feature of 
severe disease. Bilateral preauricular pain, particularly in 
the morning, limits range of motion.
Migrainous neuralgia may be localized to the mouth. 
Episodes of pain and remission without identifiable 
cause and absence of relief with local anesthesia are 
important clues. Trigeminal neuralgia (tic douloureux) may 
involve the entire branch or part of the mandibular or 
maxillary branches of the fifth cranial nerve and pro­
duce pain in one or a few teeth. Pain may occur spon­
taneously or may be triggered by touching the lip or 
gingiva, brushing the teeth, or chewing. Glossopharyngeal 
neuralgia produces similar acute neuropathic symptoms 
in the distribution of the ninth cranial nerve. Swallow­
ing, sneezing, coughing, or pressure on the tragus of the 
ear triggers pain that is felt in the base of the tongue, 
pharynx, and soft palate and may be referred to the 
temporomandibular joint. Neuritis involving the max­
illary and mandibular divisions of the trigeminal nerve 
(e.g., maxillary sinusitis, neuroma, and leukemic infil­
trate) is distinguished from ordinary toothache by the 
neuropathic quality of the pain. Occasionally, phantom 
pain follows tooth extraction. Often the earliest symp­
tom of Bell’s palsy in the day or so before facial weak­
ness develops is pain and hyperalgesia behind the ear 
and side of the face. Likewise, similar symptoms may 
precede visible lesions of herpes zoster infecting the 
seventh nerve (Ramsey-Hunt syndrome) or trigemi­
nal nerve. Postherpetic neuralgia may follow either con­
dition. Coronary ischemia may produce pain exclusively 
in the face and jaw and, like typical angina pectoris, is 
usually reproducible with increased myocardial demand. 
Aching in several upper molar or premolar teeth that 
is unrelieved by anesthetizing the teeth may point to 
maxillary sinusitis.
Giant cell arteritis is notorious for producing head­
ache, but it may also produce facial pain or sore throat 
without headache. Jaw and tongue claudication with 
chewing or talking is relatively common. Tongue 
infarction is rare. Patients with subacute thyroiditis 
often experience pain referred to the face or jaw before 
the tender thyroid gland and transient hyperthyroidism 
are appreciated.
Burning mouth syndrome (glossodynia) is present in 
the absence of an identifiable cause (e.g., vitamin B12 
deficiency, iron deficiency, diabetes mellitus, low-grade 
Candida infection, food sensitivity, or subtle xerostomia) 
and predominantly affects postmenopausal women. The 
etiology may be neuropathic. Clonazepam, alpha-lipoic 
acid, and cognitive behavioral therapy have benefited 
some. Some cases associated with ACE inhibitors have 
remitted when the drug was discontinued.
Diseases of the Salivary Glands
Saliva is essential to oral health. Its absence leads to 
tooth decay and loss. Its major components, water 
and mucin, serve as a cleansing solvent and lubricat­
ing fluid. In addition, it contains antimicrobial factors 
(e.g., lysozyme, lactoperoxidase, secretory IgA), epider­
mal growth factor, minerals, and buffering systems. The 
major salivary glands secrete intermittently in response 
to autonomic stimulation, which is high during a meal 
but low otherwise. Hundreds of minor glands in the lips 
and cheeks secrete mucus continuously. Consequently, 
oral function becomes impaired when salivary function 
is reduced. Dry mouth (xerostomia) is perceived when 
salivary flow is reduced by 50%. The most common eti­
ology is medication, especially drugs with anticholiner­
gic properties, but also alpha and beta blockers, calcium 
channel blockers, and diuretics. Other causes include 
Sjögren’s syndrome, chronic parotitis, salivary duct obs­
truction, diabetes mellitus, HIV/AIDS, and radiation 
therapy that includes the salivary glands in the field 
(Hodgkin’s disease and head and neck cancer). Man­
agement involves eliminating or limiting drying medi­
cations, preventive dental care, and supplementing oral 
liquid. Sugarless mints or chewing gum may stimulate 
salivary secretion if dysfunction is mild. When sufficient 
exocrine tissue remains, pilocarpine or cevimeline has 
been shown to increase secretions. Commercial saliva 
substitutes or gels relieve dryness but must be supple­
mented with fluoride applications to prevent caries.
Sialolithiasis presents most often as painful swelling 
but in some instances as just swelling or pain. Con­
servative therapy consists of local heat, massage, and 
hydration. Promotion of salivary secretion with mints 
or lemon drops may flush out small stones. Antibi­
otic treatment is necessary when bacterial infection in 
suspected. In adults, acute bacterial parotitis is typically 
unilateral and most commonly affects postoperative, 
dehydrated, and debilitated patients. Staphylococcus aureus 
including methicillin-resistant forms and anaerobic bac­
teria are the most common pathogens. Chronic bacte­
rial sialadenitis results from lowered salivary secretion 
and recurrent bacterial infection. When suspected bac­
terial infection is not responsive to therapy, the differ­
ential diagnosis should be expanded to include benign 
and malignant neoplasms, lymphoproliferative disorders, 
Sjögren’s syndrome, sarcoidosis, tuberculosis, lymphad­
enitis, actinomycosis, and granulomatosis with polyan­
giitis (Wegener’s). Bilateral nontender parotid enlarge­
ment occurs with diabetes mellitus, cirrhosis, bulimia, 
HIV/AIDS, and drugs (e.g., iodide, propylthiouracil).
 
CHAPTER 2
Oral Manifestations of Disease
19
Pleomorphic adenoma comprises two-thirds of all sali­
vary neoplasms. The parotid is the principal salivary 
gland affected, and the tumor presents as a firm, slow-
growing mass. Though benign, recurrence is com­
mon if resection is incomplete. Malignant tumors such 
as mucoepidermoid carcinoma, adenoid cystic carci­
noma, and adenocarcinoma tend to grow relatively fast, 
depending upon grade. They may ulcerate and invade 
nerves, producing numbness and facial paralysis. Surgi­
cal resection is the primary treatment. Radiation ther­
apy (particularly neutron-beam therapy) is used when 
surgery is not feasible, and it is used post-resection for 
certain histologic types with a high risk of recurrence. 
Malignant salivary gland tumors have a 5-year survival 
rate of about 68%.
Dental Care of Medically 
Complex Patients
Routine dental care (e.g., extraction, scaling and clean­
ing, tooth restoration, and root canal) is remarkably safe. 
The most common concerns regarding care of den­
tal patients with medical disease are fear of excessive 
bleeding for patients on anticoagulants, infection of the 
heart valves and prosthetic devices from hematogenous 
seeding of oral flora, and cardiovascular complications 
resulting from vasopressors used with local anesthetics 
during dental treatment. Experience confirms that the 
risks of any of these complications are very low.
Patients undergoing tooth extraction or alveolar and 
gingival surgery rarely experience uncontrolled bleeding 
when warfarin anticoagulation is maintained within the 
therapeutic range currently recommended for preven­
tion of venous thrombosis, atrial fibrillation, or mechan­
ical heart valve. Embolic complications and death, 
however, have been reported during subtherapeutic 
anticoagulation. Therapeutic anticoagulation should 
be confirmed before and continued through the pro­
cedure. Likewise, low-dose aspirin (e.g., 81–325 mg) 
can be safely continued. For patients on aspirin and 
another antiplatelet medication (e.g., clopidogrel), the 
decision to continue the second antiplatelet medication 
should be based on individual consideration of the risks 
of thrombosis and bleeding.
Patients at risk for bacterial endocarditis should main­
tain optimal oral hygiene, including flossing, and have 
regular professional cleaning. Currently, guidelines rec­
ommend that prophylactic antibiotics be restricted to 
those patients at high risk of bacterial endocarditis who 
undergo dental and oral procedures that involve sig­
nificant manipulation of gingival or periapical tissue or 
penetration of the oral mucosa. If unexpected bleeding 
occurs, antibiotics given within 2 h following the pro­
cedure provide effective prophylaxis.
Hematogenous bacterial seeding from oral infection 
can undoubtedly produce late prosthetic joint infection 
and therefore requires removal of the infected 
tissue (e.g., drainage, extraction, root canal) and appro­
priate antibiotic therapy. However, evidence that late 
prosthetic joint infection occurs following routine 
dental procedures is lacking. For this reason, antibiotic 
prophylaxis is not recommended before dental surgery 
in patients with orthopedic pins, screws, and plates. 
It is, however, advised within the first 2 years after 
joint replacement for patients who have inflammatory 
arthropathies, immunosuppression, type 1 diabetes mel­
litus, previous prosthetic joint infection, hemophilia, or 
malnourishment.
Concern often arises regarding the use of vasocon­
strictors in patients with hypertension and heart disease. 
Vasoconstrictors enhance the depth and duration of 
local anesthesia, thus reducing the anesthetic dose and 
potential toxicity. If intravascular injection is avoided, 
2% lidocaine with 1:100,000 epinephrine (limited to 
a total of 0.036 mg epinephrine) can be used safely in 
those with controlled hypertension and stable coronary 
heart disease, arrhythmia, or congestive heart failure. 
Precaution should be taken with patients taking tricyclic 
antidepressants and nonselective beta blockers because 
these drugs may potentiate the effect of epinephrine.
Elective dental treatments should be postponed for 
at least 1 month after myocardial infarction, after which 
the risk of reinfarction is low provided the patient is 
medically stable (e.g., stable rhythm, stable angina, and 
free of heart failure). Patients who have suffered a stroke 
should have elective dental care deferred for 6 months. 
In both situations, effective stress reduction requires 
good pain control, including the use of the minimal 
amount of vasoconstrictor necessary to provide good 
hemostasis and local anesthesia.
Bisphosphonate therapy is associated with osteonecrosis 
of the jaw. However, the risk with oral bisphosphonate 
therapy is very low. Most patients affected have received 
high-dose aminobisphosphonate therapy for multiple 
myeloma or metastatic breast cancer and have undergone 
tooth extraction or dental surgery. Intraoral lesions appear 
as exposed yellow-white hard bone involving the mandi­
ble or maxilla. Two-thirds are painful. Screening tests for 
determining risk of osteonecrosis are unreliable. Patients 
slated for aminobisphosphonate therapy should receive 
preventive dental care that reduces the risk of infection 
and need for future dentoalveolar surgery.
Halitosis
Halitosis typically emanates from the oral cavity or nasal 
passages. Volatile sulfur compounds resulting from bac­
terial decay of food and cellular debris account for the 
SECTION I
Cardinal Manifestations of Gastrointestinal Disease
20
malodor. Periodontal disease, caries, acute forms of gin­
givitis, poorly fitting dentures, oral abscess, and tongue 
coating are usual causes. Treatment includes correcting 
poor hygiene, treating infection, and tongue brushing. 
Xerostomia can produce and exacerbate halitosis. Pockets 
of decay in the tonsillar crypts, esophageal diverticulum, 
esophageal stasis (e.g., achalasia, stricture), sinusitis, and 
lung abscess account for some instances. A few systemic 
diseases produce distinctive odors: renal failure (ammo­
niacal), hepatic (fishy), and ketoacidosis (fruity). Helico-
bacter pylori gastritis can also produce ammoniac breath. 
If no odor is detectable, then pseudohalitosis or even 
halitophobia must be considered. These conditions rep­
resent varying degrees of psychiatric illness.
Aging and Oral Health
While tooth loss and dental disease are not normal con­
sequences of aging, a complex array of structural and 
functional changes occurs with age that can affect oral 
health. Subtle changes in tooth structure (e.g., dimin­
ished pulp space and volume, sclerosis of dentinal 
tubules, and altered proportions of nerve and vascular 
pulp content) result in diminished or altered pain sen­
sitivity, reduced reparative capacity, and increased tooth 
brittleness. In addition, age-associated fatty replacement 
of salivary acini may reduce physiologic reserve, thus 
increasing the risk of xerostomia.
Poor oral hygiene often results when vision fails or 
when patients lose manual dexterity and upper-extremity 
flexibility. This is particularly common for nursing 
home residents and must be emphasized because regu­
lar oral cleaning and dental care have been shown to 
reduce the incidence of pneumonia and mortality in this 
population. Other risks for dental decay include limited 
lifetime fluoride exposure and preference by some older 
adults for intensely sweet foods when taste and olfac­
tion wane. These factors occur in an increasing propor­
tion of persons over age 75 who retain teeth that have 
extensive restorations and exposed roots. Without assid­
uous care, decay can become quite advanced yet remain 
asymptomatic. Consequently, much or the entire tooth 
can be destroyed before the process is detected.
Periodontal disease, a leading cause of tooth loss, is 
indicated by loss of alveolar bone height. Over 90% of 
Americans have some degree of periodontal disease by 
age 50. Healthy adults who have not experienced signifi­
cant alveolar bone loss by the sixth decade do not typi­
cally develop significant worsening with advancing age.
Complete edentulousness with advanced age, though 
less common than in previous decades, is still present in 
approximately 50% of Americans age ≥85. Speech, mas­
tication, and facial contours are dramatically affected. 
Edentulousness may also worsen obstructive sleep apnea, 
particularly in those without symptoms while wear­
ing dentures. Dentures can improve speech articulation 
and restore diminished facial contours. Mastication is 
restored less predictably, and those expecting dentures 
to improve oral intake are often disappointed. Dentures 
require periodic adjustment to accommodate inevitable 
remodeling that leads to a diminished volume of the 
alveolar ridge. Pain can result from friction or traumatic 
lesions produced by loose dentures. Poor fit and poor 
oral hygiene may permit candidiasis to develop. This 
may be asymptomatic or painful and is indicated by ery­
thematous smooth or granular tissue conforming to an 
area covered by the appliance.
 Samuel C. Durso  I   Janet A. Yellowitz 
21
 The health status of the oral cavity is linked to cardio-
vascular disease, diabetes, and other systemic illnesses. 
Thus, examining the oral cavity for signs of disease is 
a key part of the physical exam. This chapter presents 
numerous outstanding clinical photographs (Figs. 3–1
to 3–27) illustrating many of the conditions discussed 
in Chap. 2, Oral Manifestations of Disease. Conditions 
affecting the teeth, periodontal tissues, and oral mucosa 
are all represented. 
 ATLAS OF ORAL MANIFESTATIONS 
OF DISEASE 
 CHAPTER 3 
 Figure 3-1 
 Gingival overgrowth secondary to calcium channel blocker 
use. 
 Figure 3-2 
 Oral lichen planus. 
 Figure 3-3 
 Erosive lichen planus. 
SECTION I
Cardinal Manifestations of Gastrointestinal Disease
22
Figure 3-4
Stevens-Johnson syndrome—reaction to nevirapine.
Figure 3-5
Erythematosus candidiasis under a denture (i.e., the patient 
should be treated for this fungal infection).
Figure 3-6
Severe periodontitis.
Figure 3-7
Angular cheilitis.
Figure 3-8
Sublingual leukoplakia.
A
B
 
CHAPTER 3
Atlas of Oral Manifestations  of Disease
23
Figure 3-9
A. Epulis (gingival hypertrophy) under denture. B. Epulis 
fissuratum.
Figure 3-10
Traumatic lesion inside of cheek.
Figure 3-11
Oral leukoplakia, subtype homogenous leukoplakia.
Figure 3-12
Oral carcinoma.
Figure 3-13
Healthy mouth.
SECTION I
Cardinal Manifestations of Gastrointestinal Disease
24
Figure 3-14
Geographic tongue.
Figure 3-15
Moderate gingivitis.
Figure 3-16
Gingival recession.
Figure 3-17
Heavy calculus and gingival inflammation.
Figure 3-18
Severe gingival inflammation and heavy calculus.
Figure 3-19
Root cavity in presence of severe periodontal disease.
 
CHAPTER 3
Atlas of Oral Manifestations  of Disease
25
Figure 3-21
Osteonecrosis.
Figure 3-20
Ulcer on lateral border of tongue—potential carcinoma.
Figure 3-22
Severe periodontal disease, missing tooth, very mobile teeth.
Figure 3-23
Salivary stone.
Figure 3-24
A. Calculus. B. Teeth cleaned.
Figure 3-25
Traumatic ulcer.
SECTION I
Cardinal Manifestations of Gastrointestinal Disease
26
Figure 3-26
Fissured tongue.
Figure 3-27
White coated tongue—likely candidiasis.
Acknowledgment
Dr. Jane Atkinson was a co-author of this chapter in the 17th 
edition of Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine. Some of 
the materials have been carried over into the 18th edition.
 Ikuo Hirano  I   Peter J. Kahrilas 
27
 Dysphagia—diffi culty with swallowing—refers to prob-
lems with the transit of food or liquid from the mouth 
to the hypopharynx or through the esophagus. Severe 
dysphagia can compromise nutrition, cause aspiration, 
and reduce quality of life. Additional terminology per-
taining to swallowing dysfunction is as follows.  Aphagia
denotes complete esophageal obstruction, most com-
monly encountered in the acute setting of a food bolus 
or foreign body impaction.  Odynophagia refers to pain-
ful swallowing, typically resulting from mucosal ulcer-
ation within the oropharynx or esophagus. It commonly 
is accompanied by dysphagia, but the converse is not 
true.  Globus pharyngeus is a foreign body sensation local-
ized in the neck that does not interfere with swallowing 
and sometimes is relieved by swallowing.  Transfer dyspha-
gia frequently results in nasal regurgitation and pulmo-
nary aspiration during swallowing and is characteristic of 
oropharyngeal dysphagia.  Phagophobia (fear of swallow-
ing) and  refusal to swallow may be psychogenic or related 
to anticipatory anxiety about food bolus obstruction, 
odynophagia, or aspiration. 
 Physiology of sWalloWiNg 
 Swallowing begins with a voluntary (oral) phase that 
includes preparation during which food is masticated 
and mixed with saliva. This is followed by a transfer 
phase during which the bolus is pushed into the phar-
ynx by the tongue. Bolus entry into the hypopharynx 
initiates the pharyngeal swallow response, which 
is centrally mediated and involves a complex series 
of actions, the net result of which is to propel food 
through the pharynx into the esophagus while prevent-
ing its entry into the airway. To accomplish this, the 
larynx is elevated and pulled forward, actions that also 
facilitate upper esophageal sphincter (UES) opening. 
Tongue pulsion then propels the bolus through the 
UES, followed by a peristaltic contraction that clears 
residue from the pharynx and through the esophagus. 
The lower esophageal sphincter (LES) relaxes as the 
food enters the esophagus and remains relaxed until the 
peristaltic contraction has delivered the bolus into the 
stomach. Peristaltic contractions elicited in response 
to a swallow are called  primary peristalsis and involve 
sequenced inhibition followed by contraction of the 
musculature along the entire length of the esophagus. 
The inhibition that precedes the peristaltic contrac-
tion is called  deglutitive inhibition . Local distention of 
the esophagus anywhere along its length, as may occur 
with gastroesophageal refl ux, activates  secondary peristal-
sis that begins at the point of distention and proceeds 
distally. Tertiary esophageal contractions are nonperi-
staltic, disordered esophageal contractions that may be 
observed to occur spontaneously during fl uoroscopic 
observation. 
 The musculature of the oral cavity, pharynx, UES, 
and cervical esophagus is striated and directly inner-
vated by lower motor neurons carried in cranial nerves 
( Fig. 4-1 ). Oral cavity muscles are innervated by the 
fi fth (trigeminal) and seventh (facial) cranial nerves; the 
tongue, by the twelfth (hypoglossal) cranial nerve. Pha-
ryngeal muscles are innervated by the ninth (glossopha-
ryngeal) and tenth (vagus) cranial nerves. 
 Physiologically, the UES consists of the cricopharyn-
geus muscle, the adjacent inferior pharyngeal constrictor, 
and the proximal portion of the cervical esophagus. UES 
innervation is derived from the vagus nerve, whereas 
the innervation to the musculature acting on the UES 
to facilitate its opening during swallowing comes from 
the fi fth, seventh, and twelfth cranial nerves. The UES 
remains closed at rest owing to both its inherent elastic 
properties and neurogenically mediated contraction of 
the cricopharyngeus muscle. UES opening during swal-
lowing involves both cessation of vagal excitation to the 
cricopharyngeus and simultaneous contraction of the 
suprahyoid and geniohyoid muscles that pull open the 
 DYSPHAGIA 
 CHAPTER 4 
SECTION I
Cardinal Manifestations of Gastrointestinal Disease
28
UES in conjunction with the upward and forward dis-
placement of the larynx.
The neuromuscular apparatus for peristalsis is dis-
tinct in proximal and distal parts of the esophagus. The 
cervical esophagus, like the pharyngeal musculature, 
consists of striated muscle and is directly innervated by 
lower motor neurons of the vagus nerve. Peristalsis in 
the proximal esophagus is governed by the sequential 
activation of the vagal motor neurons in the nucleus 
ambiguus. In contrast, the distal esophagus and LES 
are composed of smooth muscle and are controlled by 
excitatory and inhibitory neurons within the esopha-
geal myenteric plexus. Medullary preganglionic neurons 
from the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus trigger peri-
stalsis via these ganglionic neurons during primary peri-
stalsis. Neurotransmitters of the excitatory ganglionic 
neurons are acetylcholine and substance P; those of the 
inhibitory neurons are vasoactive intestinal peptide and 
nitric oxide. Peristalsis results from the patterned acti-
vation of inhibitory followed by excitatory ganglionic 
neurons, with progressive dominance of the inhibitory 
neurons distally. Similarly, LES relaxation occurs with 
the onset of deglutitive inhibition and persists until the 
peristaltic sequence is complete. At rest, the LES is con-
tracted because of excitatory ganglionic stimulation and 
its intrinsic myogenic tone, a property that distinguishes 
it from the adjacent esophagus. The function of the LES 
is supplemented by the surrounding muscle of the right 
diaphragmatic crus, which acts as an external sphincter 
during inspiration, cough, or abdominal straining.
Pathophysiology of Dysphagia
Dysphagia can be subclassified both by location and 
by the circumstances in which it occurs. With respect 
to location, distinct considerations apply to oral, pha-
ryngeal, or esophageal dysphagia. Normal transport of 
an ingested bolus depends on the consistency and size 
of the bolus, the caliber of the lumen, the integrity of 
peristaltic contraction, and deglutitive inhibition of both 
the UES and the LES. Dysphagia caused by an oversized 
bolus or a narrow lumen is called structural dysphagia, 
whereas dysphagia due to abnormalities of peristalsis or 
impaired sphincter relaxation after swallowing is called 
propulsive or motor dysphagia. More than one mechanism 
may be operative in a patient with dysphagia. Sclero-
derma commonly presents with absent peristalsis as well 
as a weakened LES that predisposes patients to peptic 
stricture formation. Likewise, radiation therapy for head 
and neck cancer may compound the functional deficits 
Soft palate
Oral cavity
Tongue
Thyrohyoid
membrane
Cricothyroid
membrane
Hyoid bone
Hyoid bone
Vocal cord
Esophagus
Laryngeal
pharynx
(hypopharynx)
Valeculae
Oral pharynx
Transverse
arytenoid ms.
Cricoid cartilage
Hard palate
Mylohoid ms.
Esophagus
Stylopharyngeus        
Glossopharyngeus       
Stylohyoid ligament 
Stylohyoid process
Superior constrictor
Middle constrictor
Sagittal view of the pharynx
Musculature of the pharynx
Hyoglossus
Digastric (post. belly)
Styloglossus
Digastric
(ant. belly)
Mylohyoid
Buccinator
Lateral
pterygoid
plate
Cricoid cartilage
Cricothyroid
membrane
Thyroid cartilge
Thyrohyoid membrane
Cricopharyngeus
Inferior constrictor
Epiglottis
Figure 4-1 
Sagittal and diagrammatic views of the musculature 
involved in enacting oropharyngeal swallowing. Note the 
dominance of the tongue in the sagittal view and the intimate 
relationship between the entrance to the larynx (airway) and 
the esophagus. In the resting configuration illustrated, the 
esophageal inlet is closed. This is transiently reconfigured 
such that the esophageal inlet is open and the laryngeal 
inlet closed during swallowing. (Adapted from PJ Kahrilas, in 
DW Gelfand and JE Richter [eds]: Dysphagia: Diagnosis and 
Treatment. New York: Igaku-Shoin Medical Publishers, 1989, 
pp. 11–28.)
 
CHAPTER 4
Dysphagia
29
in the oropharyngeal swallow attributable to the tumor 
and cause cervical esophageal stenosis.
Oral and pharyngeal (oropharyngeal) 
dysphagia
Oral-phase dysphagia is associated with poor bolus for-
mation and control so that food has prolonged retention 
within the oral cavity and may seep out of the mouth. 
Drooling and difficulty in initiating swallowing are 
other characteristic signs. Poor bolus control also may 
lead to premature spillage of food into the hypopharynx 
with resultant aspiration into the trachea or regurgita-
tion into the nasal cavity. Pharyngeal-phase dysphagia is 
associated with retention of food in the pharynx due to 
poor tongue or pharyngeal propulsion or obstruction at 
the UES. Signs and symptoms of concomitant hoarse-
ness or cranial nerve dysfunction may be associated with 
oropharyngeal dysphagia.
Oropharyngeal dysphagia may be due to neuro-
logic, muscular, structural, iatrogenic, infectious, and 
metabolic causes. Iatrogenic, neurologic, and struc-
tural pathologies are most common. Iatrogenic causes 
include surgery and radiation, often in the setting of 
head and neck cancer. Neurogenic dysphagia resulting 
from cerebrovascular accidents, Parkinson’s disease, and 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis is a major source of mor-
bidity related to aspiration and malnutrition. Medullary 
nuclei directly innervate the oropharynx. Lateralization 
of pharyngeal dysphagia implies either a structural pha-
ryngeal lesion or a neurologic process that selectively 
targeted the ipsilateral brainstem nuclei or cranial nerve. 
Advances in functional brain imaging have elucidated 
an important role of the cerebral cortex in swallow 
function and dysphagia. Asymmetry in the cortical rep-
resentation of the pharynx provides an explanation for 
the dysphagia that occurs as a consequence of unilateral 
cortical cerebrovascular accidents.
Oropharyngeal structural lesions causing dysphagia 
include Zenker’s diverticulum, cricopharyngeal bar, and 
neoplasia. Zenker’s diverticulum typically is encoun-
tered in elderly patients, with an estimated prevalence 
between 1:1000 and 1:10,000. In addition to dysphagia, 
patients may present with regurgitation of particulate 
food debris, aspiration, and halitosis. The pathogenesis 
is related to stenosis of the cricopharyngeus that causes 
diminished opening of the UES and results in increased 
hypopharyngeal pressure during swallowing with devel-
opment of a pulsion diverticulum immediately above 
the cricopharyngeus in a region of potential weakness 
known as Killian’s dehiscence. A cricopharyngeal bar, 
appearing as a prominent indentation behind the lower 
third of the cricoid cartilage, is related to Zenker’s 
diverticulum in that it involves limited distensibility of 
the cricopharyngeus and can lead to the formation of a 
Zenker’s diverticulum. However, a cricopharyngeal bar 
is a common radiographic finding, and most patients 
with transient cricopharyngeal bars are asymptomatic, 
making it important to rule out alternative etiologies 
of dysphagia before treatment. Furthermore, cricopha-
ryngeal bars may be secondary to other neuromuscular 
disorders.
Since the pharyngeal phase of swallowing occurs in 
less than a second, rapid-sequence fluoroscopy is neces-
sary to evaluate for functional abnormalities. Adequate 
fluoroscopic examination requires that the patient be 
conscious and cooperative. The study incorporates 
recordings of swallow sequences during ingestion of 
food and liquids of varying consistencies. The pharynx 
is examined to detect bolus retention, regurgitation into 
the nose, or aspiration into the trachea. Timing and 
integrity of pharyngeal contraction and opening of the 
UES with a swallow are analyzed to assess both aspira-
tion risk and the potential for swallow therapy. Struc-
tural abnormalities of the oropharynx, especially those 
which may require biopsies, also should be assessed by 
direct laryngoscopic examination.
Esophageal dysphagia
The adult esophagus measures 18–26 cm in length 
and is anatomically divided into the cervical esopha-
gus, extending from the pharyngoesophageal junction 
to the suprasternal notch, and the thoracic esophagus, 
which continues to the diaphragmatic hiatus. When dis-
tended, the esophageal lumen has internal dimensions 
of about 2 cm in the anteroposterior plane and 3 cm 
in the lateral plane. Solid food dysphagia becomes com-
mon when the lumen is narrowed to <13 mm but also 
can occur with larger diameters in the setting of poorly 
masticated food or motor dysfunction. Circumferen-
tial lesions are more likely to cause dysphagia than are 
lesions that involve only a partial circumference of the 
esophageal wall. The most common structural causes of 
dysphagia are Schatzki’s rings, eosinophilic esophagitis, 
and peptic strictures. Dysphagia also occurs in the set-
ting of gastroesophageal reflux disease without a stric-
ture, perhaps on the basis of altered esophageal sensation, 
distensibility, or motor function.
Propulsive disorders leading to esophageal dysphagia 
result from abnormalities of peristalsis and/or degluti-
tive inhibition, potentially affecting the cervical or tho-
racic esophagus. Since striated muscle pathology usually 
involves both the oropharynx and the cervical esopha-
gus, the clinical manifestations usually are dominated 
by oropharyngeal dysphagia. Diseases affecting smooth 
muscle involve both the thoracic esophagus and the 
LES. A dominant manifestation of this, absent peristal-
sis, refers to either the complete absence of swallow-
induced contraction or the presence of nonperistaltic, 
disordered contractions. Absent peristalsis and failure of 
deglutitive LES relaxation are the defining features of 
SECTION I
Cardinal Manifestations of Gastrointestinal Disease
30
achalasia. In diffuse esophageal spasm (DES), LES func-
tion is normal, with the disordered motility restricted to 
the esophageal body. Absent peristalsis combined with 
severe weakness of the LES is a nonspecific pattern 
commonly found in patients with scleroderma.
APPROACH TO THE
PATIENT	
Dysphagia
Figure 4-2 shows an algorithm for the approach to a 
patient with dysphagia.
History  The patient history is extremely valu-
able in making a presumptive diagnosis or at least sub-
stantially restricting the differential diagnoses in most 
patients. Key elements of the history are the localiza-
tion of dysphagia, the circumstances in which dyspha-
gia is experienced, other symptoms associated with 
dysphagia, and progression. Dysphagia that localizes 
to the suprasternal notch may indicate either an oro-
pharyngeal or an esophageal etiology as distal dys-
phagia is referred proximally about 30% of the time. 
Dysphagia that localizes to the chest is esophageal in 
origin. Nasal regurgitation and tracheobronchial aspi-
ration with swallowing are hallmarks of oropharyngeal  
Dysphagia
Oropharyngeal dysphagia
Esophageal dysphagia
Propulsive
Propulsive
Structural
Structural
Odynophagia
Solid and liquid
dysphagia
Solid
dysphagia
Myogenic
• Cerebral vascular
 accident 
• Parkinson’s
• Amyotrophic lateral
 sclerosis
• Brainstem tumor
• Guillain-Barré
• Huntington’s chorea
• Post-polio syndrome
• Multiple sclerosis
• Cerebral palsy
• Zenker’s diverticulum
• Neoplasm
• Cervical web
• Cricopharyngeal bar
• Osteophytes
• Congenital abnormalities
• Post head and neck surgery
• Chemotherapy mucositis
• Radiation
• Corrosive injury
• Infection
Dysphagia localized
to chest or
neck, food impaction
Dysphagia localized
to neck, nasal
regurgitation, aspiration,
associated ENT symptoms
Neurogenic
• Myasthenia gravis
• Polymyositis
• Mixed connective
 tissue disorders
• Oculopharyngeal
 muscular
 dystrophy
• Paraneoplastic
 syndrome
• Myotonic dystrophy
• Sarcoidosis
• GERD with weak
 peristalsis
• Achalasia
 (primary and
 secondary)
• Diffuse
 esophageal
 spasm
• Scleroderma
Intermittent
• Schatzki ring
• Esophageal web 
Progressive
• Neoplasm
Variable
• Peptic stricture
• Eosinophilic
 esophagitis
• Hiatal hernia
• Extrinsic compression
• Surgical stenosis
• Radiation esophagitis
• Ringed esophagus
• Congenital esophageal
 stenosis
• Pill esophagitis
• Infectious
 esophagitis
• Caustic injury
• Chemotherapy
 mucositis
• Sclerotherapy
• Crohn’s disease
• Behcet’s syndrome
• Bullous pemphygoid
• Lichen planus
APPROACH TO THE PATIENT WITH DYSPHAGIA
Figure 4-2
Aproach to the patient with dysphagia. Etiologies in bold print are the most common. ENT, ear, nose, and throat; GERD, 
gastroesophageal reflux disease.
dysphagia or a tracheoesophageal fistula. The pres-
ence of hoarseness may be another important diag-
nostic clue. When hoarseness precedes dysphagia, 
the primary lesion is usually laryngeal; hoarseness 
that occurs after the development of dysphagia may 
result from compromise of the recurrent laryngeal 
nerve by a malignancy. The type of food causing dys-
phagia is a crucial detail. Intermittent dysphagia that 
occurs only with solid food implies structural dyspha-
gia, whereas constant dysphagia with both liquids 
and solids strongly suggests a motor abnormality.  
Two caveats to this pattern are that despite having a 
motor abnormality, patients with scleroderma generally 
develop mild dysphagia for solids only and, somewhat 
paradoxically, that patients with oropharyngeal dyspha-
gia often have greater difficulty managing liquids than 
solids. Dysphagia that is progressive over the course of 
weeks to months raises concern for neoplasia. Episodic 
dysphagia to solids that is unchanged over years indi-
cates a benign disease process such as a Schatzki’s ring 
or eosinophilic esophagitis. Food impaction with a pro-
longed inability to pass an ingested bolus even with 
ingestion of liquid is typical of a structural dysphagia. 
Chest pain frequently accompanies dysphagia whether 
 
CHAPTER 4
Dysphagia
31
it is related to motor disorders, structural disorders, or 
reflux disease. A prolonged history of heartburn pre-
ceding the onset of dysphagia is suggestive of peptic 
stricture and, less commonly, esophageal adenocarci-
noma. A history of prolonged nasogastric intubation, 
esophageal or head and neck surgery, ingestion of caus-
tic agents or pills, previous radiation or chemotherapy, 
or associated mucocutaneous diseases may help isolate 
the cause of dysphagia. With accompanying odyno-
phagia, which usually is indicative of ulceration, infec-
tious or pill-induced esophagitis should be suspected. 
In patients with AIDS or other immunocompromised 
states, esophagitis due to opportunistic infections 
such as Candida, herpes simplex virus, or cytomegalo-
virus and to tumors such as Kaposi’s sarcoma and lym-
phoma should be considered. A strong history of atopy 
increases concerns for eosinophilic esophagitis.
Physical Examination  Physical examination 
is important in the evaluation of oral and pharyngeal dys-
phagia because dysphagia is usually only one of many 
manifestations of a more global disease process. Signs of 
bulbar or pseudobulbar palsy, including dysarthria, dys-
phonia, ptosis, tongue atrophy, and hyperactive jaw jerk, 
in addition to evidence of generalized neuromuscular 
disease, should be elicited. The neck should be examined 
for thyromegaly. A careful inspection of the mouth and 
pharynx should disclose lesions that may interfere with 
passage of food. Physical examination is less helpful in 
the evaluation of esophageal dysphagia as most relevant 
pathology is restricted to the esophagus. The notable 
exception is skin disease. Changes in the skin may sug-
gest a diagnosis of scleroderma or mucocutaneous dis-
eases such as pemphigoid and epidermolysis bullosa, all 
of which can involve the esophagus.
Diagnostic 
Procedures  Although most 
instances of dysphagia are attributable to benign disease 
processes, dysphagia is also a cardinal symptom of several 
malignancies, making it an important symptom to evalu-
ate. Even when not attributable to malignancy, dyspha-
gia is usually a manifestation of an identifiable and treat-
able disease entity, making its evaluation beneficial to the 
patient and gratifying to the practitioner. The specific diag-
nostic algorithm to pursue is guided by the details of the 
history. If oral or pharyngeal dysphagia is suspected, a fluo-
roscopic swallow study, usually done by a swallow thera-
pist, is the procedure of choice. Otolaryngoscopic and neu-
rologic evaluation also can be important, depending on 
the circumstances. For suspected esophageal dysphagia, 
endoscopy is the single most useful test. Endoscopy allows 
better visualization of mucosal lesions than does barium 
radiography and also allows one to obtain mucosal biop-
sies. Furthermore, therapeutic intervention with esopha-
geal dilatation can be done as part of the procedure if it is 
deemed necessary. Of note, the emergence of eosinophilic 
esophagitis as a common cause of dysphagia in adults has 
led to the recommendation that esophageal mucosal biop-
sies be obtained routinely in the evaluation of unexplained 
dysphagia even if no endoscopic lesions are evident. For 
cases of suspected esophageal motility disorders, esopha-
gogastroscopy is still the primary examination as neoplas-
tic and inflammatory conditions can secondarily produce 
patterns of either achalasia or esophageal spasm. Esopha-
geal manometry is done if dysphagia is not adequately 
explained by endoscopy or to confirm the diagnosis of a 
suspected esophageal motor disorder. Barium radiography 
can provide useful adjunctive information in cases of subtle 
or complex esophageal strictures, esophageal diverticula, 
or paraesophageal herniation. In specific cases, CT exami-
nation and endoscopic ultrasonography may be useful.
Treatment  Treatment of dysphagia depends on 
both the locus and the specific etiology. Oropharyn-
geal dysphagia most commonly results from functional 
deficits caused by neurologic disorders. In such circum-
stances, the treatment focuses on utilizing postures or 
maneuvers devised to reduce pharyngeal residue and 
enhance airway protection learned under the direc-
tion of a trained swallow therapist. Aspiration risk may 
be reduced by altering the consistency of ingested 
food and liquid. Dysphagia resulting from a cerebrovas-
cular accident usually, but not always, spontaneously 
improves within the first few weeks after the event. More 
severe and persistent cases may require gastrostomy 
and enteral feeding. Patients with myasthenia gravis  
and polymyositis may respond to medical treatment of 
the primary neuromuscular disease. Surgical intervention 
with cricopharyngeal myotomy is usually not helpful, with 
the exception of specific disorders such as the idiopathic 
cricopharyngeal bar, Zenker’s diverticulum, and oculopha-
ryngeal muscular dystrophy. Chronic neurologic disorders 
such as Parkinson’s disease and amyotrophic lateral scle-
rosis may manifest with severe oropharyngeal dysphagia. 
Feeding by a nasogastric tube or an endoscopically placed 
gastrostomy tube may be considered for nutritional sup-
port; however, these maneuvers do not provide protec-
tion against aspiration of salivary secretions or refluxed 
gastric contents.
Treatment of esophageal dysphagia is covered in 
detail in Chap. 13. The majority of causes of esophageal 
dysphagia are effectively managed by means of esopha-
geal dilatation using bougie or balloon dilators. Cancer 
and achalasia are often managed surgically, although 
endoscopic techniques are available for both palliation 
and primary therapy, respectively. Infectious etiologies 
respond to antimicrobial medications or treatment of 
the underlying immunosuppressive state. Finally, eosino-
philic esophagitis has emerged as an important cause of 
dysphagia that is amenable to treatment by elimination 
of dietary allergens or topical glucocorticoids.
 William L. Hasler 
32
 Nausea is the subjective feeling of a need to vomit.  Vom-
iting (emesis) is the oral expulsion of gastrointestinal 
contents resulting from contractions of gut and thora-
coabdominal wall musculature. Vomiting is contrasted 
with  regurgitation , the effortless passage of gastric contents 
into the mouth.  Rumination is the repeated regurgita-
tion of stomach contents, which may be rechewed and 
reswallowed. In contrast to vomiting, these phenomena 
often exhibit volitional control.  Indigestion is a nonspe-
cifi c term that encompasses a variety of upper abdomi-
nal complaints including nausea, vomiting, heartburn, 
regurgitation, and dyspepsia (the presence of symptoms 
thought to originate in the gastroduodenal region). 
Some individuals with dyspepsia report predominantly 
epigastric burning, gnawing discomfort, or pain. Others 
with dyspepsia experience a constellation of symptoms 
including postprandial fullness, early satiety (an inability 
to complete a meal due to premature fullness), bloating, 
eructation (belching), and anorexia. 
 nAUseA And VoMItIng 
 meChanisms 
 Vomiting is coordinated by the brainstem and is effected 
by responses in the gut, pharynx, and thoracoabdomi-
nal wall. The mechanisms underlying nausea are poorly 
understood but likely involve the cerebral cortex, because 
nausea requires conscious perception. This is supported 
by electroencephalographic studies showing activation of 
temporofrontal regions during nausea. 
 Coordination of emesis 
 Brainstem nuclei—including the nucleus tractus soli-
tarius; dorsal vagal and phrenic nuclei; medullary nuclei 
that regulate respiration; and nuclei that control pha-
ryngeal, facial, and tongue movements—coordinate the 
initiation of emesis. Neurotransmitters involved in this 
coordination are uncertain, but neurokinin NK 1 , sero-
tonin 5-HT 3 , and vasopressin pathways may participate. 
 Somatic and visceral muscles exhibit stereotypic 
responses during emesis. Inspiratory thoracic and abdomi-
nal wall muscles contract, producing high intrathoracic 
and intraabdominal pressures that facilitate expulsion of 
gastric contents. The gastric cardia herniates across the 
diaphragm and the larynx moves upward to promote 
oral propulsion of the vomitus. Under normal condi-
tions, distally migrating gut contractions are regulated by 
an electrical phenomenon, the slow wave, which cycles 
at 3 cycles/min in the stomach and 11 cycles/min in the 
duodenum. With emesis, there is slow-wave abolition and 
initiation of orally propagating spikes that evoke retro-
grade contractions that assist in oral expulsion of intestinal 
contents. 
 Activators of emesis 
 Emetic stimuli act at several sites. Emesis provoked by 
unpleasant thoughts or smells originates in the cerebral 
cortex, whereas cranial nerves mediate vomiting after 
gag refl ex activation. Motion sickness and inner ear dis-
orders act on the labyrinthine apparatus, whereas gastric 
irritants and cytotoxic agents such as cisplatin stimulate 
gastroduodenal vagal afferent nerves. Nongastric visceral 
afferents are activated by intestinal and colonic obstruc-
tion and mesenteric ischemia. The area postrema, a med-
ullary nucleus, responds to bloodborne emetic stimuli 
and is termed the  chemoreceptor trigger zone . Many emeto-
genic drugs act on the area postrema, as do bacterial 
toxins and metabolic factors produced during uremia, 
hypoxia, and ketoacidosis. 
 Neurotransmitters that mediate induction of vomit-
ing are selective for these anatomic sites. Labyrinthine 
disorders stimulate vestibular muscarinic M 1 and hista-
minergic H 1 receptors, whereas vagal afferent stimuli 
activate serotonin 5-HT 3 receptors. The area postrema 
 NAUSEA, VOMITING, AND INDIGESTION 
 CHAPteR 5 
 
CHAPTER 5
Nausea, Vomiting, and Indigestion
33
is richly served by nerves acting on 5-HT3, M1, H1, 
and dopamine D2 subtypes. Transmitters in the cerebral 
cortex are poorly understood, although cannabinoid 
CB1 pathways may participate. Optimal pharmacologic 
therapy of vomiting requires understanding of these 
pathways.
Differential Diagnosis
Nausea and vomiting are caused by conditions within 
and outside the gut as well as by drugs and circulating 
toxins (Table 5-1).
Intraperitoneal disorders
Visceral obstruction and inflammation of hollow and 
solid viscera may produce vomiting. Gastric obstruc-
tion results from ulcer disease and malignancy, while 
small-bowel and colonic obstruction occur because of 
adhesions, benign or malignant tumors, volvulus, intus-
susception, or inflammatory diseases such as Crohn’s 
disease. The superior mesenteric artery syndrome, 
occurring after weight loss or prolonged bed rest, results 
when the duodenum is compressed by the overly-
ing superior mesenteric artery. Abdominal irradiation 
impairs intestinal motor function and induces strictures. 
Biliary colic causes nausea via action on visceral afferent 
nerves. Vomiting with pancreatitis, cholecystitis, and 
appendicitis is due to visceral irritation and induction of 
ileus. Enteric infections with viruses or bacteria such as 
Staphylococcus aureus and Bacillus cereus commonly cause 
vomiting, especially in children. Opportunistic infec-
tions such as cytomegalovirus or herpes simplex virus 
induce emesis in immunocompromised individuals.
Disordered gut sensorimotor function commonly 
causes nausea and vomiting. Gastroparesis is defined as 
a delay in gastric emptying of food and occurs after vago­
tomy, with pancreatic adenocarcinoma, with mesen­
teric vascular insufficiency, or in systemic diseases such 
as diabetes, scleroderma, and amyloidosis. The most 
common form of disease, idiopathic gastroparesis, 
occurs in the absence of systemic illness and may fol-
low a viral prodrome, suggesting an infectious etiology. 
Intestinal pseudoobstruction is characterized by dis-
rupted intestinal and colonic motor activity and leads 
to retention of food residue and secretions; bacterial 
overgrowth; nutrient malabsorption; and symptoms of 
nausea, vomiting, bloating, pain, and altered defecation. 
Intestinal pseudoobstruction may be idiopathic or inherited 
as a familial visceral myopathy or neuropathy, or it may 
result from systemic disease or as a paraneoplastic com-
plication of a malignancy such as small cell lung carci-
noma. Patients with gastroesophageal reflux may report 
nausea and vomiting, as do some individuals with irri-
table bowel syndrome (IBS).
Other functional disorders without organic abnor-
malities have been characterized in adults. Chronic 
­idiopathic nausea is defined as nausea without vomiting 
Table 5-1 
Causes of Nausea and Vomiting
Intraperitoneal
Extraperitoneal
Medications/Metabolic Disorders
Obstructing disorders
  Pyloric obstruction
  Small bowel obstruction
  Colonic obstruction
  Superior mesenteric artery syndrome
Enteric infections
  Viral
  Bacterial
Inflammatory diseases
  Cholecystitis
  Pancreatitis
  Appendicitis
  Hepatitis
Altered sensorimotor function
  Gastroparesis
  Intestinal pseudoobstruction
  Gastroesophageal reflux
  Chronic idiopathic nausea
  Functional vomiting
  Cyclic vomiting syndrome
Biliary colic
Abdominal irradiation
Cardiopulmonary disease
  Cardiomyopathy
  Myocardial infarction
Labyrinthine disease
  Motion sickness
  Labyrinthitis
  Malignancy
Intracerebral disorders
  Malignancy
  Hemorrhage
  Abscess
  Hydrocephalus
Psychiatric illness
  Anorexia and bulimia nervosa
  Depression
Postoperative vomiting
Drugs
  Cancer chemotherapy
  Antibiotics
  Cardiac antiarrhythmics
  Digoxin
  Oral hypoglycemics
  Oral contraceptives
Endocrine/metabolic disease
  Pregnancy
  Uremia
  Ketoacidosis
  Thyroid and parathyroid disease
  Adrenal insufficiency
Toxins
  Liver failure
  Ethanol
SECTION I
Cardinal Manifestations of Gastrointestinal Disease
34
occurring several times weekly, whereas functional 
vomiting is defined as one or more vomiting episodes 
weekly in the absence of an eating disorder or psychi-
atric disease. Cyclic vomiting syndrome is a rare disorder of 
unknown etiology that produces periodic discrete epi-
sodes of relentless nausea and vomiting. The syndrome 
shows a strong association with migraine headaches, 
suggesting that some cases may be migraine variants. 
Cyclic vomiting is most common in children, although 
adult cases have been described in association with rapid 
gastric emptying and with chronic cannabis use.
Extraperitoneal disorders
Myocardial infarction and congestive heart failure may 
cause nausea and vomiting. Postoperative emesis occurs 
after 25% of surgeries, most commonly laparotomy and 
orthopedic surgery, and is more prevalent in women. 
Increased intracranial pressure from tumors, bleed-
ing, abscess, or obstruction to cerebrospinal fluid out-
flow produces prominent vomiting with or without 
nausea. Motion sickness, labyrinthitis, and Ménière’s 
disease evoke emesis via labyrinthine pathways. Patients 
with psychiatric illnesses including anorexia nervosa, 
bulimia nervosa, anxiety, and depression may report 
significant nausea that may be associated with delayed 
gastric emptying.
Medications and metabolic disorders
Drugs evoke vomiting by action on the stomach (anal-
gesics, erythromycin) or area postrema (digoxin, opiates, 
anti-Parkinsonian drugs). Emetogenic agents include anti-
biotics, cardiac antiarrhythmics, antihypertensives, oral 
hypoglycemics, and contraceptives. Cancer chemotherapy 
causes vomiting that is acute (within hours of adminis-
tration), delayed (after 1 or more days), or anticipatory. 
Acute emesis resulting from highly emetogenic agents 
such as cisplatin is mediated by 5-HT3 pathways, whereas 
delayed emesis is 5-HT3-independent. Anticipatory nau-
sea often responds better to anxiolytic therapy than to 
antiemetics.
Several metabolic disorders elicit nausea and vomit-
ing. Pregnancy is the most prevalent endocrinologic 
cause of nausea, which affects 70% of women in the 
first trimester. Hyperemesis gravidarum is a severe form 
of nausea of pregnancy that can produce significant fluid 
loss and electrolyte disturbances. Uremia, ketoacidosis, 
and adrenal insufficiency, as well as parathyroid and thy-
roid disease, are other metabolic causes of emesis.
Circulating toxins evoke emesis via effects on the 
area postrema. Endogenous toxins are generated in ful-
minant liver failure, whereas exogenous enterotoxins 
may be produced by enteric bacterial infection. Ethanol 
intoxication is a common toxic etiology of nausea and 
vomiting.
APPROACH TO THE
PATIENt        Nausea and Vomiting
History and Physical Examination  The 
history helps define the etiology of unexplained nau-
sea and vomiting. Drugs, toxins, and gastrointestinal 
infections commonly cause acute symptoms, whereas 
established illnesses evoke chronic complaints. Pyloric 
obstruction and gastroparesis produce vomiting within 
1 h of eating, whereas emesis from intestinal obstruc-
tion occurs later. In severe cases of gastroparesis, the 
vomitus may contain food residue ingested hours or 
days previously. Hematemesis raises suspicion of an 
ulcer, malignancy, or Mallory-Weiss tear, whereas fecu-
lent emesis is noted with distal intestinal or colonic 
obstruction. Bilious vomiting excludes gastric obstruc-
tion, while emesis of undigested food is consistent with 
a Zenker’s diverticulum or achalasia. Relief of abdomi-
nal pain by emesis characterizes intestinal obstruc-
tion, whereas vomiting has no effect on pancreatitis or 
cholecystitis pain. Pronounced weight loss raises con-
cern about malignancy or obstruction. Fevers suggest 
inflammation; an intracranial source is considered if 
there are headaches or visual field changes. Vertigo or 
tinnitus indicates labyrinthine disease.
The physical examination complements informa-
tion from the history. Orthostatic hypotension and 
reduced skin turgor indicate intravascular fluid loss. 
Pulmonary abnormalities raise concern for aspira-
tion of vomitus. Abdominal auscultation may reveal 
absent bowel sounds with ileus. High-pitched rushes 
suggest bowel obstruction, while a succussion splash 
upon abrupt lateral movement of the patient is found 
with gastroparesis or pyloric obstruction. Tenderness or 
involuntary guarding raises suspicion of inflammation, 
whereas fecal blood suggests mucosal injury from ulcer,  
ischemia, or tumor. Neurologic disease presents with 
papilledema, visual field loss, or focal neural abnormali-
ties. Neoplasm is suggested by palpation of masses or  
adenopathy.
Diagnostic Testing  For intractable symptoms 
or an elusive diagnosis, selected screening tests can 
direct clinical care. Electrolyte replacement is indicated 
for hypokalemia or metabolic alkalosis. Detection of 
iron-deficiency anemia mandates a search for mucosal 
injury. Pancreaticobiliary disease is indicated by abnor-
mal pancreatic or liver biochemistries, whereas endo-
crinologic, rheumatologic, or paraneoplastic etiologies 
are suggested by hormone or serologic abnormalities. 
If bowel obstruction is suspected, supine and upright 
abdominal radiographs may show intestinal air-fluid  
levels with reduced colonic air. Ileus is characterized by 
diffusely dilated air-filled bowel loops.
Anatomic studies may be indicated if initial test-
ing is nondiagnostic. Upper endoscopy detects ulcers 
 
CHAPTER 5
Nausea, Vomiting, and Indigestion
35
or malignancy, while small-bowel barium radiography 
diagnoses partial intestinal obstruction. Colonoscopy or 
contrast enema radiography can detect colonic obstruc-
tion. Ultrasound or CT defines intraperitoneal inflam-
matory processes, while CT or MRI of the head can 
delineate intracranial disease. Advances in CT and MRI 
enterography have improved definition of bowel inflam-
mation, as in Crohn’s disease. Mesenteric angiography, 
CT, or MRI is useful for suspected ischemia.
Gastrointestinal motility testing may detect a motor 
disorder that contributes to symptoms when anatomic 
abnormalities are absent. Gastroparesis commonly is 
diagnosed using gastric scintigraphy, by which empty-
ing of a radiolabeled meal is measured. Isotopic breath 
tests and wireless motility capsule methods have been 
validated and may become important alternatives to 
scintigraphy to define gastroparesis. The diagnosis of 
intestinal pseudoobstruction often is suggested by 
abnormal barium transit and luminal dilation on small-
bowel contrast radiography. Delayed small-bowel tran-
sit also may be detected by wireless capsule techniques. 
Small-intestinal manometry can confirm the diagnosis 
and further characterize the motor abnormality as neu-
ropathic or myopathic based on contractile patterns. 
Such investigation can obviate the need for open intes-
tinal biopsy to evaluate for smooth muscle or neuronal 
degeneration.
Treatment	
Nausea and Vomiting
General Principles  Therapy of vomiting is tailored 
to correcting medically or surgically remediable abnor-
malities if possible. Hospitalization is considered for severe 
dehydration, especially if oral fluid replenishment cannot 
be sustained. Once oral intake is tolerated, nutrients are 
restarted with liquids that are low in fat, as lipids delay 
gastric emptying. Foods high in indigestible residues are 
avoided because these also prolong gastric retention.
Antiemetic 
Medications  The most com-
monly used antiemetic agents act on sites in the cen-
tral nervous system (Table 5-2). Antihistamines such as 
meclizine and dimenhydrinate and anticholinergic drugs 
like scopolamine act on labyrinthine pathways and are 
useful in motion sickness and inner ear disorders. Dopa-
mine D2 antagonists treat emesis evoked by area pos-
trema stimuli and are useful for medication, toxic, and 
metabolic etiologies. Dopamine antagonists freely cross 
the blood-brain barrier and cause anxiety, dystonic reac-
tions, hyperprolactinemic effects (galactorrhea and sex-
ual dysfunction), and irreversible tardive dyskinesia.
Other drug classes exhibit antiemetic properties. 
Serotonin 5-HT3 antagonists such as ondansetron 
and granisetron exhibit utility in postoperative vomit-
ing, after radiation therapy, and for preventing cancer  
chemotherapy–induced emesis. The usefulness of 5-HT3 
antagonists for other causes of emesis is less well estab-
lished. Low-dose tricyclic antidepressant agents provide 
symptomatic benefit in patients with chronic idiopathic 
nausea and functional vomiting as well as in diabetic 
patients with nausea and vomiting whose disease is of 
long standing. Other antidepressants such as mirtazap-
ine also may exhibit antiemetic effects.
Gastrointestinal Motor Stimulants 
Drugs that stimulate gastric emptying are indicated for 
gastroparesis (Table 5-2). Metoclopramide, a combined 
5-HT4 agonist and D2 antagonist, exhibits efficacy in gas-
troparesis, but antidopaminergic side effects, particu-
larly tardive dyskinesia, limit its use in <25% of patients. 
Erythromycin, a macrolide antibiotic, increases gastro-
duodenal motility by action on receptors for motilin, an 
endogenous stimulant of fasting motor activity. Intrave-
nous erythromycin is useful for inpatients with refrac-
tory gastroparesis; however, oral forms also have some 
utility. Domperidone, a D2 antagonist not available in 
the United States, exhibits prokinetic and antiemetic 
effects but does not cross into most other brain regions; 
thus, anxiety and dystonic reactions are rare. The main 
side effects of domperidone relate to induction of 
hyperprolactinemia via effects on pituitary regions 
served by a porous blood-brain barrier.
Refractory upper gut motility disorders pose signifi-
cant challenges. Liquid suspensions of prokinetic drugs 
may be beneficial, because liquids empty from the 
stomach more rapidly than pills do. Metoclopramide 
can be administered subcutaneously in patients unre-
sponsive to oral drugs. Intestinal pseudoobstruction 
may respond to the somatostatin analogue octreo-
tide, which induces propagative small intestinal motor 
complexes. Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors such as  
pyridostigmine are anecdotally observed to benefit 
some patients with small bowel dysmotility. Pyloric 
injections of botulinum toxin are reported in uncon-
trolled studies to benefit patients with gastroparesis. 
Placement of a feeding jejunostomy reduces hospital-
izations and improves overall health in some patients 
with drug-refractory gastroparesis. Surgical options are 
limited for unresponsive cases, but postvagotomy gas-
troparesis may improve with near-total resection of the 
stomach. Implanted gastric electrical stimulators may 
reduce symptoms, enhance nutrition, improve quality 
of life, and decrease health care expenditures in medica-
tion-refractory gastroparesis, although small controlled 
trials report only modest benefits with this method.
Selected Clinical Settings  Some cancer 
chemotherapeutic agents such as cisplatin are intensely 
emetogenic. Given prophylactically, 5-HT3 antagonists 
SECTION I
Cardinal Manifestations of Gastrointestinal Disease
36
prevent chemotherapy-induced acute vomiting in most 
cases (Table 5-2). Optimal antiemetic effects often are 
obtained with a 5-HT3 antagonist combined with a glu-
cocorticoid. Benzodiazepines such as lorazepam are use-
ful to reduce anticipatory nausea and vomiting. Therapy 
of delayed emesis 1–5 days after chemotherapy is less 
successful. Neurokinin NK1 antagonists (e.g., aprepitant) 
exhibit antiemetic and antinausea effects during both the 
acute and delayed periods after chemotherapy. Cannabi-
noids such as tetrahydrocannabinol, long advocated for 
cancer-associated emesis, produce significant side effects 
and exhibit no more efficacy than antidopaminergic 
agents. Most antiemetic regimens produce greater reduc-
tions in vomiting than in nausea.
The clinician should exercise caution in managing 
the pregnant patient with nausea. Studies of the tera-
togenic effects of available antiemetic agents provide 
conflicting results. Few controlled trials have been per-
formed in nausea of pregnancy, although antihista-
mines such as meclizine and antidopaminergics such 
as prochlorperazine demonstrate efficacy greater than 
placebo. Some obstetricians offer alternative therapies 
such as pyridoxine, acupressure, or ginger.
Controlling emesis in cyclic vomiting syndrome is a 
challenge. In many patients, prophylaxis with tricyclic 
antidepressants, cyproheptadine, or β-adrenoceptor 
antagonists can reduce the frequency of attacks. Intra-
venous 5-HT3 antagonists combined with the sedat-
ing effects of a benzodiazepine such as lorazepam 
are a mainstay of treatment of acute symptom flares. 
Small studies report benefits with antimigraine thera-
pies, including the serotonin 5-HT1 agonist sumatrip-
tan, as well as selected anticonvulsant drugs such as 
zonisamide and levetiracetam.
Indigestion
Mechanisms
The most common causes of indigestion are gastro-
esophageal reflux and functional dyspepsia. Other cases 
are a consequence of a more serious organic illness.
Gastroesophageal reflux
Gastroesophageal reflux can result from a variety of 
physiologic defects. Reduced lower esophageal sphincter 
(LES) tone is an important cause of reflux in scleroderma 
and pregnancy; it may also be a factor in patients with-
out other systemic conditions. Many individuals exhibit 
Table 5-2 
Treatment of Nausea and Vomiting
Treatment
Mechanism
Examples
Clinical Indications
Antiemetic 
agents
Antihistaminergic
Anticholinergic
Antidopaminergic 
5-HT3 antagonist
NK1 antagonist
Tricyclic antidepressant
Other antidepressant
Dimenhydrinate, meclizine
Scopolamine
Prochlorperazine, thiethylperazine
Ondansetron, granisetron
Aprepitant
Amitriptyline, nortriptyline
Mirtazapine
Motion sickness, inner ear disease
Motion sickness, inner ear disease
Medication-, toxin-, or metabolic-induced 
emesis
Chemotherapy- and radiation-induced 
emesis, postoperative emesis
Chemotherapy-induced nausea and  
vomiting
Chronic idiopathic nausea, functional  
vomiting, cyclic vomiting syndrome,  
?gastroparesis
?Functional vomiting, ?gastroparesis
Prokinetic 
agents
5-HT4 agonist and 
antidopaminergic
Motilin agonist
Peripheral antidopaminergic
Somatostatin analogue
Acetylcholinesterase inhibitor
Metoclopramide
Erythromycin
Domperidone
Octreotide
Pyridostigmine
Gastroparesis
Gastroparesis, ?intestinal pseudoobstruction
Gastroparesis
Intestinal pseudoobstruction
?Small intestinal dysmotility 
/pseudoobstruction
Special  
settings
Benzodiazepines
Glucocorticoids
Cannabinoids
Lorazepam
Methylprednisolone,  
dexamethasone
Tetrahydrocannabinol
Anticipatory nausea and vomiting with 
chemotherapy
Chemotherapy-induced emesis
Chemotherapy-induced emesis
Abbreviation: ?, indication is uncertain.
 
CHAPTER 5
Nausea, Vomiting, and Indigestion
37
frequent transient LES relaxations during which acid or 
nonacidic fluid bathes the esophagus. Overeating and 
aerophagia can transiently override the barrier function 
of the LES, whereas impaired esophageal body motility 
and reduced salivary secretion prolong fluid exposure. 
The role of hiatal hernias is controversial—although most 
reflux patients exhibit hiatal hernias, most individuals 
with hiatal hernias do not have excess heartburn.
Gastric motor dysfunction
Disturbed gastric motility is purported to cause gastro-
esophageal reflux in some cases of indigestion. Delayed 
gastric emptying is also found in 25–50% of functional 
dyspeptics. The relation of these defects to symptom 
induction is uncertain; studies show poor correlation 
between symptom severity and degrees of motor dys-
function. Impaired gastric fundus relaxation after eating 
may underlie selected dyspeptic symptoms like bloating, 
nausea, and early satiety.
Visceral afferent hypersensitivity
Disturbed gastric sensory function is proposed as a patho-
genic factor in functional dyspepsia. Visceral afferent 
hypersensitivity was first demonstrated in patients with 
IBS who had heightened perception of rectal balloon 
inflation without changes in rectal compliance. Similarly, 
dyspeptic patients experience discomfort with fundic dis-
tention to lower pressures than healthy controls. Some 
patients with heartburn exhibit no increase in reflux of 
acid or nonacidic fluid. These individuals with functional 
heartburn are believed to have heightened perception of 
normal esophageal pH and volume.
Other factors
Helicobacter pylori has a clear etiologic role in peptic ulcer 
disease, but ulcers cause a minority of cases of dyspepsia. 
H. pylori is considered to be a minor factor in the gen-
esis of functional dyspepsia. In contrast, functional dys-
pepsia is associated with a reduced sense of physical and 
mental well-being and is exacerbated by stress, suggest-
ing important roles for psychological factors. Analgesics 
cause dyspepsia, while nitrates, calcium channel blockers, 
theophylline, and progesterone promote gastroesopha-
geal reflux. Other stimuli that induce reflux include eth-
anol, tobacco, and caffeine via LES relaxation. Genetic 
factors may promote development of reflux.
Differential Diagnosis
Gastroesophageal reflux disease
Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is prevalent in 
Western society. Heartburn is reported once monthly 
by 40% of Americans and daily by 7–10%. Most cases 
of heartburn occur because of excess acid reflux, 
although reflux of non acidic fluid may produce similar 
symptoms. Alkaline reflux esophagitis produces GERD-
like symptoms most often in patients who have had 
surgery for peptic ulcer disease. Approximately 10% of 
patients with heartburn of a functional nature exhibit 
normal degrees of esophageal acid exposure and no 
increase in nonacidic reflux.
Functional dyspepsia
Nearly 25% of the populace has dyspepsia at least 
6 times yearly, but only 10–20% of these individuals 
present to physicians. Functional dyspepsia, the cause 
of symptoms in 60% of dyspeptic patients, is defined as 
≥3 months of bothersome postprandial fullness, early 
satiety, or epigastric pain or burning with symptom 
onset at least 6 months before diagnosis in the absence 
of organic cause. Most cases follow a benign course, but 
some patients with H. pylori infection or on nonsteroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) develop ulcers. As 
with idiopathic gastroparesis, some cases of functional 
dyspepsia result from prior gastrointestinal infection.
Ulcer disease
In most cases of GERD, there is no destruction of the 
esophagus. However, 5% of patients develop esopha-
geal ulcers, and some form strictures. Symptoms do 
not reliably distinguish nonerosive from erosive or 
ulcerative esophagitis. Some 15–25% of cases of dys-
pepsia stem from ulcers of the stomach or duodenum. 
The most common causes of ulcer disease are gastric 
infection with H. pylori and use of NSAIDs. Other rare 
causes of gastroduodenal ulcer include Crohn’s disease 
(Chap. 17) and Zollinger-Ellison syndrome (Chap. 14), 
a condition resulting from gastrin overproduction by an 
endocrine tumor.
Malignancy
Dyspeptic patients often seek care because of fear of 
cancer. However, <2% of cases result from gastroesoph-
ageal malignancy. Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma 
occurs most often in those with histories of tobacco or 
ethanol intake. Other risk factors include prior caustic 
ingestion, achalasia, and the hereditary disorder tylosis. 
Esophageal adenocarcinoma usually complicates long-
standing acid reflux. Between 8 and 20% of GERD 
patients exhibit intestinal metaplasia of the esophagus, 
termed Barrett’s metaplasia. This condition predisposes to 
esophageal adenocarcinoma (Chap. 49). Gastric malig-
nancies include adenocarcinoma, which is prevalent in 
certain Asian societies, and lymphoma.
SECTION I
Cardinal Manifestations of Gastrointestinal Disease
38
Other causes
Opportunistic fungal or viral esophageal infections may 
produce heartburn or chest discomfort but more often 
cause odynophagia. Other causes of esophageal inflam-
mation include eosinophilic esophagitis and pill esoph-
agitis. Biliary colic is in the differential diagnosis of 
dyspepsia, but most patients with true biliary colic 
report discrete episodes of right upper quadrant or epi-
gastric pain rather than chronic burning discomfort, 
nausea, and bloating. Intestinal lactase deficiency pro-
duces gas, bloating, discomfort, and diarrhea after lac-
tose ingestion. Lactase deficiency occurs in 15–25% of 
whites of northern European descent but is more com-
mon in blacks and Asians. Intolerance of other car-
bohydrates (e.g., fructose, sorbitol) produces similar 
symptoms. Small-intestinal bacterial overgrowth may 
produce dyspepsia, often with bowel dysfunction, dis-
tention, and malabsorption. Eosinophilic infiltration 
of the duodenal mucosa is described in some cases of 
dyspepsia. Pancreatic disease (chronic pancreatitis and 
malignancy), hepatocellular carcinoma, celiac disease, 
Ménétrier’s disease, infiltrative diseases (sarcoidosis and 
eosinophilic gastroenteritis), mesenteric ischemia, thy-
roid and parathyroid disease, and abdominal wall strain 
cause dyspepsia. Extraperitoneal etiologies of indigestion 
include congestive heart failure and tuberculosis. Inves-
tigation is ongoing into genetic markers that predispose 
to developing functional dyspepsia.
APPROACH TO THE
PATIENt	
Indigestion
History and Physical Examination 
Care of the patient with indigestion requires a thorough 
interview. GERD classically produces heartburn, a sub-
sternal warmth in the epigastrium that moves toward 
the neck. Heartburn often is exacerbated by meals and 
may awaken the patient. Associated symptoms include 
regurgitation of acid or nonacidic fluid and water brash, 
the reflex release of salty salivary secretions into the 
mouth. Atypical symptoms include pharyngitis, asthma, 
cough, bronchitis, hoarseness, and chest pain that  
mimics angina. Some patients with acid reflux on 
esophageal pH testing do not report heartburn, but 
note abdominal pain or other symptoms.
Some patients with dyspepsia report a predomi-
nance of epigastric pain or burning that is intermittent 
and not generalized or localized to other regions. Others 
experience a postprandial distress syndrome charac-
terized by fullness occurring after normal-sized meals 
and early satiety that prevents completion of regular 
meals, with associated bloating, belching, or nausea. 
Functional dyspepsia overlaps with other functional  
disorders such as IBS.
The physical exam with GERD and functional dys-
pepsia usually is normal. In atypical GERD, pharyngeal 
erythema and wheezing may be noted. Recurrent 
acid regurgitation may cause poor dentition. Func-
tional dyspeptics may report epigastric tenderness or 
distention.
Discrimination between functional and organic causes 
of indigestion mandates exclusion of selected historic 
and examination features. Odynophagia suggests 
esophageal infection, while dysphagia is worrisome 
for a benign or malignant esophageal blockage. Other 
alarming features include unexplained weight loss, 
recurrent vomiting, occult or gross gastrointestinal 
bleeding, jaundice, a palpable mass or adenopathy, 
and a family history of gastrointestinal malignancy.
Diagnostic Testing  Because indigestion is 
prevalent and most cases result from GERD or func-
tional dyspepsia, a general principle is to perform only 
limited and directed diagnostic testing of selected indi-
viduals.
Once alarm factors are excluded (Table 5-3), patients 
with typical GERD do not need further evaluation and 
are treated empirically. Upper endoscopy is indicated 
to exclude mucosal injury in cases with atypical symp-
toms, symptoms unresponsive to acid suppressing 
drugs, or alarm factors. For heartburn >5 years in dura-
tion, especially in patients >50 years old, endoscopy 
is recommended to screen for Barrett’s metaplasia. 
However, the clinical benefits and cost-effectiveness 
of this approach have not been validated in controlled 
studies. Ambulatory esophageal pH testing using a 
catheter method or an implanted esophageal capsule 
device is considered for drug-refractory symptoms and 
atypical symptoms like unexplained chest pain. Esoph-
ageal manometry most commonly is ordered when  
surgical treatment of GERD is considered. A low LES 
pressure may predict failure of drug therapy and helps 
select patients who may require surgery. Demonstra-
tion of disordered esophageal body peristalsis may 
affect the decision to operate or modify the type 
Table 5-3 
Alarm Symptoms in GERD
Odynophagia
Unexplained weight loss
Recurrent vomiting
Occult or gross gastrointestinal bleeding
Jaundice
Palpable mass or adenopathy
Family history of gastrointestinal malignancy
 
CHAPTER 5
Nausea, Vomiting, and Indigestion
39
of operation chosen. High-resolution manometric  
methods improve characterization of ineffective esoph-
ageal propulsion, which may contribute to impaired 
esophageal acid clearance in some GERD patients. 
Manometry with provocative testing may clarify the 
diagnosis in patients with atypical symptoms. Blind 
perfusion of saline and then acid into the esophagus, 
known as the Bernstein test, can delineate whether unex-
plained chest discomfort results from acid reflux. Non-
acidic reflux may be suggested by nuclear medicine 
reflux scanning or detected by combined esophageal 
impedance-pH testing, which increases the diagnostic 
yield by 15% versus pH testing alone. Ambulatory mea-
surement of esophageal bilirubin levels facilitates diag-
nosis of alkaline reflux.
Upper endoscopy is performed as the initial diagnos-
tic test in patients with unexplained dyspepsia who are 
>55 years old or who have alarm factors because of the 
elevated risks of malignancy and ulcer in these groups. 
The management approach to patients <55 years old 
without alarm factors is dependent on the local preva-
lence of H. pylori infection. For individuals in regions with 
low H. pylori prevalence (<10%), a 4-week trial of an acid-
suppressing medication such as a proton pump inhibitor 
is recommended. If this fails, a “test and treat” approach 
is most commonly applied. H. pylori status is determined 
with urea breath testing, stool antigen measurement, or 
blood serology testing. Those who are H. pylori positive 
are given therapy to eradicate the infection. If symp-
toms resolve on either regimen, no further interven-
tion is required. For patients in areas with high H. pylori 
prevalence (>10%), an initial test and treat approach is 
advocated, with a subsequent trial of an acid-suppress-
ing regimen offered for those in whom H. pylori treat-
ment fails or for those who are negative for the infec-
tion. In each of these patient subsets, upper endoscopy 
is reserved for those whose symptoms fail to respond to 
therapy.
Further testing is indicated if other factors are pres-
ent. If bleeding is reported, a blood count is obtained 
to exclude anemia. Thyroid chemistries or calcium 
levels screen for metabolic disease, whereas serolo-
gies may suggest celiac disease. For possible pancre-
aticobiliary causes, pancreatic and liver chemistries 
are obtained. If abnormalities are found, ultrasound 
or CT may give important information. Gastric empty-
ing measurement is considered to exclude gastropa-
resis in patients whose dyspeptic symptoms resemble 
postprandial distress when drug therapy fails. Gas-
tric scintigraphy also assesses for gastroparesis in 
patients with GERD, especially if surgical intervention 
is being considered. Breath testing after carbohydrate 
ingestion may detect lactase deficiency, intolerance  
to other carbohydrates, or small-intestinal bacterial 
overgrowth.
Treatment      General Principles 
For mild indigestion, reassurance that a careful evalua-
tion revealed no serious organic disease may be the only 
intervention needed. Drugs that cause gastroesophageal 
reflux or dyspepsia should be stopped, if possible. Patients 
with GERD should limit ethanol, caffeine, chocolate, and 
tobacco use because of their effects on the LES. Other mea-
sures in GERD include ingesting a low-fat diet, avoiding 
snacks before bedtime, and elevating the head of the bed.
Specific therapies for organic disease should be 
offered when possible. Surgery is appropriate in dis­
orders like biliary colic, while diet changes are indicated 
for lactase deficiency or celiac disease. Some illnesses 
such as peptic ulcer disease may be cured by specific 
medical regimens. However, because most indigestion 
is caused by GERD or functional dyspepsia, medications 
that reduce gastric acid, modulate motility, or blunt gas-
tric sensitivity are indicated.
Acid-Suppressing 
or 
-Neutralizing 
Medications  Drugs that reduce or neutralize 
gastric acid are often prescribed for GERD. Histamine H2 
antagonists such as cimetidine, ranitidine, famotidine, 
and nizatidine are useful in mild to moderate GERD. 
For severe symptoms or for many cases of erosive or 
ulcerative esophagitis, proton pump inhibitors such as 
omeprazole, lansoprazole, rabeprazole, pantoprazole, 
esomeprazole, or dexlansoprazole are needed. These 
drugs, which inhibit gastric H+, K+-ATPase, are more 
potent than H2 antagonists. Up to one-third of GERD 
patients do not respond to proton pump inhibitors; one-
third of these patients have nonacidic reflux while 10% 
have persistent acid-related disease. Acid suppressants 
may be taken continuously or on demand depending 
on symptom severity. Infrequent potential complica-
tions of long-term proton pump inhibitors may include 
infection, small intestinal bacterial overgrowth, nutri-
ent deficiency (vitamin B12, iron, calcium), bone demin-
eralization, and impaired medication absorption (e.g. 
clopidogrel). Many patients started on a proton pump 
inhibitor can be stepped down to an H2 antagonist. 
Combining a proton pump inhibitor with an H2 antago-
nist is provided for some refractory cases.
Acid-suppressing drugs are also effective in appropri-
ately selected patients with functional dyspepsia. Meta-
analysis of eight controlled trials calculated a risk ratio of 
0.86, with a 95% confidence interval of 0.78–0.95, favor-
ing proton pump inhibitor therapy over placebo. The 
benefits of less potent acid-reducing therapies such as 
H2 antagonists are unproven.
Liquid antacids are useful for short-term control 
of mild GERD but are less effective for severe dis-
ease unless given at high doses that elicit side effects  
(diarrhea and constipation with magnesium- and 
 
SECTION I
Cardinal Manifestations of Gastrointestinal Disease
40
­aluminum-containing agents, respectively). Alginic acid 
in combination with antacids may form a floating bar-
rier to acid reflux in individuals with upright symptoms. 
Sucralfate is a salt of aluminum hydroxide and sucrose 
octasulfate that buffers acid and binds pepsin and bile 
salts. Its efficacy in GERD is felt to be comparable to that 
of H2 antagonists.
Helicobacter 
Pylori 
Eradication 
H. pylori eradication is clearly indicated only for peptic 
ulcer and mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue gastric 
lymphoma. The utility of eradication therapy in func-
tional dyspepsia is less well established, but <15% of 
cases relate to this infection. Meta-analysis of 13 con-
trolled trials calculated a risk ratio of 0.91, with a 95% 
confidence interval of 0.87–0.96, favoring H. pylori 
eradication therapy over placebo. Several drug com-
binations show efficacy in eliminating the infection 
(Chap. 14); most include 10–14 days of a proton pump 
inhibitor or bismuth subsalicylate in concert with two 
antibiotics. H. pylori infection is associated with reduced 
prevalence of GERD, especially in the elderly. However, 
eradication of the infection does not worsen GERD 
symptoms. To date, no consensus recommendations 
regarding H. pylori eradication in GERD patients have 
been offered.
Agents that Modify Gastrointestinal 
Motor Activity  Motor stimulants (also known 
as prokinetics) such as metoclopramide, erythromy-
cin, and domperidone have limited utility in GERD. 
Several studies have evaluated the effectiveness 
of motor-stimulating drugs in functional dyspep-
sia; however, convincing evidence of their benefits 
has not been found. Some clinicians suggest that 
patients with symptoms resembling postprandial dis-
tress may respond preferentially to prokinetic drugs. 
The γ-aminobutyric acid B (GABA-B) agonist baclofen 
reduces esophageal exposure to acid and non acidic 
fluids by inhibiting transient LES relaxations; this drug 
is proposed for refractory acid and non acid reflux.
Other 
Options  Antireflux surgery (fundopli-
cation) is most often offered to GERD patients who are 
young and may require lifelong therapy, have typical 
heartburn and regurgitation, and are responsive to pro-
ton pump inhibitors. Surgery also is effective for some 
cases of non acidic reflux. Individuals who may respond 
less well to operative therapy include those with atypi-
cal symptoms and those who have esophageal body 
motor disturbances. Fundoplications are performed 
laparoscopically when possible and include the Nissen 
and Toupet procedures in which the proximal stom-
ach is partly or completely wrapped around the distal 
esophagus to increase LES pressure. Dysphagia, gas-
bloat syndrome, and gastroparesis may be long-term 
complications of these procedures. The utility and safety 
of endoscopic therapies for increasing the barrier func-
tion of the gastroesophageal junction, including radio-
frequency energy delivery and gastroplication, have not 
been fully investigated for patients with refractory GERD.
Some patients with functional heartburn and func-
tional dyspepsia refractory to standard therapies may 
respond to low-dose antidepressants in tricyclic and 
other classes. Their mechanism of action is unknown but 
may involve blunting of visceral pain processing in the 
brain. Gas and bloating are among the most troubling 
symptoms in some patients with indigestion and can 
be difficult to treat. Dietary exclusion of gas-producing 
foods such as legumes and use of simethicone or acti-
vated charcoal provide benefits in some cases. Therapies 
that modify gut flora, including antibiotics and probiotic 
preparations containing active bacterial cultures, are use-
ful for cases of bacterial overgrowth and functional lower 
gastrointestinal disorders, but their utility in functional 
dyspepsia is unproven. Psychological treatments may be 
offered for refractory functional dyspepsia, but no con-
vincing data suggest their efficacy.
 Michael Camilleri  I   Joseph A. Murray 
41
 Diarrhea and constipation are exceedingly common 
and, together, exact an enormous toll in terms of mor-
tality, morbidity, social inconvenience, loss of work 
productivity, and consumption of medical resources. 
Worldwide, >1 billion individuals suffer one or more 
episodes of acute diarrhea each year. Among the 100 
million persons affected annually by acute diarrhea in 
the United States, nearly half must restrict activities, 
10% consult physicians, ∼250,000 require hospitaliza-
tion, and ∼5000 die (primarily the elderly). The annual 
economic burden to society may exceed $20 billion. 
Acute infectious diarrhea remains one of the most com-
mon causes of mortality in developing countries, par-
ticularly among children, accounting for 2–3 million 
deaths per year. Constipation, by contrast, is rarely asso-
ciated with mortality and is exceedingly common in 
developed countries, leading to frequent self-medication 
and, in a third of those, to medical consultation. Popu-
lation statistics on chronic diarrhea and constipation are 
more uncertain, perhaps due to variable defi nitions and 
reporting, but the frequency of these conditions is also 
high. United States population surveys put prevalence 
rates for chronic diarrhea at 2–7% and for chronic con-
stipation at 12–19%, with women being affected twice 
as often as men. Diarrhea and constipation are among 
the most common patient complaints faced by internists 
and primary care physicians, and they account for nearly 
50% of referrals to gastroenterologists. 
 Although diarrhea and constipation may present as 
mere nuisance symptoms at one extreme, they can be 
severe or life-threatening at the other. Even mild symp-
toms may signal a serious underlying gastrointestinal 
lesion, such as colorectal cancer, or systemic disorder, 
such as thyroid disease. Given the heterogeneous causes 
and potential severity of these common complaints, it 
is imperative for clinicians to appreciate the pathophysi-
ology, etiologic classifi cation, diagnostic strategies, and 
principles of management of diarrhea and constipation, 
so that rational and cost-effective care can be delivered. 
 DIARRHEA AND CONSTIPATION 
 Chapter 6 
 norMaL phYsioLoGY 
 While the primary function of the small intestine 
is the digestion and assimilation of nutrients from 
food, the small intestine and colon together perform 
important functions that regulate the secretion and 
absorption of water and electrolytes, the storage and 
subsequent transport of intraluminal contents aborally, 
and the salvage of some nutrients after bacterial metab-
olism of carbohydrate that are not absorbed in the 
small intestine. The main motor functions are sum-
marized in  Table 6-1 . Alterations in fl uid and elec-
trolyte handling contribute signifi cantly to diarrhea. 
Alterations in motor and sensory functions of the colon 
result in highly prevalent syndromes such as irritable 
bowel syndrome (IBS), chronic diarrhea, and chronic 
constipation. 
 neural control 
 The small intestine and colon have intrinsic and extrin-
sic innervation. The  intrinsic innervation , also called the 
Table 6-1 
 normal gastroIntestInal motIlIty: 
FunctIons at dIFFerent anatomIc levels 
 stomach and small bowel 
 Synchronized MMC in fasting
 Accommodation, trituration, mixing, transit 
  Stomach ∼3 h
  Small bowel ∼3 h
 Ileal reservoir empties boluses
 colon: irregular mixing, fermentation, absorption, transit 
 Ascending, transverse: reservoirs
 Descending: conduit
 Sigmoid/rectum: volitional reservoir
Abbreviation: MMC, migrating motor complex.
SECTION I
Cardinal Manifestations of Gastrointestinal Disease
42
enteric nervous system, comprises myenteric, submuco-
sal, and mucosal neuronal layers. The function of these 
layers is modulated by interneurons through the actions 
of neurotransmitter amines or peptides, including ace-
tylcholine, vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP), opi-
oids, norepinephrine, serotonin, adenosine triphosphate 
(ATP), and nitric oxide (NO). The myenteric plexus 
regulates smooth-muscle function, and the submucosal 
plexus affects secretion, absorption, and mucosal blood 
flow.
The extrinsic innervations of the small intestine and 
colon are part of the autonomic nervous system and 
also modulate motor and secretory functions. The para-
sympathetic nerves convey visceral sensory and excit-
atory pathways to the colon. Parasympathetic fibers via 
the vagus nerve reach the small intestine and proximal 
colon along the branches of the superior mesenteric 
artery. The distal colon is supplied by sacral parasym-
pathetic nerves (S2–4) via the pelvic plexus; these fibers 
course through the wall of the colon as ascending intra-
colonic fibers as far as, and in some instances including, 
the proximal colon. The chief excitatory neurotransmit-
ters controlling motor function are acetylcholine and 
the tachykinins, such as substance P. The sympathetic 
nerve supply modulates motor functions and reaches 
the small intestine and colon alongside their arterial ves-
sels. Sympathetic input to the gut is generally excitatory 
to sphincters and inhibitory to nonsphincteric muscle. 
Visceral afferents convey sensation from the gut to the 
central nervous system (CNS); initially, they course 
along sympathetic fibers, but as they approach the spi-
nal cord they separate, have cell bodies in the dorsal 
root ganglion, and enter the dorsal horn of the spinal 
cord. Afferent signals are conveyed to the brain along 
the lateral spinothalamic tract and the nociceptive dor-
sal column pathway and are then projected beyond the 
thalamus and brainstem to the insula and cerebral cor-
tex to be perceived. Other afferent fibers synapse in 
the prevertebral ganglia and reflexly modulate intestinal 
motility.
Intestinal Fluid Absorption  
and Secretion
On an average day, 9 L of fluid enter the gastrointestinal 
(GI) tract, ∼1 L of residual fluid reaches the colon, and 
the stool excretion of fluid constitutes about 0.2 L/d. 
The colon has a large capacitance and functional reserve 
and may recover up to four times its usual volume of 
0.8 L/d, provided the rate of flow permits reabsorption 
to occur. Thus, the colon can partially compensate for 
excess fluid delivery to the colon because of intestinal 
absorptive or secretory disorders.
In the colon, sodium absorption is predominantly 
electrogenic, and uptake takes place at the apical mem-
brane; it is compensated for by the export functions of 
the basolateral sodium pump. A variety of neural and 
non-neural mediators regulate colonic fluid and elec-
trolyte balance, including cholinergic, adrenergic, and 
serotonergic mediators. Angiotensin and aldosterone also 
influence colonic absorption, reflecting the common 
embryologic development of the distal colonic epithe-
lium and the renal tubules.
Small-Intestinal Motility
During fasting, the motility of the small intestine is char-
acterized by a cyclical event called the migrating motor 
complex (MMC), which serves to clear nondigestible 
residue from the small intestine (the intestinal “house-
keeper”). This organized, propagated series of contrac-
tions last, on average, 4 min, occur every 60–90 min, 
and usually involve the entire small intestine. After food 
ingestion, the small intestine produces irregular, mixing 
contractions of relatively low amplitude, except in the 
distal ileum where more powerful contractions occur 
intermittently and empty the ileum by bolus transfers.
Ileocolonic Storage and Salvage
The distal ileum acts as a reservoir, emptying intermit-
tently by bolus movements. This action allows time for 
salvage of fluids, electrolytes, and nutrients. Segmenta-
tion by haustra compartmentalizes the colon and facili-
tates mixing, retention of residue, and formation of 
solid stools. There is increased appreciation of the inti-
mate interaction between the colonic function and the 
luminal ecology. The resident bacteria in the colon are 
necessary for the digestion of unabsorbed carbohydrates 
that reach the colon even in health, thereby providing a 
vital source of nutrients to the mucosa. Normal colonic 
flora also keeps pathogens at bay by a variety of mecha-
nisms. In health, the ascending and transverse regions 
of colon function as reservoirs (average transit, 15 h), 
and the descending colon acts as a conduit (average 
transit, 3 h). The colon is efficient at conserving sodium 
and water, a function that is particularly important in 
sodium-depleted patients in whom the small intestine 
alone is unable to maintain sodium balance. Diarrhea or 
constipation may result from alteration in the reservoir 
function of the proximal colon or the propulsive func-
tion of the left colon. Constipation may also result from 
disturbances of the rectal or sigmoid reservoir, typically 
as a result of dysfunction of the pelvic floor, the anal 
sphincters, or the coordination of defecation.
Colonic Motility and Tone
The small intestinal MMC only rarely continues into 
the colon. However, short duration or phasic con­
tractions mix colonic contents, and high-amplitude 
 
CHAPTER 6
Diarrhea and Constipation
43
(>75 mmHg) propagated contractions (HAPCs) are 
sometimes associated with mass movements through 
the colon and normally occur approximately five times 
per day, usually on awakening in the morning and post-
prandially. Increased frequency of HAPCs may result in 
diarrhea or urgency. The predominant phasic contrac-
tions in the colon are irregular and nonpropagated and 
serve a “mixing” function.
Colonic tone refers to the background contractil-
ity upon which phasic contractile activity (typically 
contractions lasting <15 s) is superimposed. It is an 
important cofactor in the colon’s capacitance (volume 
accommodation) and sensation.
Colonic Motility after  
Meal Ingestion
After meal ingestion, colonic phasic and tonic contrac-
tility increase for a period of ∼2 h. The initial phase 
(∼10 min) is mediated by the vagus nerve in response 
to mechanical distention of the stomach. The subse-
quent response of the colon requires caloric stimula-
tion and is mediated at least in part by hormones (e.g., 
gastrin and serotonin).
Defecation
Tonic contraction of the puborectalis muscle, which 
forms a sling around the rectoanal junction, is impor-
tant to maintain continence; during defecation, sacral 
parasympathetic nerves relax this muscle, facilitating 
the straightening of the rectoanal angle (Fig. 6-1). 
At rest
During straining
Anorectal
angle
Anorectal
angle
Descent of the pelvic floor
Coccyx
Puborectalis
Pubis
External anal
sphincter
Internal anal
sphincter
A
B
Figure 6-1
Sagittal view of the anorectum (A) at rest and (B) during 
straining to defecate. Continence is maintained by normal 
rectal sensation and tonic contraction of the internal anal 
sphincter and the puborectalis muscle, which wraps around 
the anorectum, maintaining an anorectal angle between 
80° and 110°. During defecation, the pelvic floor muscles 
Distention of the rectum results in transient relaxation 
of the internal anal sphincter via intrinsic and reflex 
sympathetic innervation. As sigmoid and rectal con-
tractions increase the pressure within the rectum, the 
rectosigmoid angle opens by >15°. Voluntary relax-
ation of the external anal sphincter (striated muscle 
innervated by the pudendal nerve) in response to the 
sensation produced by distention permits the evac-
uation of feces; this evacuation process can be 
augmented by an increase in intraabdominal pressure 
created by the Valsalva maneuver. Defecation can also 
be delayed voluntarily by contraction of the external 
anal sphincter.
Diarrhea
Definition
Diarrhea is loosely defined as passage of abnormally 
liquid or unformed stools at an increased frequency. 
For adults on a typical Western diet, stool weight >200 
g/d can generally be considered diarrheal. Diarrhea 
may be further defined as acute if <2 weeks, persistent if 
2–4 weeks, and chronic if >4 weeks in duration.
Two common conditions, usually associated with 
the passage of stool totaling <200 g/d, must be distin-
guished from diarrhea, because diagnostic and thera-
peutic algorithms differ. Pseudodiarrhea, or the frequent 
passage of small volumes of stool, is often associated 
with rectal urgency and accompanies IBS or proctitis. 
Fecal incontinence is the involuntary discharge of rectal 
contents and is most often caused by neuromuscular 
(including the puborectalis) relax, allowing the anorec-
tal angle to straighten by at least 15°, and the perineum 
descends by 1–3.5 cm. The external anal sphincter 
also relaxes and reduces pressure on the anal canal. 
(Reproduced with permission from A Lembo, M Camilleri: 
N Engl J Med 349:1360, 2003.)
SECTION I
Cardinal Manifestations of Gastrointestinal Disease
44
disorders or structural anorectal problems. Diarrhea and 
urgency, especially if severe, may aggravate or cause 
incontinence. Pseudodiarrhea and fecal incontinence 
occur at prevalence rates comparable to or higher than 
that of chronic diarrhea and should always be consid-
ered in patients complaining of “diarrhea.” Overflow 
diarrhea may occur in nursing home patients due to 
fecal impaction that is readily detectable by rectal exam-
ination. A careful history and physical examination gen-
erally allow these conditions to be discriminated from 
true diarrhea.
Acute Diarrhea
More than 90% of cases of acute diarrhea are caused by 
infectious agents; these cases are often accompanied by 
vomiting, fever, and abdominal pain. The remaining 
10% or so are caused by medications, toxic ingestions, 
ischemia, and other conditions.
Infectious agents
Most infectious diarrheas are acquired by fecal-oral 
transmission or, more commonly, via ingestion of food 
or water contaminated with pathogens from human or 
animal feces. In the immunocompetent person, the resi-
dent fecal microflora, containing >500 taxonomically 
distinct species, are rarely the source of diarrhea and 
may actually play a role in suppressing the growth of 
ingested pathogens. Disturbances of flora by antibiotics 
can lead to diarrhea by reducing the digestive function 
or by allowing the overgrowth of pathogens, such as 
Clostridium difficile (Chap. 24). Acute infection or injury 
occurs when the ingested agent overwhelms or bypasses 
the host’s mucosal immune and nonimmune (gastric 
acid, digestive enzymes, mucus secretion, peristalsis, and 
suppressive resident flora) defenses. Established clini-
cal associations with specific enteropathogens may offer 
diagnostic clues.
In the United States, five high-risk groups are recognized:
1.	 Travelers. Nearly 40% of tourists to endemic regions 
of Latin America, Africa, and Asia develop so-called 
traveler’s diarrhea, most commonly due to entero-
toxigenic or enteroaggregative Escherichia coli as well 
as to Campylobacter, Shigella, Aeromonas, norovirus, 
Coronavirus, and Salmonella. Visitors to Russia (espe-
cially St. Petersburg) may have increased risk of 
Giardia-associated diarrhea; visitors to Nepal may 
acquire Cyclospora. Campers, backpackers, and swim-
mers in wilderness areas may become infected with 
Giardia. Cruise ships may be affected by outbreaks of 
gastroenteritis caused by agents such as norovirus.
2.	 Consumers of certain foods. Diarrhea closely following 
food consumption at a picnic, banquet, or restaurant 
may suggest infection with Salmonella, Campylobacter, 
or Shigella from chicken; enterohemorrhagic E. coli 
(O157:H7) from undercooked hamburger; Bacillus 
cereus from fried rice or other reheated food; Staph-
ylococcus aureus or Salmonella from mayonnaise or 
creams; Salmonella from eggs; Listeria from uncooked 
foods or soft cheeses; and Vibrio species, Salmonella, 
or acute hepatitis A from seafood, especially if raw.
3.	 Immunodeficient persons. Individuals at risk for diar-
rhea include those with either primary immunodefi-
ciency (e.g., IgA deficiency, common variable hypo-
gammaglobulinemia, chronic granulomatous disease) 
or the much more common secondary immunode-
ficiency states (e.g., AIDS, senescence, pharmaco-
logic suppression). Common enteric pathogens often 
cause a more severe and protracted diarrheal illness, 
and, particularly in persons with AIDS, opportu-
nistic infections, such as by Mycobacterium species, 
certain viruses (cytomegalovirus, adenovirus, and 
herpes simplex), and protozoa (Cryptosporidium, 
Isospora belli, Microsporida, and Blastocystis hominis) 
may also play a role. In patients with AIDS, agents 
transmitted venereally per rectum (e.g., Neisseria gon-
orrhoeae, Treponema pallidum, Chlamydia) may con-
tribute to proctocolitis. Persons with hemochro-
matosis are especially prone to invasive, even fatal, 
enteric infections with Vibrio species and Yersinia 
infections and should avoid raw fish.
4.	 Daycare attendees and their family members. Infections 
with Shigella, Giardia, Cryptosporidium, rotavirus, 
and other agents are very common and should be 
considered.
5.	 Institutionalized persons. Infectious diarrhea is one of 
the most frequent categories of nosocomial infec-
tions in many hospitals and long-term care facili-
ties; the causes are a variety of microorganisms but 
most commonly C. difficile. C. difficile can affect 
those with no history of antibiotic use and may be 
acquired in the community.
The pathophysiology underlying acute diarrhea by 
infectious agents produces specific clinical features that 
may also be helpful in diagnosis (Table 6-2). Profuse, 
watery diarrhea secondary to small-bowel hypersecre-
tion occurs with ingestion of preformed bacterial tox-
ins, enterotoxin-producing bacteria, and enteroadherent 
pathogens. Diarrhea associated with marked vomiting 
and minimal or no fever may occur abruptly within a 
few hours after ingestion of the former two types; vom-
iting is usually less, abdominal cramping or bloating 
is greater, and fever is higher with the latter. Cytotoxin-­
producing and invasive microorganisms all cause 
high fever and abdominal pain. Invasive bacteria and 
Entamoeba histolytica often cause bloody diarrhea 
(referred to as dysentery). Yersinia invades the termi-
nal ileal and proximal colon mucosa and may cause 
 
CHAPTER 6
Diarrhea and Constipation
45
Table 6-2 
Association Between Pathobiology of Causative Agents and Clinical Features in Acute 
Infectious Diarrhea
Pathobiology/Agents
Incubation 
Period
Vomiting
Abdominal 
Pain
Fever
Diarrhea
Toxin producers
  Preformed toxin
    Bacillus cereus, Staphylococcus aureus, 
  Clostridium perfringens
1–8 h 
8–24 h
3–4+
1–2+
0–1+
3–4+, watery
  Enterotoxin
    Vibrio cholerae, enterotoxigenic
  Escherichia coli, Klebsiella 
pneumoniae, Aeromonas species
8–72 h
2–4+
1–2+
0–1+
3–4+, watery
Enteroadherent
  Enteropathogenic and enteroadherent  
  E. coli, Giardia organisms, 
cryptosporidiosis, helminths
1–8 d
0–1+
1–3+
0–2+
1–2+, watery, mushy
Cytotoxin producers
  C. difficile
1–3 d
0–1+
3–4+
1–2+
1–3+, usually watery, 
occasionally bloody
  Hemorrhagic E. coli
12–72 h
0–1+
3–4+
1–2+
1–3+, initially watery, 
quickly bloody
Invasive organisms
  Minimal inflammation
    Rotavirus and norovirus
1–3 d
1–3+
2–3+
3–4+
1–3+, watery
  Variable inflammation
    Salmonella, Campylobacter, and 
  Aeromonas species, Vibrio parahae­
molyticus, Yersinia
12 h–11 d
0–3+
2–4+
3–4+
1–4+, watery or 
bloody
  Severe inflammation
    Shigella species, enteroinvasive E. coli, 
  Entamoeba histolytica
12 h–8 d
0–1+
3–4+
3–4+
1–2+, bloody
Source: Adapted from DW Powell, in T Yamada (ed): Textbook of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 4th ed. Philadelphia, Lippincott Williams & 
Wilkins, 2003.
especially severe abdominal pain with tenderness mim-
icking acute appendicitis.
Finally, infectious diarrhea may be associated with 
systemic manifestations. Reactive arthritis (formerly 
known as Reiter’s syndrome), arthritis, urethritis, and 
conjunctivitis may accompany or follow infections 
by Salmonella, Campylobacter, Shigella, and Yersinia. 
Yersiniosis may also lead to an autoimmune-type thy-
roiditis, pericarditis, and glomerulonephritis. Both 
enterohemorrhagic E. coli (O157:H7) and Shigella can 
lead to the hemolytic-uremic syndrome with an attendant 
high mortality rate. The syndrome of postinfectious IBS 
has now been recognized as a complication of infectious 
diarrhea. Acute diarrhea can also be a major symptom 
of several systemic infections including viral hepatitis, 
listeriosis, legionellosis, and toxic shock syndrome.
Other causes
Side effects from medications are probably the most com-
mon noninfectious causes of acute diarrhea, and etiology 
may be suggested by a temporal association between use 
and symptom onset. Although innumerable medica-
tions may produce diarrhea, some of the more frequently 
incriminated include antibiotics, cardiac antidysrhythmics, 
antihypertensives, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs 
(NSAIDs), certain antidepressants, chemotherapeutic 
agents, bronchodilators, antacids, and laxatives. Occlusive 
or nonocclusive ischemic colitis typically occurs in persons 
>50 years; often presents as acute lower abdominal pain 
preceding watery, then bloody diarrhea; and generally 
results in acute inflammatory changes in the sigmoid or 
left colon while sparing the rectum. Acute diarrhea may 
accompany colonic diverticulitis and graft-versus-host disease. 
Acute diarrhea, often associated with systemic compro-
mise, can follow ingestion of toxins including organo-
phosphate insecticides; amanita and other mushrooms; 
arsenic; and preformed environmental toxins in seafood, 
such as ciguatera and scombroid. Acute anaphylaxis to 
food ingestion can have a similar presentation. Conditions 
causing chronic diarrhea can also be confused with acute 
diarrhea early in their course. This confusion may occur 
SECTION I
Cardinal Manifestations of Gastrointestinal Disease
46
with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and some of the 
other inflammatory chronic diarrheas that may have an 
abrupt rather than insidious onset and exhibit features that 
mimic infection.
APPROACH TO THE
PATIENT	
Acute Diarrhea
The decision to evaluate acute diarrhea depends on 
its severity and duration and on various host factors 
(Fig. 6-2). Most episodes of acute diarrhea are mild 
and self-limited and do not justify the cost and poten-
tial morbidity rate of diagnostic or pharmacologic  
interventions. Indications for evaluation include profuse 
diarrhea with dehydration, grossly bloody stools, fever 
≥38.5°C (≥101°F), duration >48 h without improvement, 
recent antibiotic use, new community outbreaks, associ-
ated severe abdominal pain in patients >50 years, and 
elderly (≥70 years) or immunocompromised patients. In 
some cases of moderately severe febrile diarrhea asso-
ciated with fecal leukocytes (or increased fecal levels of 
History and
  physical exam
Moderate
  (activities altered)
Mild
  (unrestricted)
Observe
Resolves
Persists*
Severe
  (incapacitated)
Institute fluid and electrolyte replacement
Antidiarrheal
  agents
Resolves
Persists*
Stool microbiology
  studies
Pathogen found
Fever ≥38.5°C, bloody stools,   fecal WBCs,
  immunocompromised or elderly host
Evaluate and
  treat accordingly
Acute Diarrhea
Likely noninfectious
Likely infectious
Yes†
No
Yes†
No
Select specific
  treatment
Empirical
  treatment + further
  evaluation
Figure 6-2
Algorithm for the management of acute diarrhea. 
­Consider empirical Rx before evaluation with (*) metronida-
zole and with (†) quinolone. WBCs, white blood cells.
the leukocyte proteins) or with gross blood, a diagnos-
tic evaluation might be avoided in favor of an empirical 
antibiotic trial discussed later.
The cornerstone of diagnosis in those suspected of 
severe acute infectious diarrhea is microbiologic analy-
sis of the stool. Workup includes cultures for bacterial 
and viral pathogens, direct inspection for ova and par-
asites, and immunoassays for certain bacterial toxins  
(C. difficile), viral antigens (rotavirus), and protozoal 
antigens (Giardia, E. histolytica). The aforementioned 
clinical and epidemiologic associations may assist in 
focusing the evaluation. If a particular pathogen or set 
of possible pathogens is so implicated, then either the 
whole panel of routine studies may not be necessary 
or, in some instances, special cultures may be appropri-
ate as for enterohemorrhagic and other types of E. coli, 
Vibrio species, and Yersinia. Molecular diagnosis of 
pathogens in stool can be made by identification of 
unique DNA sequences; and evolving microarray tech-
nologies could lead to a more rapid, sensitive, specific, 
and cost-­effective diagnostic approach in the future.
Persistent diarrhea is commonly due to Giardia 
(Chap. 32), but additional causative organisms that 
should be considered include C. difficile (especially 
if antibiotics had been administered), E. histolytica, 
Cryptosporidium, Campylobacter, and others. If stool 
studies are unrevealing, flexible sigmoidoscopy with 
biopsies and upper endoscopy with duodenal aspi-
rates and biopsies may be indicated. Brainerd diarrhea 
is an increasingly recognized entity characterized by an 
abrupt-onset diarrhea that persists for at least 4 weeks, 
but may last 1–3 years, and is thought to be of infec-
tious origin. It may be associated with subtle inflamma-
tion of the distal small intestine or proximal colon.
Structural examination by sigmoidoscopy, colo-
noscopy, or abdominal CT scanning (or other imag-
ing approaches) may be appropriate in patients with 
uncharacterized persistent diarrhea to exclude IBD or as 
an initial approach in patients with suspected noninfec-
tious acute diarrhea such as might be caused by isch-
emic colitis, diverticulitis, or partial bowel obstruction.
Treatment	
Acute Diarrhea
Fluid and electrolyte replacement are of central impor-
tance to all forms of acute diarrhea. Fluid replacement 
alone may suffice for mild cases. Oral sugar-electrolyte 
solutions (sport drinks or designed formulations) should 
be instituted promptly with severe diarrhea to limit 
dehydration, which is the major cause of death. Pro-
foundly dehydrated patients, especially infants and the 
elderly, require IV rehydration.
 
CHAPTER 6
Diarrhea and Constipation
47
In moderately severe nonfebrile and nonbloody diar-
rhea, antimotility and antisecretory agents such as lop-
eramide can be useful adjuncts to control symptoms. 
Such agents should be avoided with febrile dysentery, 
which may be exacerbated or prolonged by them.  
Bismuth subsalicylate may reduce symptoms of vomiting 
and diarrhea but should not be used to treat immuno-
compromised patients or those with renal impairment 
because of the risk of bismuth encephalopathy.
Judicious use of antibiotics is appropriate in selected 
instances of acute diarrhea and may reduce its severity 
and duration (Fig. 6-2). Many physicians treat moder-
ately to severely ill patients with febrile dysentery empiri-
cally without diagnostic evaluation using a quinolone, 
such as ciprofloxacin (500 mg bid for 3–5 days). Empirical  
treatment can also be considered for suspected giar-
diasis with metronidazole (250 mg qid for 7 days). Selec-
tion of antibiotics and dosage regimens are otherwise 
dictated by specific pathogens, geographic patterns 
of resistance, and conditions found (Chaps. 23 and  
27). Antibiotic coverage is indicated, whether or not a  
causative organism is discovered, in patients who are 
immunocompromised, have mechanical heart valves or 
recent vascular grafts, or are elderly. Bismuth subsalicylate  
may reduce the frequency of traveler’s diarrhea. Antibiotic 
prophylaxis is only indicated for certain patients travel-
ing to high-risk countries in whom the likelihood or seri-
ousness of acquired diarrhea would be especially high, 
including those with immunocompromise, IBD, hemo-
chromatosis, or gastric achlorhydria. Use of ciprofloxacin 
or rifaximin may reduce bacterial diarrhea in such trav-
elers by 90%, though rifaximin is not suitable for inva-
sive disease, but rather as treatment for uncomplicated  
traveler’s diarrhea. Finally, physicians should be vigi-
lant to identify if an outbreak of diarrheal illness is  
occurring and to alert the public health authorities 
promptly. This may reduce the ultimate size of the 
affected population.
Chronic Diarrhea
Diarrhea lasting >4 weeks warrants evaluation to 
exclude serious underlying pathology. In contrast to 
acute diarrhea, most of the causes of chronic diarrhea 
are noninfectious. The classification of chronic diarrhea 
by pathophysiologic mechanism facilitates a rational 
approach to management, though many diseases cause 
diarrhea by more than one mechanism (Table 6-3).
Table 6-3
Major Causes of Chronic Diarrhea According to Predominant Pathophysiologic Mechanism
Secretory causes
  Exogenous stimulant laxatives
  Chronic ethanol ingestion
  Other drugs and toxins
  Endogenous laxatives (dihydroxy bile acids)
  Idiopathic secretory diarrhea
  Certain bacterial infections
  Bowel resection, disease, or fistula (↓ absorption)
  Partial bowel obstruction or fecal impaction
  Hormone-producing tumors (carcinoid, VIPoma, medullary 
  cancer of thyroid, mastocytosis, gastrinoma, colorectal  
villous adenoma)
  Addison’s disease
  Congenital electrolyte absorption defects
Osmotic causes
  Osmotic laxatives (Mg2+, PO4
−3, SO4
−2)
  Lactase and other disaccharide deficiencies
  Nonabsorbable carbohydrates (sorbitol, lactulose,  
  polyethylene glycol)
Steatorrheal causes
  Intraluminal maldigestion (pancreatic exocrine insufficiency,  
  bacterial overgrowth, bariatric surgery, liver disease)
  Mucosal malabsorption (celiac sprue, Whipple’s disease,  
  infections, abetalipoproteinemia, ischemia)
  Postmucosal obstruction (1° or 2° lymphatic obstruction)
Inflammatory causes
  Idiopathic inflammatory bowel disease (Crohn’s, chronic  
  ulcerative colitis)
  Lymphocytic and collagenous colitis
  Immune-related mucosal disease (1° or 2° 
  immunodeficiencies, food allergy, eosinophilic  
gastroenteritis, graft-vs-host disease)
  Infections (invasive bacteria, viruses, and parasites,  
  Brainerd diarrhea)
  Radiation injury
  Gastrointestinal malignancies
Dysmotile causes
  Irritable bowel syndrome (including postinfectious IBS)
  Visceral neuromyopathies
  Hyperthyroidism
  Drugs (prokinetic agents)  
Postvagotomy
Factitial causes
  Munchausen
  Eating disorders
Iatrogenic causes
  Cholecystectomy
  Ileal resection
  Bariatric surgery
  Vagotomy, fundoplication
SECTION I
Cardinal Manifestations of Gastrointestinal Disease
48
Secretory causes
Secretory diarrheas are due to derangements in fluid and 
electrolyte transport across the enterocolonic mucosa. 
They are characterized clinically by watery, large- 
volume fecal outputs that are typically painless and per-
sist with fasting. Because there is no malabsorbed solute, 
stool osmolality is accounted for by normal endogenous 
electrolytes with no fecal osmotic gap.
Medications
Side effects from regular ingestion of drugs and toxins 
are the most common secretory causes of chronic diar-
rhea. Hundreds of prescription and over-the-counter 
medications (see “Acute Diarrhea, Other Causes”) 
may produce diarrhea. Surreptitious or habitual use of 
stimulant laxatives [e.g., senna, cascara, bisacodyl, ricin-
oleic acid (castor oil)] must also be considered. Chronic 
ethanol consumption may cause a secretory-type diar-
rhea due to enterocyte injury with impaired sodium 
and water absorption as well as rapid transit and other 
alterations. Inadvertent ingestion of certain environmen-
tal toxins (e.g., arsenic) may lead to chronic rather than 
acute forms of diarrhea. Certain bacterial infections may 
occasionally persist and be associated with a secretory-
type diarrhea.
Bowel resection, mucosal disease,  
or enterocolic fistula
These conditions may result in a secretory-type diar-
rhea because of inadequate surface for reabsorption of 
secreted fluids and electrolytes. Unlike other secretory 
diarrheas, this subset of conditions tends to worsen with 
eating. With disease (e.g., Crohn’s ileitis) or resection of 
<100 cm of terminal ileum, dihydroxy bile acids may 
escape absorption and stimulate colonic secretion (chol-
orrheic diarrhea). This mechanism may contribute to 
so-called idiopathic secretory diarrhea, in which bile acids 
are functionally malabsorbed from a normal-appearing 
terminal ileum. This idiopathic bile acid malabsorption may 
account for an average of 40% of unexplained chronic 
diarrhea. Reduced negative feedback regulation of bile 
acid synthesis by fibroblast growth factor 19 produced 
by enterocytes results in a degree of bile-acid synthesis 
that exceeds the normal capacity for ileal reabsorption, 
producing bile acid diarrhea.
Partial bowel obstruction, ostomy stricture, or fecal 
impaction may paradoxically lead to increased fecal out-
put due to fluid hypersecretion.
Hormones
Although uncommon, the classic examples of secretory 
diarrhea are those mediated by hormones. Metastatic 
gastrointestinal carcinoid tumors or, rarely, primary bron-
chial carcinoids may produce watery diarrhea alone or as 
part of the carcinoid syndrome that comprises episodic 
flushing, wheezing, dyspnea, and right-sided valvular 
heart disease. Diarrhea is due to the release into the 
circulation of potent intestinal secretagogues including 
serotonin, histamine, prostaglandins, and various kinins. 
Pellagra-like skin lesions may rarely occur as the result 
of serotonin overproduction with niacin depletion. 
Gastrinoma, one of the most common neuroendocrine 
tumors, most typically presents with refractory peptic 
ulcers, but diarrhea occurs in up to one-third of cases 
and may be the only clinical manifestation in 10%. 
While other secretagogues released with gastrin may 
play a role, the diarrhea most often results from fat mal-
digestion owing to pancreatic enzyme inactivation by 
low intraduodenal pH. The watery diarrhea hypokale-
mia achlorhydria syndrome, also called pancreatic cholera, 
is due to a non-β cell pancreatic adenoma, referred to 
as a VIPoma, that secretes VIP and a host of other pep-
tide hormones including pancreatic polypeptide, secre-
tin, gastrin, gastrin-inhibitory polypeptide (also called 
glucose-dependent insulinotropic peptide), neurotensin, 
calcitonin, and prostaglandins. The secretory diarrhea is 
often massive with stool volumes >3 L/d; daily volumes 
as high as 20 L have been reported. Life-threatening 
dehydration; neuromuscular dysfunction from associ-
ated hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia, or hypercalcemia; 
flushing; and hyperglycemia may accompany a VIPoma. 
Medullary carcinoma of the thyroid may present with watery 
diarrhea caused by calcitonin, other secretory peptides, 
or prostaglandins. Prominent diarrhea is often associated 
with metastatic disease and poor prognosis. Systemic mas-
tocytosis, which may be associated with the skin lesion 
urticaria pigmentosa, may cause diarrhea that is either 
secretory and mediated by histamine or inflammatory 
due to intestinal infiltration by mast cells. Large colorectal 
villous adenomas may rarely be associated with a secretory 
diarrhea that may cause hypokalemia, can be inhibited by 
NSAIDs, and are apparently mediated by prostaglandins.
Congenital defects in ion absorption
Rarely, defects in specific carriers associated with ion 
absorption cause watery diarrhea from birth. These dis-
orders include defective Cl−/HCO3
− exchange (congenital 
chloridorrhea) with alkalosis (which results from a mutated 
DRA [down-regulated in adenoma] gene) and defec-
tive Na+/H+ exchange (congential sodium diarrhea), which 
results from a mutation in the NHE3 (sodium-hydrogen 
exchanger) gene and results in acidosis.
Some hormone deficiencies may be associated with 
watery diarrhea, such as occurs with adrenocortical 
insufficiency (Addison’s disease) that may be accompa-
nied by skin hyperpigmentation.
Osmotic causes
Osmotic diarrhea occurs when ingested, poorly absorb-
able, osmotically active solutes draw enough fluid into 
the lumen to exceed the reabsorptive capacity of the 
 
CHAPTER 6
Diarrhea and Constipation
49
colon. Fecal water output increases in proportion to 
such a solute load. Osmotic diarrhea characteristically 
ceases with fasting or with discontinuation of the caus-
ative agent.
Osmotic laxatives
Ingestion of magnesium-containing antacids, health 
supplements, or laxatives may induce osmotic diarrhea 
typified by a stool osmotic gap (>50 mosmol/L): 
serum osmolarity (typically 290 mosmol/kg) - [2 × 
(fecal sodium + potassium concentration)]. Measure-
ment of fecal osmolarity is no longer recommended 
because, even when measured immediately after evac-
uation, it may be erroneous because carbohydrates are 
metabolized by colonic bacteria, causing an increase in 
osmolarity.
Carbohydrate malabsorption
Carbohydrate malabsorption due to acquired or con-
genital defects in brush-border disaccharidases and 
other enzymes leads to osmotic diarrhea with a low 
pH. One of the most common causes of chronic diar-
rhea in adults is lactase deficiency, which affects three-
fourths of non-whites worldwide and 5–30% of 
persons in the United States; the total lactose load at any 
one time influences the symptoms experienced. Most 
patients learn to avoid milk products without requiring 
treatment with enzyme supplements. Some sugars, such 
as sorbitol, lactulose, or fructose, are frequently malab-
sorbed, and diarrhea ensues with ingestion of medica-
tions, gum, or candies sweetened with these poorly or 
incompletely absorbed sugars.
Steatorrheal causes
Fat malabsorption may lead to greasy, foul-smelling, 
difficult-to-flush diarrhea often associated with weight 
loss and nutritional deficiencies due to concomitant mal-
absorption of amino acids and vitamins. Increased fecal 
output is caused by the osmotic effects of fatty acids, 
especially after bacterial hydroxylation, and, to a lesser 
extent, by the neutral fat. Quantitatively, steatorrhea is 
defined as stool fat exceeding the normal 7 g/d; rapid-
transit diarrhea may result in fecal fat up to 14 g/d; daily 
fecal fat averages 15–25 g with small intestinal diseases 
and is often >32 g with pancreatic exocrine insuffi-
ciency. Intraluminal maldigestion, mucosal malabsorp-
tion, or lymphatic obstruction may produce steatorrhea.
Intraluminal maldigestion
This condition most commonly results from pancreatic 
exocrine insufficiency, which occurs when >90% of 
pancreatic secretory function is lost. Chronic pancreatitis, 
usually a sequel of ethanol abuse, most frequently causes 
pancreatic insufficiency. Other causes include cystic 
fibrosis; pancreatic duct obstruction; and, rarely, somatostati-
noma. Bacterial overgrowth in the small intestine may 
deconjugate bile acids and alter micelle formation, 
impairing fat digestion; it occurs with stasis from a 
blind-loop, small-bowel diverticulum or dysmotility 
and is especially likely in the elderly. Finally, cirrhosis or 
biliary obstruction may lead to mild steatorrhea due to 
deficient intraluminal bile acid concentration.
Mucosal malabsorption
Mucosal malabsorption occurs from a variety of enter-
opathies, but it most commonly occurs from celiac 
disease. This gluten-sensitive enteropathy affects all ages 
and is characterized by villous atrophy and crypt hyper-
plasia in the proximal small bowel and can present with 
fatty diarrhea associated with multiple nutritional defi-
ciencies of varying severity. Celiac disease is much more 
frequent than previously thought; it affects ∼1% of the 
population, frequently presents without steatorrhea, can 
mimic IBS, and has many other GI and extraintestinal 
manifestations. Tropical sprue may produce a similar his-
tologic and clinical syndrome but occurs in residents 
of or travelers to tropical climates; abrupt onset and 
response to antibiotics suggest an infectious etiology. 
Whipple’s disease, due to the bacillus Tropheryma whipplei 
and histiocytic infiltration of the small-bowel mucosa, is 
a less common cause of steatorrhea that most typically 
occurs in young or middle-aged men; it is frequently 
associated with arthralgias, fever, lymphadenopathy, 
and extreme fatigue, and it may affect the CNS and 
endocardium. A similar clinical and histologic picture 
results from Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare infection in 
patients with AIDS. Abetalipoproteinemia is a rare defect 
of chylomicron formation and fat malabsorption in chil-
dren, associated with acanthocytic erythrocytes, ataxia, 
and retinitis pigmentosa. Several other conditions may 
cause mucosal malabsorption including infections, espe-
cially with protozoa such as Giardia; numerous medica-
tions (e.g., colchicine, cholestyramine, neomycin); amy-
loidosis; and chronic ischemia.
Postmucosal lymphatic obstruction
The pathophysiology of this condition, which is due to 
the rare congenital intestinal lymphangiectasia or to acquired 
lymphatic obstruction secondary to trauma, tumor, cardiac 
disease, or infection, leads to the unique constellation of 
fat malabsorption with enteric losses of protein (often 
causing edema) and lymphocytopenia. Carbohydrate 
and amino acid absorption is preserved.
Inflammatory causes
Inflammatory diarrheas are generally accompanied by 
pain, fever, bleeding, or other manifestations of inflam-
mation. The mechanism of diarrhea may not only be 
exudation but, depending on lesion site, may include 
fat malabsorption, disrupted fluid/electrolyte absorption, 
and hypersecretion or hypermotility from release of cyto-
kines and other inflammatory mediators. The unifying 
SECTION I
Cardinal Manifestations of Gastrointestinal Disease
50
feature on stool analysis is the presence of leukocytes or 
leukocyte-derived proteins such as calprotectin. With 
severe inflammation, exudative protein loss can lead 
to anasarca (generalized edema). Any middle-aged or 
older person with chronic inflammatory-type diarrhea, 
especially with blood, should be carefully evaluated to 
exclude a colorectal tumor.
Idiopathic inflammatory bowel disease
The illnesses in this category, which include Crohn’s 
disease and chronic ulcerative colitis, are among the most 
common organic causes of chronic diarrhea in adults 
and range in severity from mild to fulminant and life-
threatening. They may be associated with uveitis, 
polyarthralgias, cholestatic liver disease (primary scleros-
ing cholangitis), and skin lesions (erythema nodosum, 
pyoderma gangrenosum). Microscopic colitis, includ-
ing both lymphocytic and collagenous colitis, is an 
increasingly recognized cause of chronic watery diar-
rhea, especially in middle-aged women and those on 
NSAIDs, statins, proton pump inhibitors (PPIs), and 
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs); biopsy 
of a normal-appearing colon is required for histologic 
diagnosis. It may coexist with symptoms suggesting 
IBS or with celiac sprue. It typically responds well to 
anti-inflammatory drugs (e.g., bismuth), to the opioid 
agonist loperamide, or to budesonide.
Primary or secondary forms  
of immunodeficiency
Immunodeficiency may lead to prolonged infectious 
diarrhea. With selective IgA deficiency or common 
variable hypogammaglobulinemia, diarrhea is particularly 
prevalent and often the result of giardiasis, bacterial 
overgrowth, or sprue.
Eosinophilic gastroenteritis
Eosinophil infiltration of the mucosa, muscularis, or 
serosa at any level of the GI tract may cause diarrhea, 
pain, vomiting, or ascites. Affected patients often have an 
atopic history, Charcot-Leyden crystals due to extruded 
eosinophil contents may be seen on microscopic inspec-
tion of stool, and peripheral eosinophilia is present in 
50–75% of patients. While hypersensitivity to certain 
foods occurs in adults, true food allergy causing chronic 
diarrhea is rare.
Other causes
Chronic inflammatory diarrhea may be caused by radia-
tion enterocolitis, chronic graft-versus-host disease, Behçet’s 
syndrome, and Cronkhite-Canada syndrome, among others.
Dysmotility causes
Rapid transit may accompany many diarrheas as a sec-
ondary or contributing phenomenon, but primary dys-
motility is an unusual etiology of true diarrhea. Stool 
features often suggest a secretory diarrhea, but mild ste-
atorrhea of up to 14 g of fat per day can be produced 
by maldigestion from rapid transit alone. Hyperthyroid-
ism, carcinoid syndrome, and certain drugs (e.g., prosta-
glandins, prokinetic agents) may produce hypermotility 
with resultant diarrhea. Primary visceral neuromyopa-
thies or idiopathic acquired intestinal pseudoobstruction 
may lead to stasis with secondary bacterial overgrowth 
causing diarrhea. Diabetic diarrhea, often accompanied 
by peripheral and generalized autonomic neuropathies, 
may occur in part because of intestinal dysmotility.
The exceedingly common IBS (10% point preva-
lence, 1–2% per year incidence) is characterized by 
disturbed intestinal and colonic motor and sensory 
responses to various stimuli. Symptoms of stool fre-
quency typically cease at night, alternate with periods 
of constipation, are accompanied by abdominal pain 
relieved with defecation, and rarely result in weight loss.
Factitial causes
Factitial diarrhea accounts for up to 15% of unexplained 
diarrheas referred to tertiary care centers. Either as a 
form of Munchausen syndrome (deception or self-injury 
for secondary gain) or eating disorders, some patients 
covertly self-administer laxatives alone or in combina-
tion with other medications (e.g., diuretics) or surrepti-
tiously add water or urine to stool sent for analysis. Such 
patients are typically women, often with histories of 
psychiatric illness, and disproportionately from careers in 
health care. Hypotension and hypokalemia are common 
co-presenting features. The evaluation of such patients 
may be difficult: contamination of the stool with water 
or urine is suggested by very low or high stool osmolar-
ity, respectively. Such patients often deny this possibility 
when confronted, but they do benefit from psychiatric 
counseling when they acknowledge their behavior.
APPROACH TO THE
PATIENT	
Chronic Diarrhea
The laboratory tools available to evaluate the very 
common problem of chronic diarrhea are extensive, 
and many are costly and invasive. As such, the diag-
nostic evaluation must be rationally directed by a 
careful history and physical examination (Fig. 6-3A). 
When this strategy is unrevealing, simple triage tests 
are often warranted to direct the choice of more com-
plex investigations (Fig. 6-3B). The history, physical 
examination (Table 6-4), and routine blood studies 
should attempt to characterize the mechanism of diar-
rhea, identify diagnostically helpful associations, and 
assess the patient’s fluid/electrolyte and nutritional 
status. Patients should be questioned about the onset,  
duration, pattern, aggravating (especially diet) and 
 
CHAPTER 6
Diarrhea and Constipation
51
Figure 6-3
Chronic diarrhea. A. Initial management based on accom-
panying symptoms or features. B. Evaluation based on 
findings from a limited age-appropriate screen for organic 
disease. pr, per rectum; bm, bowel movement; IBS, irritable 
Exclude iatrogenic problem:
medication, surgery
Blood
pr
Colonoscopy
+ biopsy
Features, e.g.,
stool, suggest
malabsorption
Small bowel:
Imaging, biopsy,
aspirate
Pain aggravated
before bm, relieved
with bm, sense
incomplete evacuation
Suspect IBS
Limited screen for
organic disease
No blood,
features of
malabsorption
Consider
functional 
diarrhea
Dietary exclusion,
e.g., lactose,
sorbitol
Chronic diarrhea
A
Limited screen for organic disease
Chronic diarrhea
B
Stool vol, OSM, pH;
Laxative screen;
Hormonal screen
Persistent
chronic diarrhea
Stool fat >20 g/day
Pancreatic function
Titrate Rx to 
speed of transit
Opioid Rx +
follow-up
Low K
+
Screening tests
all normal
Colonoscopy +
biopsy
Normal and
stool fat
<14 g/day
Full gut transit
Low Hb, Alb; abnormal MCV, 
MCH; excess fat in stool
Small bowel: X-ray, 
biopsy, aspirate; 
stool 48-h fat
relieving factors, and stool characteristics of their  
diarrhea. The presence or absence of fecal inconti-
nence, fever, weight loss, pain, certain exposures (travel, 
medications, contacts with diarrhea), and common 
extraintestinal manifestations (skin changes, arthral-
gias, oral aphthous ulcers) should be noted. A family 
history of IBD or sprue may indicate those possibili-
ties. Physical findings may offer clues such as a thyroid 
mass, wheezing, heart murmurs, edema, hepatomegaly, 
abdominal masses, lymphadenopathy, mucocutaneous ­ 
abnormalities, perianal fistulas, or anal sphincter  
laxity. Peripheral blood leukocytosis, elevated sedimen-
tation rate, or C-reactive protein suggests inflammation; 
anemia reflects blood loss or nutritional deficiencies; or 
eosinophilia may occur with parasitoses, neoplasia, col-
lagen-vascular disease, allergy, or eosinophilic gastroen-
teritis. Blood chemistries may demonstrate electrolyte, 
hepatic, or other metabolic disturbances. Measuring tis-
sue transglutaminase antibodies may help detect celiac 
disease.
bowel syndrome; Hb, hemoglobin; Alb, albumin; MCV, mean 
corpuscular volume; MCH, mean corpuscular hemoglobin; 
OSM, osmolality. (Reprinted from M Camilleri: Clin Gastro­
enterol Hepatol 2:198, 2004.)
SECTION I
Cardinal Manifestations of Gastrointestinal Disease
52
A therapeutic trial is often appropriate, definitive, and 
highly cost effective when a specific diagnosis is sug-
gested on the initial physician encounter. For example, 
chronic watery diarrhea, which ceases with fasting in an 
otherwise healthy young adult, may justify a trial of a  
lactose-restricted diet; bloating and diarrhea persisting 
since a mountain backpacking trip may warrant a trial 
of metronidazole for likely giardiasis; and postprandial 
diarrhea persisting following resection of terminal ileum 
might be due to bile acid malabsorption and be treated 
with cholestyramine or colesevelam before further evalua-
tion. Persistent symptoms require additional investigation.
Certain diagnoses may be suggested on the ini-
tial encounter (e.g., idiopathic IBD); however, additional 
focused evaluations may be necessary to confirm the diag-
nosis and characterize the severity or extent of disease so 
that treatment can be best guided. Patients suspected of 
having IBS should be initially evaluated with flexible sig-
moidoscopy with colorectal biopsies; those with normal 
findings might be reassured and, as indicated, treated 
empirically with antispasmodics, antidiarrheals, bulk agents, 
anxiolytics, or antidepressants. Any patient who presents 
with chronic diarrhea and hematochezia should be evalu-
ated with stool microbiologic studies and colonoscopy.
In an estimated two-thirds of cases, the cause 
for chronic diarrhea remains unclear after the initial 
encounter, and further testing is required. Quantitative 
stool collection and analyses can yield important objec-
tive data that may establish a diagnosis or characterize 
the type of diarrhea as a triage for focused additional 
studies (Fig. 6-3B). If stool weight is >200 g/d, additional 
stool analyses should be performed that might include 
electrolyte concentration, pH, occult blood testing,  
leukocyte inspection (or leukocyte protein assay), fat 
quantitation, and laxative screens.
For secretory diarrheas (watery, normal osmotic gap), 
possible medication-related side effects or surreptitious 
Table 6-4 
Physical Examination in Patients With 
Chronic Diarrhea
1.  Are there general features to suggest malabsorption  
or inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) such as anemia, 
dermatitis herpetiformis, edema, or clubbing?
2.  Are there features to suggest underlying autonomic 
neuropathy or collagen-vascular disease in the pupils, 
orthostasis, skin, hands, or joints?
3.  Is there an abdominal mass or tenderness?
4.  Are there any abnormalities of rectal mucosa, rectal 
defects, or altered anal sphincter functions?
5.  Are there any mucocutaneous manifestations of sys-
temic disease such as dermatitis herpetiformis (celiac 
disease), erythema nodosum (ulcerative colitis), flushing 
(carcinoid), or oral ulcers for IBD or celiac disease?
laxative use should be reconsidered. Microbiologic ­studies 
should be done including fecal bacterial cultures (includ-
ing media for Aeromonas and Pleisiomonas), inspection 
for ova and parasites, and Giardia antigen assay (the 
most sensitive test for giardiasis). Small-bowel bacte-
rial overgrowth can be excluded by intestinal aspirates 
with quantitative cultures or with glucose or lactulose 
breath tests involving measurement of breath hydro-
gen, methane, or other metabolite (e.g., 14CO2). However, 
interpretation of these breath tests may be confounded by 
disturbances of intestinal transit. Upper endoscopy and colo-
noscopy with biopsies and small-bowel barium x-rays are  
helpful to rule out structural or occult inflammatory disease. 
When suggested by history or other findings, screens for 
peptide hormones should be pursued (e.g., serum gastrin, 
VIP, calcitonin, and thyroid hormone/thyroid-stimulating hor-
mone, or urinary 5-hydroxyindolacetic acid, and histamine).
Further evaluation of osmotic diarrhea should include 
tests for lactose intolerance and magnesium ingestion, 
the two most common causes. Low fecal pH suggests 
carbohydrate malabsorption; lactose malabsorption can 
be confirmed by lactose breath testing or by a therapeu-
tic trial with lactose exclusion and observation of the 
effect of lactose challenge (e.g., a liter of milk). Lactase 
determination on small-bowel biopsy is not generally 
available. If fecal magnesium or laxative levels are ele-
vated, inadvertent or surreptitious ingestion should be 
considered and psychiatric help should be sought.
For those with proven fatty diarrhea, endoscopy with 
small-bowel biopsy (including aspiration for Giardia 
and quantitative cultures) should be performed; if this 
procedure is unrevealing, a small-bowel radiograph is 
often an appropriate next step. If small-bowel studies 
are negative or if pancreatic disease is suspected, pan-
creatic exocrine insufficiency should be excluded with 
direct tests, such as the secretin-cholecystokinin stimu-
lation test or a variation that could be performed endo-
scopically. In general, indirect tests such as assay of fecal 
elastase or chymotrypsin activity or a bentiromide test 
have fallen out of favor because of low sensitivity and 
specificity.
Chronic inflammatory-type diarrheas should be sus-
pected by the presence of blood or leukocytes in the 
stool. Such findings warrant stool cultures; inspection 
for ova and parasites; C. difficile toxin assay; colonoscopy 
with biopsies; and, if indicated, small-bowel contrast 
studies.
Treatment	
Chronic Diarrhea
Treatment of chronic diarrhea depends on the specific 
etiology and may be curative, suppressive, or empirical. If 
the cause can be eradicated, treatment is curative as with 
 
CHAPTER 6
Diarrhea and Constipation
53
resection of a colorectal cancer, antibiotic administration 
for Whipple’s disease or tropical sprue, or discontinuation 
of a drug. For many chronic conditions, diarrhea can be 
controlled by suppression of the underlying mechanism. 
Examples include elimination of dietary lactose for lac-
tase deficiency or gluten for celiac sprue, use of glucocor-
ticoids or other anti-inflammatory agents for idiopathic 
IBDs, adsorptive agents such as cholestyramine for ileal 
bile acid malabsorption, proton pump inhibitors such 
as omeprazole for the gastric hypersecretion of gastri-
nomas, somatostatin analogues such as octreotide for 
malignant carcinoid syndrome, prostaglandin inhibitors 
such as indomethacin for medullary carcinoma of the 
thyroid, and pancreatic enzyme replacement for pancre-
atic insufficiency. When the specific cause or mechanism 
of chronic diarrhea evades diagnosis, empirical therapy 
may be beneficial. Mild opiates, such as diphenoxyl-
ate or loperamide, are often helpful in mild or moderate 
watery diarrhea. For those with more severe diarrhea, 
codeine or tincture of opium may be beneficial. Such 
antimotility agents should be avoided with severe IBD, 
because toxic megacolon may be precipitated. Clonidine, 
an α2-adrenergic agonist, may allow control of diabetic 
diarrhea. For all patients with chronic diarrhea, fluid and  
electrolyte repletion is an important component of 
management (see “Acute Diarrhea,” discussed earlier). 
Replacement of fat-soluble vitamins may also be neces-
sary in patients with chronic steatorrhea.
Constipation
Definition
Constipation is a common complaint in clinical practice 
and usually refers to persistent, difficult, infrequent, or 
seemingly incomplete defecation. Because of the wide 
range of normal bowel habits, constipation is difficult 
to define precisely. Most persons have at least three 
bowel movements per week; however, low stool fre-
quency alone is not the sole criterion for the diagno-
sis of constipation. Many constipated patients have a 
normal frequency of defecation but complain of exces-
sive straining, hard stools, lower abdominal fullness, 
or a sense of incomplete evacuation. The individual 
patient’s symptoms must be analyzed in detail to ascer-
tain what is meant by “constipation” or “difficulty” 
with defecation.
Stool form and consistency are well correlated with 
the time elapsed from the preceding defecation. Hard, 
pellety stools occur with slow transit, while loose, 
watery stools are associated with rapid transit. Both 
small pellety or very large stools are more difficult to 
expel than normal stools.
The perception of hard stools or excessive strain-
ing is more difficult to assess objectively, and the need 
for enemas or digital disimpaction is a clinically useful 
way to corroborate the patient’s perceptions of difficult 
defecation.
Psychosocial or cultural factors may also be impor-
tant. A person whose parents attached great importance 
to daily defecation will become greatly concerned 
when he or she misses a daily bowel movement; some 
children withhold stool to gain attention or because 
of fear of pain from anal irritation; and some adults 
habitually ignore or delay the call to have a bowel 
movement.
Causes
Pathophysiologically, chronic constipation generally 
results from inadequate fiber or fluid intake or from 
disordered colonic transit or anorectal function. These 
result from neurogastroenterologic disturbance, cer-
tain drugs, advancing age, or in association with a large 
number of systemic diseases that affect the GI tract 
(Table 6-5). Constipation of recent onset may be 
a symptom of significant organic disease such as 
tumor or stricture. In idiopathic constipation, a subset of 
patients exhibit delayed emptying of the ascending and 
Table 6-5 
Causes of Constipation in Adults
Types of Constipation 
and Causes
Examples
Recent onset
  Colonic obstruction
Neoplasm; stricture: ischemic, 
diverticular, inflammatory
  Anal sphincter spasm
Anal fissure, painful hemorrhoids
  Medications
Chronic
  Irritable bowel 
  syndrome
Constipation-predominant, 
alternating
  Medications
Ca2+ blockers, antidepressants
  Colonic 
  pseudoobstruction
Slow-transit constipation,  
megacolon (rare Hirschsprung’s, 
Chagas’ diseases)
  Disorders of rectal 
  evacuation
Pelvic floor dysfunction; anis-
mus; descending perineum 
syndrome; rectal mucosal  
prolapse; rectocele
  Endocrinopathies
Hypothyroidism,  
hypercalcemia, pregnancy
  Psychiatric disorders
Depression, eating disorders, 
drugs
  Neurologic disease
Parkinsonism, multiple  
sclerosis, spinal cord injury
  Generalized muscle 
  disease
Progressive systemic sclerosis
SECTION I
Cardinal Manifestations of Gastrointestinal Disease
54
transverse colon with prolongation of transit (often in 
the proximal colon) and a reduced frequency of pro-
pulsive HAPCs. Outlet obstruction to defecation (also 
called evacuation disorders) may cause delayed colonic 
transit, which is usually corrected by biofeedback 
retraining of the disordered defecation. Constipa-
tion of any cause may be exacerbated by hospital-
ization or chronic illnesses that lead to physical or 
mental impairment and result in inactivity or physical 
immobility.
APPROACH TO THE
PATIENT	
Constipation
A careful history should explore the patient’s symptoms 
and confirm whether he or she is indeed constipated 
based on frequency (e.g., fewer than three bowel move-
ments per week), consistency (lumpy/hard), excessive 
straining, prolonged defecation time, or need to sup-
port the perineum or digitate the anorectum. In the vast 
majority of cases (probably >90%), there is no underly-
ing cause (e.g., cancer, depression, or hypothyroidism), 
and constipation responds to ample hydration, exer-
cise, and supplementation of dietary fiber (15–25 g/d). 
A good diet and medication history and attention to 
psychosocial issues are key. Physical examination and, 
particularly, a rectal examination should exclude fecal 
impaction and most of the important diseases that 
present with constipation and possibly indicate fea-
tures suggesting an evacuation disorder (e.g., high anal 
sphincter tone).
The presence of weight loss, rectal bleeding, or  
anemia with constipation mandates either flexible sig-
moidoscopy plus barium enema or colonoscopy alone, 
particularly in patients >40 years, to exclude structural 
diseases such as cancer or strictures. Colonoscopy alone 
is most cost-effective in this setting because it provides 
an opportunity to biopsy mucosal lesions, perform pol-
ypectomy, or dilate strictures. Barium enema has advan-
tages over colonoscopy in the patient with isolated  
constipation because it is less costly and identifies 
colonic dilation and all significant mucosal lesions or 
strictures that are likely to present with constipation. 
Melanosis coli, or pigmentation of the colon mucosa, 
indicates the use of anthraquinone laxatives such as 
cascara or senna; however, this is usually apparent 
from a careful history. An unexpected disorder such as 
megacolon or cathartic colon may also be detected by 
colonic radiographs. Measurement of serum calcium, 
potassium, and thyroid-stimulating hormone levels will 
identify rare patients with metabolic disorders.
Patients with more troublesome constipation may 
not respond to fiber alone and may be helped by a 
bowel-training regimen: taking an osmotic laxative 
(lactulose, sorbitol, polyethylene glycol) and evacuating  
with enema or glycerine suppository as needed. 
After breakfast, a distraction-free 15–20 min on the  
toilet without straining is encouraged. Excessive strain-
ing may lead to development of hemorrhoids, and, if 
there is weakness of the pelvic floor or injury to the 
pudendal nerve, may result in obstructed defecation 
from descending perineum syndrome several years 
later. Those few who do not benefit from the simple 
measures delineated above or require long-term treat-
ment with potent laxatives, with the attendant risk of 
developing laxative abuse syndrome, are assumed to 
have severe or intractable constipation and should have 
further investigation (Fig. 6-4). Novel agents that induce 
secretion (e.g., lubiprostone, a chloride channel activa-
tor) are also available.
Investigation of Severe Constipation
A small minority (probably <5%) of patients have severe 
or “intractable” constipation. These are the patients 
most likely to be seen by gastroenterologists or in refer-
ral centers. Further observation of the patient may occa-
sionally reveal a previously unrecognized cause, such as 
an evacuation disorder, laxative abuse, malingering, or 
psychological disorder. In these patients, evaluations of 
the physiologic function of the colon and pelvic floor 
Clinical and basic laboratory tests
Bloods, chest and abd x-ray
Exclude mechanical obstruction, e.g., colonoscopy
Colonic transit
Consider functional
  bowel disease
Known
  disorder
Rx
No known underlying disorder
Anorectal manometry and balloon expulsion
Slow colonic transit
Normal
Rectoanal angle measurement,
  defecation proctography?
Appropriate Rx: Rehabilitation
  program, surgery, or other
Chronic Constipation
Normal
Abnormal
Figure 6-4
Algorithm for the management of constipation.
 
CHAPTER 6
Diarrhea and Constipation
55
and of psychological status aid in the rational choice of 
treatment. Even among these highly selected patients 
with severe constipation, a cause can be identified in 
only about two-thirds of tertiary referral patients (dis-
cussed later).
Measurement of colonic transit
Radiopaque marker transit tests are easy, repeatable, gen-
erally safe, inexpensive, reliable, and highly applicable in 
evaluating constipated patients in clinical practice. Sev-
eral validated methods are very simple. For example, 
radiopaque markers are ingested; an abdominal flat film 
taken 5 days later should indicate passage of 80% of the 
markers out of the colon without the use of laxatives 
or enemas. This test does not provide useful information 
about the transit profile of the stomach and small bowel.
Radioscintigraphy with a delayed-release capsule 
containing radiolabeled particles has been used to non-
invasively characterize normal, accelerated, or delayed 
colonic function over 24–48 h with low radiation 
exposure. This approach simultaneously assesses gas-
tric, small bowel (which may be important in ∼20% of 
patients with delayed colonic transit because they reflect 
a more generalized GI motility disorder), and colonic 
transit. The disadvantages are the greater cost and the 
need for specific materials prepared in a nuclear medi-
cine laboratory.
Anorectal and pelvic floor tests
Pelvic floor dysfunction is suggested by the inability to 
evacuate the rectum, a feeling of persistent rectal full-
ness, rectal pain, the need to extract stool from the rec-
tum digitally, application of pressure on the posterior 
wall of the vagina, support of the perineum during 
straining, and excessive straining. These significant symp-
toms should be contrasted with the sense of incomplete 
rectal evacuation, which is common in IBS.
Formal psychological evaluation may identify eating 
disorders, “control issues,” depression, or post-traumatic 
stress disorders that may respond to cognitive or other 
intervention and may be important in restoring qual-
ity of life to patients who might present with chronic 
constipation.
A simple clinical test in the office to document a 
nonrelaxing puborectalis muscle is to have the patient 
strain to expel the index finger during a digital rectal 
examination. Motion of the puborectalis posteriorly 
during straining indicates proper coordination of the 
pelvic floor muscles.
Measurement of perineal descent is relatively easy to 
gauge clinically by placing the patient in the left decu-
bitus position and watching the perineum to detect 
inadequate descent (<1.5 cm, a sign of pelvic floor dys-
function) or perineal ballooning during straining relative 
to bony landmarks (>4 cm, suggesting excessive peri-
neal descent).
A useful overall test of evacuation is the balloon expul-
sion test. A balloon-tipped urinary catheter is placed and 
inflated with 50 mL of water. Normally, a patient can 
expel it while seated on a toilet or in the left lateral decu-
bitus position. In the lateral position, the weight needed 
to facilitate expulsion of the balloon is determined; nor-
mally, expulsion occurs with <200 g added.
Anorectal manometry, when used in the evaluation 
of patients with severe constipation, may find an exces-
sively high resting (>80 mmHg) or squeeze anal sphinc-
ter tone, suggesting anismus (anal sphincter spasm). 
This test also identifies rare syndromes, such as adult 
Hirschsprung’s disease, by the absence of the rectoanal 
inhibitory reflex.
Defecography (a dynamic barium enema including 
lateral views obtained during barium expulsion) reveals 
“soft abnormalities” in many patients; the most relevant 
findings are the measured changes in rectoanal angle, 
anatomic defects of the rectum such as internal mucosal 
prolapse, and enteroceles or rectoceles. Surgically reme-
diable conditions are identified in only a few patients. 
These include severe, whole-thickness intussusception 
with complete outlet obstruction due to funnel-shaped 
plugging at the anal canal or an extremely large recto-
cele that fills preferentially during attempts at defecation 
instead of expulsion of the barium through the anus. In 
summary, defecography requires an interested and expe-
rienced radiologist, and abnormalities are not pathogno-
monic for pelvic floor dysfunction. The most common 
cause of outlet obstruction is failure of the puborecta-
lis muscle to relax; this is not identified by defecogra-
phy but requires a dynamic study such as proctography. 
MRI is being developed as an alternative and provides 
more information about the structure and function of 
the pelvic floor, distal colorectum, and anal sphincters.
Dynamic imaging studies such as proctography dur-
ing defecation or scintigraphic expulsion of artificial 
stool help measure perineal descent and the rectoanal 
angle during rest, squeezing, and straining, and scinti-
graphic expulsion quantitates the amount of “artificial 
stool” emptied. Lack of straightening of the rectoanal 
angle by at least 15° during defecation confirms pelvic 
floor dysfunction.
Neurologic testing (electromyography) is more help-
ful in the evaluation of patients with incontinence 
than of those with symptoms suggesting obstructed 
defecation. The absence of neurologic signs in the lower 
extremities suggests that any documented denerva-
tion of the puborectalis results from pelvic (e.g., obstet-
ric) injury or from stretching of the pudendal nerve 
by chronic, long-standing straining. Constipation is 
common among patients with spinal cord injuries, neu-
rologic diseases such as Parkinson’s disease, multiple 
sclerosis, and diabetic neuropathy.
SECTION I
Cardinal Manifestations of Gastrointestinal Disease
56
Spinal-evoked responses during electrical rectal 
stimulation or stimulation of external anal sphincter 
contraction by applying magnetic stimulation over the 
lumbosacral cord identify patients with limited sacral 
neuropathies with sufficient residual nerve conduction 
to attempt biofeedback training.
In summary, a balloon expulsion test is an impor-
tant screening test for anorectal dysfunction. If positive, 
an anatomic evaluation of the rectum or anal sphincters 
and an assessment of pelvic floor relaxation are the tools 
for evaluating patients in whom obstructed defecation is 
suspected.
Treatment	
Constipation
After the cause of constipation is characterized, a treat-
ment decision can be made. Slow-transit constipa-
tion requires aggressive medical or surgical treatment;  
anismus or pelvic floor dysfunction usually responds 
to biofeedback management (Fig. 6-4). However, only 
∼60% of patients with severe constipation are found to 
have such a physiologic disorder (half with colonic tran-
sit delay and half with evacuation disorder). Patients 
with spinal cord injuries or other neurologic disorders 
require a dedicated bowel regimen that often includes 
rectal stimulation, enema therapy, and carefully timed 
laxative therapy.
Patients with slow-transit constipation are treated 
with bulk, osmotic, prokinetic, secretory, and stimulant 
laxatives including fiber, psyllium, milk of magnesia, 
lactulose, polyethylene glycol (colonic lavage solution), 
lubiprostone, and bisacodyl. Newer treatment aimed  
at enhancing motility and secretion may have applica-
tion in circumstances such as constipation-predominant  
IBS in females or severe constipation. If a 3- to 6-month 
trial of medical therapy fails and patients continue 
to have documented slow-transit constipation unas-
sociated with obstructed defecation, the patients 
should be considered for laparoscopic colectomy with  
ileorectostomy; however, this should not be undertaken 
if there is continued evidence of an evacuation disorder 
or a generalized GI dysmotility. Referral to a specialized 
center for further tests of colonic motor function is war-
ranted. The decision to resort to surgery is facilitated in 
the presence of megacolon and megarectum. The com-
plications after surgery include small-bowel obstruction 
(11%) and fecal soiling, particularly at night during the 
first postoperative year. Frequency of defecation is 3–8 
per day during the first year, dropping to 1–3 per day 
from the second year after surgery.
Patients who have a combined (evacuation and tran-
sit/motility) disorder should pursue pelvic floor retrain-
ing (biofeedback and muscle relaxation), psychological 
counseling, and dietetic advice first, followed by colec-
tomy and ileorectostomy if colonic transit studies do 
not normalize and symptoms are intractable despite 
biofeedback and optimized medical therapy. In patients 
with pelvic floor dysfunction alone, biofeedback  
training has a 70–80% success rate, measured by the 
acquisition of comfortable stool habits. Attempts to 
manage pelvic floor dysfunction with operations (inter-
nal anal sphincter or puborectalis muscle division) have 
achieved only mediocre success and have been largely 
abandoned.
 Loren Laine 
57
 Bleeding from the gastrointestinal (GI) tract may pres-
ent in fi ve ways.  Hematemesis is vomitus of red blood or 
“coffee-grounds” material.  Melena is black, tarry, foul-
smelling stool.  Hematochezia is the passage of bright red 
or maroon blood from the rectum.  Occult GI bleeding
(GIB) may be identifi ed in the absence of overt bleed-
ing by a fecal occult blood test or the presence of iron 
defi ciency. Finally, patients may present only with 
symptoms of blood loss or anemia such as lightheadedness, 
syncope, angina, or dyspnea. 
 SOURCES OF GASTROINTESTINAL 
BLEEDING 
 Upper gastrointestinal sources of bleeding 
( Table 7-1 ) The annual incidence of hospital admis-
sions for upper GIB (UGIB) in the United States and 
Europe is ∼0.1%, with a mortality rate of ∼5–10%. 
Patients rarely die from exsanguination; rather, they die 
due to decompensation from other underlying illnesses. 
The mortality rate for patients <60 years in the absence 
of major concurrent illness is <1%.  Independent 
 predictors of rebleeding and death in patients 
 hospitalized with UGIB include increasing age, comor-
bidities, and hemodynamic compromise  (tachycardia or 
hypotension). 
 Peptic ulcers are the most common cause of UGIB, 
accounting for up to ∼50% of cases; an increasing 
proportion is due to nonsteroidal anti-infl ammatory 
drugs (NSAIDs), with the prevalence of  Helicobacter 
pylori decreasing. Mallory-Weiss tears account for 
∼5–10% of cases. The proportion of patients bleeding 
from varices varies widely from ∼5 to 40%, depend-
ing on the population. Hemorrhagic or erosive gas-
tropathy (e.g., due to NSAIDs or alcohol) and erosive 
esophagitis often cause mild UGIB, but major bleed-
ing is rare. 
 Peptic ulcers 
 In addition to clinical features, characteristics of an ulcer 
at endoscopy provide important prognostic informa-
tion. One-third of patients with active bleeding or a 
nonbleeding visible vessel have further bleeding that 
requires urgent surgery if they are treated conserva-
tively. These patients clearly benefi t from endoscopic 
therapy with bipolar electrocoagulation; heater probe; 
injection therapy (e.g., absolute alcohol, 1:10,000 epi-
nephrine); and/or clips with reductions in bleed-
ing, hospital stay, mortality rate, and costs. In contrast, 
patients with clean-based ulcers have rates of recurrent 
bleeding approaching zero. If there is no other reason 
for hospitalization, such patients may be discharged on 
the fi rst hospital day, following stabilization. Patients 
without clean-based ulcers should usually remain in the 
hospital for 3 days because most episodes of recurrent 
bleeding occur within 3 days. 
 Randomized controlled trials document that a high-
dose, constant-infusion IV proton pump inhibitor (PPI) 
 GASTROINTESTINAL BLEEDING 
 CHAPTER 7 
TABLe 7-1
 SOURCES OF BLEEDING IN PATIENTS HOSPITALIZED 
FOR UPPER GI BLEEDING 
SOURCES OF BLEEDING
PROPORTION OF PATIENTS, %
Ulcers
31–67
Varices
 6–39
Mallory-Weiss tears
2–8
Gastroduodenal erosions
    2–18
Erosive esophagitis
 1–13
Neoplasm
2–8
Vascular ectasias
0–6
No source identiﬁ ed
 5–14
Source: Data on hospitalizations from year 2000 onward from Am J 
Gastroenterol 98:1494, 2003; Gastrointest Endosc 57:AB147, 2003; 
60:875, 2004; Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol 16:177, 2004; 17:641, 
2005; J Clin Gastroenterol 42:128, 2008; World J Gastroenterol 
14:5046, 2008; Dig Dis Sci 54:333, 2009.
SECTION I
Cardinal Manifestations of Gastrointestinal Disease
58
(e.g., omeprazole 80-mg bolus and 8-mg/h infusion), 
designed to sustain intragastric pH  >6 and enhance 
clot stability, decreases further bleeding and mortality 
in patients with high-risk ulcers (active bleeding, non-
bleeding visible vessel, adherent clot) when given after 
endoscopic therapy. Institution of PPI therapy at pre-
sentation in all patients with UGIB decreases high-risk 
ulcer characteristics (e.g., active bleeding) but does not 
significantly improve outcomes such as further bleed-
ing, transfusions, or mortality as compared to initiating 
therapy only when high-risk ulcers are identified at the 
time of endoscopy.
Approximately one-third of patients with bleeding 
ulcers will rebleed within the next 1–2 years if no pre-
ventive strategies are employed. Prevention of recur-
rent bleeding focuses on the three main factors in ulcer 
pathogenesis, H. pylori, NSAIDs, and acid. Eradication 
of H. pylori in patients with bleeding ulcers decreases 
rates of rebleeding to <5%. If a bleeding ulcer devel-
ops in a patient taking NSAIDs, the NSAIDs should 
be discontinued, if possible. If NSAIDs must be con-
tinued or reinstituted, a cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2) 
selective inhibitor (coxib) plus a PPI should be used. 
PPI co-therapy alone or a coxib alone is associated 
with an annual rebleeding rate of ∼10% in patients 
with a recent bleeding ulcer, while combination of a 
coxib and PPI provides a further significant decrease in 
recurrent ulcer bleeding. Patients with cardiovascular 
disease who develop bleeding ulcers while taking low-
dose aspirin should restart aspirin as soon as possible 
after their bleeding episode (e.g., ≤7 days). A random-
ized trial showed that failure to restart aspirin was asso-
ciated with a nonsignificant difference in rebleeding 
(5% vs. 10% at 30 days), but a significant increase in 
mortality at 30 days (9% vs. 1%) and 8 weeks (13% vs. 
1%) as compared to immediate reinstitution of aspirin. 
Patients with bleeding ulcers unrelated to H. pylori 
or NSAIDs should remain on full-dose antisecretory 
therapy indefinitely. Peptic ulcers are discussed in 
Chap. 14.
Mallory-Weiss tears
The classic history is vomiting, retching, or cough-
ing preceding hematemesis, especially in an alcoholic 
patient. Bleeding from these tears, which are usually on 
the gastric side of the gastroesophageal junction, stops 
spontaneously in 80–90% of patients and recurs in only 
0–7%. Endoscopic therapy is indicated for actively 
bleeding Mallory-Weiss tears. Angiographic therapy 
with embolization and operative therapy with oversew-
ing of the tear are rarely required. Mallory-Weiss tears 
are discussed in Chap. 13.
Esophageal varices
Patients with variceal hemorrhage have poorer out-
comes than patients with other sources of UGIB. 
Endoscopic therapy for acute bleeding and repeated 
sessions of endoscopic therapy to eradicate esophageal 
varices significantly reduce rebleeding and mortality. 
Ligation is the endoscopic therapy of choice for esopha-
geal varices because it has less rebleeding, a lower mor-
tality rate, fewer local complications, and it requires 
fewer treatment sessions to achieve variceal eradication 
than sclerotherapy.
Octreotide (50-μg bolus and 50-μg/h IV infusion for 
2–5 days) further helps in the control of acute bleed-
ing when used in combination with endoscopic ther-
apy. Other vasoactive agents such as somatostatin and 
terlipressin, available outside the United States, are also 
effective. Antibiotic therapy (e.g., ceftriaxone) is also 
recommended for patients with cirrhosis present-
ing with UGIB because antibiotics decrease bacterial 
infections and mortality in this population. Over the 
long term, treatment with nonselective beta blockers 
decreases recurrent bleeding from esophageal varices. 
Chronic therapy with beta blockers plus endoscopic 
ligation is recommended for prevention of recurrent 
esophageal variceal bleeding.
In patients who have persistent or recurrent bleed-
ing despite endoscopic and medical therapy, more inva-
sive therapy with transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic 
shunt (TIPS) is recommended. Older studies indicate 
that most patients with TIPS developed shunt stenosis 
within 1–2 years and required reintervention to main-
tain shunt patency. The use of coated stents appears to 
decrease shunt dysfunction by ∼50% in the first 2 years. 
A randomized comparison of TIPS (with uncoated 
stents) and distal splenorenal shunt in Child-Pugh class 
A or B cirrhotic patients with refractory variceal bleed-
ing revealed no significant difference in rebleeding, 
encephalopathy, or survival, but had a much higher rate 
of reintervention with TIPS (82% vs. 11%). Therefore, 
decompressive surgery may be an option in patients 
with milder, well-compensated cirrhosis.
Portal hypertension is also responsible for bleed-
ing from gastric varices, varices in the small and large 
intestine, and portal hypertensive gastropathy and 
enterocolopathy.
Hemorrhagic and erosive gastropathy 
(“gastritis”)
Hemorrhagic and erosive gastropathy, often labeled gas-
tritis, refers to endoscopically visualized subepithelial 
hemorrhages and erosions. These are mucosal lesions 
and, thus, do not cause major bleeding. They develop 
in various clinical settings, the most important of 
which are NSAID use, alcohol intake, and stress. Half 
of patients who chronically ingest NSAIDs have ero-
sions (15–30% have ulcers), while up to 20% of actively 
drinking alcoholic patients with symptoms of UGIB 
have evidence of subepithelial hemorrhages or erosions.
 
CHAPTER 7
Gastrointestinal Bleeding
59
Stress-related gastric mucosal injury occurs only in 
extremely sick patients: those who have experienced 
serious trauma, major surgery, burns covering more 
than one-third of the body surface area, major intra-
cranial disease, or severe medical illness (i.e., ventilator 
dependence, coagulopathy). Significant bleeding prob-
ably does not develop unless ulceration occurs. The 
mortality rate in these patients is quite high because of 
their serious underlying illnesses.
The incidence of bleeding from stress-related gastric 
mucosal injury or ulceration has decreased dramatically 
in recent years, most likely due to better care of criti-
cally ill patients. Pharmacologic prophylaxis for bleeding 
may be considered in the high-risk patients mentioned 
earlier. Multiple trials document the efficacy of intra-
venous H2-receptor antagonist therapy, which is more 
effective than sucralfate but not superior to a PPI 
immediate-release suspension given via nasogastric tube. 
Prophylactic therapy decreases bleeding but does not 
lower the mortality rate.
Other causes
Other less frequent causes of UGIB include erosive 
duodenitis, neoplasms, aortoenteric fistulas, vascular 
lesions [including hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasias 
(Osler-Weber-Rendu) and gastric antral vascular ectasia 
(“watermelon stomach”)], Dieulafoy’s lesion (in which 
an aberrant vessel in the mucosa bleeds from a pinpoint 
mucosal defect), prolapse gastropathy (prolapse of proxi-
mal stomach into esophagus with retching, especially in 
alcoholics), and hemobilia or hemosuccus pancreaticus 
(bleeding from the bile duct or pancreatic duct).
Small-intestinal sources of bleeding
Small-intestinal sources of bleeding (bleeding from sites 
beyond the reach of the standard upper endoscope) are 
difficult to diagnose and are responsible for the major-
ity of cases of obscure GIB. Fortunately, small-­intestinal 
bleeding is uncommon. The most common causes in 
adults are vascular ectasias, tumors (e.g., adenocarci-
noma, leiomyoma, lymphoma, benign polyps, carci-
noid, metastases, and lipoma), and NSAID-induced 
erosions and ulcers. Other less common causes in adults 
include Crohn’s disease, infection, ischemia, vasculitis, 
small-bowel varices, diverticula, Meckel’s diverticulum, 
duplication cysts, and intussusception.
Meckel’s diverticulum is the most common cause of 
significant lower GIB (LGIB) in children, decreasing 
in frequency as a cause of bleeding with age. In adults 
<40–50 years, small-bowel tumors often account for 
obscure GIB; in patients >50–60 years, vascular ecta-
sias and NSAID-induced lesions are more commonly 
responsible.
Vascular ectasias should be treated with endoscopic 
therapy if possible. Surgical therapy can be used for 
vascular ectasias isolated to a segment of the small intes-
tine when endoscopic therapy is unsuccessful. Although 
estrogen/progesterone compounds have been used for 
vascular ectasias, a double-blind trial found no benefit 
in prevention of recurrent bleeding. Isolated lesions, 
such as tumors, diverticula, or duplications, are gener-
ally treated with surgical resection.
Colonic sources of bleeding
The incidence of hospitalizations for LGIB is ≥20% 
that for UGIB. Hemorrhoids are probably the most 
common cause of LGIB; anal fissures also cause minor 
bleeding and pain. If these local anal processes, which 
rarely require hospitalization, are excluded, the most 
common causes of LGIB in adults are diverticula, vas-
cular ectasias (especially in the proximal colon of 
patients >70 years), neoplasms (primarily adenocar-
cinoma), and colitis—most commonly infectious or 
idiopathic inflammatory bowel disease, but occasion-
ally ischemic or radiation-induced. Uncommon causes 
include post-polypectomy bleeding, solitary rectal ulcer 
syndrome, NSAID-induced ulcers or colitis, trauma, 
varices (most commonly rectal), lymphoid nodular 
hyperplasia, vasculitis, and aortocolic fistulas. In children 
and adolescents, the most common colonic causes of 
significant GIB are inflammatory bowel disease and 
juvenile polyps.
Diverticular bleeding is abrupt in onset, usually pain-
less, sometimes massive, and often from the right colon; 
minor and occult bleeding is not characteristic. Clini-
cal reports suggest that bleeding colonic diverticula stop 
bleeding spontaneously in ∼80% of patients and rebleed 
in about 20–25% of patients. Intraarterial vasopressin or 
embolization by superselective technique should stop 
bleeding in a majority of patients. If bleeding persists or 
recurs, segmental surgical resection is indicated.
Bleeding from right colonic vascular ectasias in the 
elderly may be overt or occult; it tends to be chronic 
and only occasionally is hemodynamically signifi-
cant. Endoscopic hemostatic therapy may be useful 
in the treatment of vascular ectasias, as well as dis-
crete bleeding ulcers and post-polypectomy bleeding, 
while endoscopic polypectomy, if possible, is used for 
bleeding colonic polyps. Surgical therapy is gener-
ally required for major, persistent, or recurrent bleed-
ing from the wide variety of colonic sources of GIB 
that cannot be treated medically, angiographically, or 
endoscopically.
APPROACH TO THE
PATIENT	
Gastrointestinal Bleeding
Measurement of the heart rate and blood pressure 
is the best way to initially assess a patient with GIB. 
­Clinically significant bleeding leads to postural changes 
SECTION I
Cardinal Manifestations of Gastrointestinal Disease
60
in heart rate or blood pressure, tachycardia, and, finally, 
­recumbent hypotension. In contrast, the hemoglobin 
does not fall immediately with acute GIB, due to pro-
portionate reductions in plasma and red cell volumes 
(i.e., “people bleed whole blood”). Thus, hemoglobin 
may be normal or only minimally decreased at the ini-
tial presentation of a severe bleeding episode. As extra-
vascular fluid enters the vascular space to restore vol-
ume, the hemoglobin falls, but this process may take 
up to 72 h. Patients with slow, chronic GIB may have 
very low hemoglobin values despite normal blood 
pressure and heart rate. With the development of 
iron-deficiency anemia, the mean corpuscular volume 
will be low and red blood cell distribution width will 
increase.
Differentiation of Upper from Lower 
GIB  Hematemesis indicates an upper GI source of 
bleeding (above the ligament of Treitz). Melena indi-
cates that blood has been present in the GI tract for at 
least 14 h (and as long as 3–5 days). The more proximal 
the bleeding site, the more likely melena will occur. 
Hematochezia usually represents a lower GI source of 
bleeding, although an upper GI lesion may bleed so 
briskly that blood does not remain in the bowel long 
enough for melena to develop. When hematochezia is 
the presenting symptom of UGIB, it is associated with 
hemodynamic instability and dropping hemoglobin. 
Bleeding lesions of the small bowel may present as 
melena or hematochezia. Other clues to UGIB include 
hyperactive bowel sounds and an elevated blood urea 
nitrogen level (due to volume depletion and blood pro-
teins absorbed in the small intestine).
A nonbloody nasogastric aspirate may be seen in 
up to 18% of patients with UGIB—usually from a duo-
denal source. Even a bile-stained appearance does not 
exclude a bleeding postpyloric lesion because reports of 
bile in the aspirate are incorrect in ∼50% of cases. Test-
ing of aspirates that are not grossly bloody for occult 
blood is not useful.
Diagnostic Evaluation of the Patient 
with GIB
Upper GIB  (Fig. 7-1) History and physical exami-
nation are not usually diagnostic of the source of GIB. 
Upper endoscopy is the test of choice in patients with 
UGIB and should be performed urgently in patients who 
present with hemodynamic instability (hypotension, 
tachycardia, or postural changes in heart rate or blood 
pressure). Early endoscopy is also beneficial in cases of 
milder bleeding for management decisions. Patients 
with major bleeding and high-risk endoscopic findings 
(e.g., varices, ulcers with active bleeding or a visible 
vessel) benefit from endoscopic hemostatic therapy, 
while patients with low-risk lesions (e.g., clean-based 
ulcers, nonbleeding Mallory-Weiss tears, erosive or 
­hemorrhagic gastropathy) who have stable vital signs 
and hemoglobin, and no other medical problems, can 
be discharged home.
Lower GIB  (Fig. 7-2) Patients with hematochezia 
and hemodynamic instability should have upper endos-
copy to rule out an upper GI source before evaluation 
of the lower GI tract. Patients with presumed LGIB may 
undergo early sigmoidoscopy for the detection of obvi-
ous, low-lying lesions. However, the procedure is dif-
ficult with brisk bleeding, and it is usually not possible 
Figure 7-1 
Suggested algorithm for patients with acute upper gas-
trointestinal bleeding. Recommendations on level of care 
and time of discharge assume patient is stabilized without 
further bleeding or other concomitant medical problems. 
ICU, intensive care unit; PPI, proton pump inhibitor.
Acute Upper GI Bleeding
ICU for 1-2 days;
ward for 2-3 days
Ligation + IV
vasoactive drug
(e.g., octreotide)
Esophageal varices
Ulcer
Mallory-Weiss tear
Clean base
Discharge
No IV PPI
or endoscopic
therapy
Active bleeding
or visible vessel
ICU for 1 day;
ward for 2 days
IV PPI therapy
+ endoscopic
therapy
Adherent clot
Ward for 3 days
IV PPI therapy
+/– endoscopic
therapy
Flat,
pigmented spot
No IV PPI
or endoscopic
therapy
Ward for 3 days
Active
bleeding
No active
bleeding
No
endoscopic
therapy
Discharge
Endoscopic
therapy
Ward for
1-2 days
 
CHAPTER 7
Gastrointestinal Bleeding
61
to identify the area of bleeding. Sigmoidoscopy is useful 
primarily in patients <40 years with minor bleeding.
Colonoscopy after an oral lavage solution is the pro-
cedure of choice in patients admitted with LGIB unless 
bleeding is too massive or unless sigmoidoscopy has 
disclosed an obvious actively bleeding lesion. 99mTc-
labeled red cell scan allows repeated imaging for up to 
24 h and may identify the general location of bleeding. 
However, radionuclide scans should be interpreted with 
caution because results, especially from later images, 
are highly variable. In active LGIB, angiography can 
detect the site of bleeding (extravasation of contrast 
into the gut) and permits treatment with emboliza-
tion or intraarterial infusion of vasopressin. Even after 
bleeding has stopped, angiography may identify lesions 
with abnormal vasculature, such as vascular ectasias or 
tumors.
GIB of Obscure Origin  Obscure GIB is defined 
as persistent or recurrent bleeding for which no source 
Figure 7-2 
Suggested algorithm for patients with acute lower gas-
trointestinal bleeding. *Some suggest colonoscopy for any 
degree of rectal bleeding in patients <40 years as well. †If 
massive bleeding does not allow time for colonic lavage, 
proceed to angiography.
Hemodynamic
instability
Site identified;
bleeding stops
Angiography
Obscure bleeding
work-up
Flexible
sigmoidoscopy
(colonoscopy if
iron-deficiency
anemia, familial
colon cancer, or
copious bleeding)*
Bleeding persists
Surgery
Acute lower
GI bleeding
No hemodynamic
instability
Age  ≥ 40 yrs
Upper endoscopy
Age < 40 yrs
Colonoscopy
Colonoscopy†
Site identified;
bleeding persists
Site not identified;
bleeding persists
has been identified by routine endoscopic and contrast 
x-ray studies; it may be overt (melena, hematochezia) or 
occult (iron-deficiency anemia). Current guidelines sug-
gest angiography as the initial test for massive obscure 
bleeding, and video capsule endoscopy, which allows 
examination of the entire small intestine, for all others. 
Push enteroscopy, with a specially designed entero-
scope or a pediatric colonoscope to inspect the entire 
duodenum and part of the jejunum, also may be con-
sidered as an initial evaluation. A systematic review 
of 14 trials comparing push enteroscopy to capsule 
revealed “clinically significant findings” in 26% and 
56% of patients, respectively. However, in contrast to 
enteroscopy, lack of control of the capsule prevents its 
manipulation and full visualization of the intestine; in 
addition, tissue cannot be sampled and therapy cannot 
be applied.
If capsule endoscopy is positive, management (e.g., 
enteroscopy, laparoscopy) is dictated by the finding. 
If capsule is negative, current recommendations sug-
gest patients may be either observed, or if their clini-
cal course mandates (e.g., recurrent bleeding, need 
for transfusions or hospitalization), undergo further  
testing. Newer endoscopic techniques (e.g., double- 
balloon, single-balloon, and spiral enteroscopy) allow 
the endoscopist to examine, obtain specimens from, 
and provide therapy to much or all of the small intes-
tine. Newer imaging techniques (CT and MR enterog-
raphy) are now frequently being used in place of older 
specialized small-bowel radiographic exams (e.g., 
enteroclysis). Other tests include 
99mTc-labeled red 
blood cell scintigraphy; angiography, which may be 
useful even if bleeding has subsided because it may 
disclose vascular anomalies or tumor vessels; and 99mTc-
pertechnetate scintigraphy for diagnosis of Meckel’s 
diverticulum (especially in young patients). When all 
tests are unrevealing, intraoperative endoscopy is indi-
cated in patients with severe recurrent or persistent 
bleeding requiring repeated transfusions.
Positive Fecal Occult Blood Test  Fecal 
occult blood testing is recommended only for colorec-
tal cancer screening and may be used in average-risk 
adults (beginning at age 50) and in adults with a first-
degree relative with colorectal neoplasm at ≥60 years 
or two second-degree relatives with colorectal cancer 
(beginning at age 40). A positive test necessitates colo-
noscopy. If evaluation of the colon is negative, further 
workup is not recommended unless iron-deficiency 
anemia or GI symptoms are present.
 Daniel S. Pratt 
I  Marshall M. Kaplan 
62
 Jaundice, or icterus, is a yellowish discoloration of tis-
sue resulting from the deposition of bilirubin. Tissue 
deposition of bilirubin occurs only in the presence of 
serum hyperbilirubinemia and is a sign of either liver 
disease or, less often, a hemolytic disorder. The degree 
of serum bilirubin elevation can be estimated by physi-
cal examination. Slight increases in serum bilirubin are 
best detected by examining the sclerae, which have a 
particular affi nity for bilirubin due to their high elastin 
content. The presence of scleral icterus indicates a serum 
bilirubin of at least 51 μmol/L (3 mg/dL). The ability to 
detect scleral icterus is made more diffi cult if the exam-
ining room has fl uorescent lighting. If the examiner 
suspects scleral icterus, a second place to examine is under-
neath the tongue. As serum bilirubin levels rise, the skin 
will eventually become yellow in light-skinned patients 
and even green if the process is long-standing; the green 
color is produced by oxidation of bilirubin to biliverdin. 
 The differential diagnosis for yellowing of the skin 
is limited. In addition to jaundice, it includes carote-
noderma, the use of the drug quinacrine, and exces-
sive exposure to phenols. Carotenoderma is the yellow 
color imparted to the skin by the presence of carotene; 
it occurs in healthy individuals who ingest excessive 
amounts of vegetables and fruits that contain carotene, 
such as carrots, leafy vegetables, squash, peaches, and 
oranges. Unlike jaundice, where the yellow coloration 
of the skin is uniformly distributed over the body, in 
carotenoderma, the pigment is concentrated on the 
palms, soles, forehead, and nasolabial folds. Caroteno-
derma can be distinguished from jaundice by the spar-
ing of the sclerae. Quinacrine causes a yellow discolor-
ation of the skin in 4–37% of patients treated with it. 
Unlike carotene, quinacrine can cause discoloration of 
the sclerae. 
 Another sensitive indicator of increased serum biliru-
bin is darkening of the urine, which is due to the renal 
excretion of conjugated bilirubin. Patients often describe 
their urine as tea- or cola-colored. Bilirubinuria indicates 
an elevation of the direct serum bilirubin fraction and, 
therefore, the presence of liver disease. 
 Increased serum bilirubin levels occur when an 
imbalance exists between bilirubin production and 
clearance. A logical evaluation of the patient who is 
jaundiced requires an understanding of bilirubin pro-
duction and metabolism. 
 produCtion and MetaBolisM 
of BiliruBin 
 (See also  Chap. 37 ) Bilirubin, a tetrapyrrole pigment, is a 
breakdown product of heme (ferroprotoporphyrin IX). 
About 70–80% of the 250–300 mg of bilirubin produced 
each day is derived from the breakdown of hemoglo-
bin in senescent red blood cells. The remainder comes 
from prematurely destroyed erythroid cells in bone mar-
row and from the turnover of hemoproteins such as 
myoglobin and cytochromes found in tissues throughout 
the body. 
 The formation of bilirubin occurs in reticuloendo-
thelial cells, primarily in the spleen and liver. The fi rst 
reaction, catalyzed by the microsomal enzyme heme 
oxygenase, oxidatively cleaves the α bridge of the por-
phyrin group and opens the heme ring. The end prod-
ucts of this reaction are biliverdin, carbon monoxide, 
and iron. The second reaction, catalyzed by the cyto-
solic enzyme biliverdin reductase, reduces the cen-
tral methylene bridge of biliverdin and converts it to 
bilirubin. Bilirubin formed in the reticuloendothelial 
cells is virtually insoluble in water. This is due to tight 
internal hydrogen bonding between the water-soluble 
moieties of bilirubin, proprionic acid carboxyl groups 
of one dipyrrolic half of the molecule with the imino 
and lactam groups of the opposite half. This confi gu-
ration blocks solvent access to the polar residues of 
bilirubin and places the hydrophobic residues on the 
outside. To be transported in blood, bilirubin must be 
 JAUNDICE 
 CHaPTEr 8 
 
CHAPTER 8
Jaundice
63
solubilized. This is accomplished by its reversible, non-
covalent binding to albumin. Unconjugated bilirubin 
bound to albumin is transported to the liver, where 
it, but not the albumin, is taken up by hepatocytes via 
a process that at least partly involves carrier-mediated 
membrane transport. No specific bilirubin transporter 
has yet been identified (Chap. 37, Fig. 37-1).
After entering the hepatocyte, unconjugated bilirubin 
is bound in the cytosol to a number of proteins including 
proteins in the glutathione-S-transferase superfamily. These 
proteins serve both to reduce efflux of bilirubin back into 
the serum and to present the bilirubin for conjugation. In 
the endoplasmic ­reticulum, bilirubin is solubilized by con-
jugation to glucuronic acid, a process that disrupts the inter-
nal hydrogen bonds and yields bilirubin monoglucuronide 
and diglucuronide. The conjugation of glucuronic acid 
to bilirubin is catalyzed by bilirubin uridine diphosphate-
glucuronosyl transferase (UDPGT). The now hydrophilic 
­bilirubin conjugates diffuse from the endoplasmic reticu-
lum to the canalicular membrane, where bilirubin mono-
glucuronide and diglucuronide are actively transported into 
canalicular bile by an energy-dependent mechanism involv-
ing the multiple drug resistance protein 2.
The conjugated bilirubin excreted into bile drains 
into the duodenum and passes unchanged through 
the proximal small bowel. Conjugated bilirubin is not 
taken up by the intestinal mucosa. When the conju-
gated bilirubin reaches the distal ileum and colon, it 
is hydrolyzed to unconjugated bilirubin by bacterial 
β-glucuronidases. The unconjugated bilirubin is reduced 
by normal gut bacteria to form a group of colorless 
tetrapyrroles called urobilinogens. About 80–90% of 
these products are excreted in feces, either unchanged 
or oxidized to orange derivatives called urobilins. The 
remaining 10–20% of the urobilinogens are passively 
absorbed, enter the portal venous blood, and are reex-
creted by the liver. A small fraction (usually <3 mg/dL) 
escapes hepatic uptake, filters across the renal glomeru-
lus, and is excreted in urine.
Measurement of Serum Bilirubin
The terms direct and indirect bilirubin, conjugated and 
unconjugated bilirubin, respectively, are based on the 
original van den Bergh reaction. This assay, or a varia-
tion of it, is still used in most clinical chemistry labo-
ratories to determine the serum bilirubin level. In this 
assay, bilirubin is exposed to diazotized sulfanilic acid, 
splitting into two relatively stable dipyrrylmethene 
azopigments that absorb maximally at 540 nm, allow-
ing for photometric analysis. The direct fraction is 
that which reacts with diazotized sulfanilic acid in the 
absence of an accelerator substance such as alcohol. The 
direct fraction provides an approximate determination 
of the conjugated bilirubin in serum. The total serum 
bilirubin is the amount that reacts after the addition of 
alcohol. The indirect fraction is the difference between 
the total and the direct bilirubin and provides an esti-
mate of the unconjugated bilirubin in serum.
With the van den Bergh method, the normal serum 
bilirubin concentration usually is 17 μmol/L (<1 mg/
dL). Up to 30%, or 5.1 μmol/L (0.3 mg/dL), of the 
total may be direct-reacting (conjugated) bilirubin. 
Total serum bilirubin concentrations are between 3.4 
and 15.4 μmol/L (0.2 and 0.9 mg/dL) in 95% of a nor-
mal population.
Several new techniques, although less convenient to 
perform, have added considerably to our understanding 
of bilirubin metabolism. First, they demonstrate that in 
normal persons or those with Gilbert’s syndrome, almost 
100% of the serum bilirubin is unconjugated; <3% is 
monoconjugated bilirubin. Second, in jaundiced patients 
with hepatobiliary disease, the total serum bilirubin con-
centration measured by these new, more accurate meth-
ods is lower than the values found with diazo methods. 
This suggests that there are diazo-positive compounds 
distinct from bilirubin in the serum of patients with 
hepatobiliary disease. Third, these studies indicate that, 
in jaundiced patients with hepatobiliary disease, mono-
glucuronides of bilirubin predominate over the digluc-
uronides. Fourth, part of the direct-reacting bilirubin 
fraction includes conjugated bilirubin that is covalently 
linked to albumin. This albumin-linked bilirubin frac-
tion (delta fraction, or biliprotein) represents an important 
fraction of total serum bilirubin in patients with cho-
lestasis and hepatobiliary disorders. Albumin-bound 
conjugated bilirubin is formed in serum when hepatic 
excretion of bilirubin glucuronides is impaired and the 
glucuronides are present in serum in increasing amounts. 
By virtue of its tight binding to albumin, the clearance 
rate of albumin-bound bilirubin from serum approxi-
mates the half-life of albumin, 12–14 days, rather than 
the short half-life of bilirubin, about 4 h.
The prolonged half-life of albumin-bound conju-
gated bilirubin explains two previously unexplained 
enigmas in jaundiced patients with liver disease: (1) that 
some patients with conjugated hyperbilirubinemia do not 
exhibit bilirubinuria during the recovery phase of their 
disease because the bilirubin is covalently bound to albu-
min and therefore not filtered by the renal glomeruli, and 
(2) that the elevated serum bilirubin level declines more 
slowly than expected in some patients who otherwise 
appear to be recovering satisfactorily. Late in the recov-
ery phase of hepatobiliary disorders, all the conjugated 
bilirubin may be in the albumin-linked form. Its value in 
serum falls slowly because of the long half-life of albumin.
Measurement of Urine Bilirubin
Unconjugated bilirubin is always bound to albumin 
in the serum, is not filtered by the kidney, and is not 
found in the urine. Conjugated bilirubin is filtered at the 
SECTION I
64
Cardinal Manifestations of Gastrointestinal Disease
glomerulus and the majority is reabsorbed by the proximal 
tubules; a small fraction is excreted in the urine. Any bili-
rubin found in the urine is conjugated bilirubin. The pres-
ence of bilirubinuria implies the presence of liver disease. 
A urine dipstick test (Ictotest) gives the same information 
as fractionation of the serum bilirubin. This test is very 
accurate. A false-negative test is possible in patients with 
prolonged cholestasis due to the predominance of conju-
gated bilirubin covalently bound to albumin.
APPROACH TO THE
PATIENT	
Bilirubin
The bilirubin present in serum represents a balance 
between input from production of bilirubin and hepatic/
biliary removal of the pigment. Hyperbilirubinemia 
may result from (1) overproduction of bilirubin; (2) 
impaired uptake, conjugation, or excretion of bilirubin; or  
(3) regurgitation of unconjugated or conjugated bilirubin  
Figure 8-1 
Evaluation of the patient with 
jaundice. ALT, alanine aminotrans­
ferase; AMA, antimitochondrial anti­
body; ANA, ­antinuclear antibody; 
AST, 
aspartate 
aminotransferase; 
CMV, cytomegalovirus; EBV, Epstein-
Barr virus; LKM, liver-kidney micro­
somal ­antibody; MRCP, magnetic 
resonance 
cholangiopancreatogra­
phy; SMA, smooth-­muscle antibody; 
SPEP, serum ­protein ­electrophoresis.
History (focus on medication/drug exposure)
    Physical examination
    Lab tests: Bilirubin with fractionation,
    ALT, AST, alkaline phosphatase,
      prothrombin time, and albumin
Isolated elevation
  of the bilirubin
Indirect
  hyperbilirubinemia
  (direct <15%)
See Table 8-1
Direct
  hyperbilirubinemia
    (direct >15%)
    See Table 8-1
Drugs
    Rifampicin
    Probenecid
Inherited disorders
    Dubin-Johnson
      syndrome
    Rotor's syndrome
1. Viral serologies
        Hepatitis A IgM
        Hepatitis B surface
            antigen and core
            antibody (IgM)
        Hepatitis C RNA
2. Toxicology screen
      Acetaminophen level
3. Ceruloplasmin (if
      patient <40
      years of age)
4. ANA, SMA, LKM, SPEP
Inherited disorders
    Gilbert's syndrome
    Crigler-Najjar syndromes
Hemolytic disorders
Ineffective erythropoiesis
Bilirubin and other
  liver tests elevated
Hepatocellular pattern:
  ALT/AST elevated out
  of proportion to
  alkaline phosphatase
  See Table 8-2
Cholestatic pattern:
  Alkaline phosphatase
  out of proportion
  ALT/AST
  See Table 8-3
Dilated ducts
Extrahepatic
  cholestasis
CT/ERCP
Liver biopsy
Liver biopsy
MRCP/Liver biopsy
Results
negative
Results
negative
Additional virologic testing
    CMV DNA, EBV capsid
      antigen
    Hepatitis D antibody
      (if indicated)
    Hepatitis E IgM
      (if indicated)  
Results
negative
AMA
positive
Serologic testing
    AMA
    Hepatitis serologies
    Hepatitis A, CMV, EBV
Review drugs (see Table 8-3)
Ultrasound
Ducts not dilated
Intrahepatic
 cholestasis
ALGORITHM FOR PATIENT WITH JAUNDICE
from damaged hepatocytes or bile ducts. An increase 
in unconjugated bilirubin in serum results from either 
overproduction, impairment of uptake, or conjugation 
of bilirubin. An increase in conjugated bilirubin is due to 
decreased excretion into the bile ductules or backward 
leakage of the pigment. The initial steps in evaluating 
the patient with jaundice are to determine (1) whether 
the hyperbilirubinemia is predominantly conjugated or 
unconjugated in nature, and (2) whether other biochemi-
cal liver tests are abnormal. The thoughtful interpretation 
of limited data will allow for a rational evaluation of the 
patient (Fig. 8-1). This discussion will focus solely on the 
evaluation of the adult patient with jaundice.
Isolated Elevation of Serum ­Bilirubin
Unconjugated Hyperbilirubinemia  The differ-
ential diagnosis of an isolated unconjugated hyperbiliru-
binemia is limited (Table 8-1). The critical determination 
 
CHAPTER 8
Jaundice
65
is whether the patient is suffering from a hemolytic pro-
cess resulting in an overproduction of bilirubin (hemo-
lytic disorders and ineffective erythropoiesis) or from 
impaired hepatic uptake/conjugation of bilirubin (drug 
effect or genetic disorders).
Hemolytic disorders that cause excessive heme pro-
duction may be either inherited or acquired. Inherited 
disorders include spherocytosis, sickle cell anemia, 
thalassemia, and deficiency of red cell enzymes such 
as pyruvate kinase and glucose-6-phosphate dehy-
drogenase. In these conditions, the serum bilirubin 
rarely exceeds 86 μmol/L (5 mg/dL). Higher levels may 
occur when there is coexistent renal or hepatocellular  
dysfunction or in acute hemolysis such as a sickle cell 
crisis. In evaluating jaundice in patients with chronic 
hemolysis, it is important to remember the high inci-
dence of pigmented (calcium bilirubinate) gallstones 
found in these patients, which increases the likelihood 
of ­choledocholithiasis as an alternative explanation for 
hyperbilirubinemia.
Acquired hemolytic disorders include microangio-
pathic hemolytic anemia (e.g., hemolytic-uremic syn-
drome), paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria, spur cell 
anemia, and immune hemolysis and parasitic infections 
including malaria and babesiosis. Ineffective erythropoi-
esis occurs in cobalamin, folate, and iron deficiencies.
Table 8-1
Causes of Isolated Hyperbilirubinemia
I.  Indirect hyperbilirubinemia
A.  Hemolytic disorders
1.  Inherited
a.  Spherocytosis, elliptocytosis
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase and 
pyruvate kinase deficiencies
b.  Sickle cell anemia
2.  Acquired
a.  Microangiopathic hemolytic anemias
b.  Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
c.  Spur cell anemia
d.  Immune hemolysis
e.  Parasitic infections
1.  Malaria
2.  Babesiosis
B.  Ineffective erythropoiesis
1.  Cobalamin, folate, thalassemia, and severe iron 
deficiencies
C.  Drugs
1.  Rifampicin, probenecid, ribavirin
D.  Inherited conditions
1.  Crigler-Najjar types I and II
2.  Gilbert’s syndrome
II. Direct hyperbilirubinemia
A.  Inherited conditions
1.  Dubin-Johnson syndrome
2.  Rotor’s syndrome
In the absence of hemolysis, the physician should 
consider a problem with the hepatic uptake or conjuga-
tion of bilirubin. Certain drugs, including rifampicin and 
probenecid, may cause unconjugated hyperbilirubine-
mia by diminishing hepatic uptake of bilirubin. Impaired 
bilirubin conjugation occurs in three genetic conditions: 
Crigler-Najjar syndrome, types I and II, and Gilbert’s  
syndrome. Crigler-Najjar type I is an exceptionally rare 
condition found in neonates and characterized by severe 
jaundice [bilirubin >342 μmol/L (>20 mg/dL)] and neuro-
logic impairment due to kernicterus, frequently leading 
to death in infancy or childhood. These patients have a 
complete absence of bilirubin UDPGT activity, usually 
due to mutations in the critical 3′ domain of the UDPGT 
gene, and are totally unable to conjugate, and hence 
cannot excrete, bilirubin. The only effective treatment 
is orthotopic liver transplantation. Use of gene therapy 
and allogeneic hepatocyte infusion are experimental 
approaches of future promise for this devastating disease.
Crigler-Najjar type II is somewhat more common than 
type I. Patients live into adulthood with serum bilirubin 
levels that range from 103–428 μmol/L (6–25 mg/dL). In 
these patients, mutations in the bilirubin UDPGT gene 
cause reduced but not completely absent activity of 
the enzyme. Bilirubin UDPGT activity can be induced by 
the administration of phenobarbital, which can reduce 
serum bilirubin levels in these patients. Despite marked 
jaundice, these patients usually survive into adulthood, 
although they may be susceptible to kernicterus under 
the stress of intercurrent illness or surgery.
Gilbert’s syndrome is also marked by the impaired 
conjugation of bilirubin due to reduced bilirubin 
UDPGT activity to approximately one-third of normal.  
Gilbert’s syndrome is very common, with a reported 
incidence of 3–12%. Patients with Gilbert’s syndrome 
have a mild unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia with 
serum levels almost always <103 μmol/L (6 mg/dL). 
The serum levels may fluctuate, and jaundice is often 
identified only during periods of fasting. One molecu-
lar defect that has been identified in patients with  
Gilbert’s syndrome is in the TATAA element in the 5′ 
promoter region of the bilirubin UDPGT gene upstream 
of exon 1. This defect alone is not necessarily sufficient 
for producing the clinical syndrome of Gilbert’s as 
there are patients who are homozygous for this defect 
yet do not have the levels of hyperbilirubinemia typi-
cally seen in Gilbert’s syndrome. An enhancer polymor-
phism that lowers transcriptional activity has been 
identified. The decrease in transcription caused by 
both mutations together may be critical for producing 
the syndrome. Unlike both Crigler-Najjar syndromes, 
Gilbert’s syndrome is very common. The reported inci-
dence is 3–7% of the population with males predomi-
nating over females by a ratio of 2–7:1.
SECTION I
66
Cardinal Manifestations of Gastrointestinal Disease
Conjugated Hyperbilirubinemia  Elevated con­-
jugated hyperbilirubinemia is found in two rare inherited 
conditions: Dubin-Johnson syndrome and Rotor’s syndrome 
(Table 8-1). Patients with both conditions present with 
asymptomatic jaundice, typically in the second generation 
of life. The defect in Dubin-Johnson syndrome is mutations 
in the gene for multiple drug resistance protein 2. These 
patients have altered excretion of bilirubin into the bile 
ducts. Rotor’s syndrome seems to be a problem with the 
hepatic storage of bilirubin. Differentiating between these 
syndromes is possible, but clinically unnecessary, due to 
their benign nature.
Elevation of Serum Bilirubin with 
Other Liver Test Abnormalities  The 
remainder of this chapter will focus on the evaluation of 
the patient with a conjugated hyperbilirubinemia in the 
setting of other liver test abnormalities. This group of 
patients can be divided into those with a primary hepa-
tocellular process and those with intra- or extrahepatic 
cholestasis. Being able to make this differentiation will 
guide the physician’s evaluation (Fig. 8-1). This differen-
tiation is made on the basis of the history and physical 
examination as well as the pattern of liver test abnor-
malities.
History  A complete medical history is perhaps the 
single most important part of the evaluation of the 
patient with unexplained jaundice. Important consid-
erations include the use of or exposure to any chemical 
or medication, either physician-prescribed, over-the-
counter, complementary or alternative medicines such 
as herbal and vitamin preparations, or other drugs such 
as anabolic steroids. The patient should be carefully 
questioned about possible parenteral exposures, includ-
ing transfusions, intravenous and intranasal drug use, 
tattoos, and sexual activity. Other important questions 
include recent travel history; exposure to people with 
jaundice; exposure to possibly contaminated foods; 
occupational exposure to hepatotoxins; alcohol con-
sumption; the duration of jaundice; and the presence of 
any accompanying symptoms such as arthralgias, myal-
gias, rash, anorexia, weight loss, abdominal pain, fever, 
pruritus, and changes in the urine and stool. While none 
of these latter symptoms are specific for any one condi-
tion, they can suggest a particular diagnosis. A history 
of arthralgias and myalgias predating jaundice suggests  
hepatitis, either viral or drug-related. Jaundice asso-
ciated with the sudden onset of severe right upper  
quadrant pain and shaking chills suggests choledocholi-
thiasis and ascending cholangitis.
Physical Examination  The general assessment 
should include assessment of the patient’s nutritional 
status. Temporal and proximal muscle wasting suggests 
long-standing diseases such as pancreatic cancer or 
­cirrhosis. Stigmata of chronic liver disease, including spi-
der nevi, palmar erythema, gynecomastia, caput medu-
sae, Dupuytren’s contractures, parotid gland enlarge-
ment, and testicular atrophy are commonly seen in 
advanced alcoholic (Laennec’s) cirrhosis and occasion-
ally in other types of cirrhosis. An enlarged left supracla-
vicular node (Virchow’s node) or periumbilical nodule 
(Sister Mary Joseph’s nodule) suggests an abdominal 
malignancy. Jugular venous distention, a sign of right-
sided heart failure, suggests hepatic congestion. Right 
pleural effusion, in the absence of clinically apparent 
ascites, may be seen in advanced cirrhosis.
The abdominal examination should focus on the size 
and consistency of the liver, whether the spleen is pal-
pable and hence enlarged, and whether there is ascites 
present. Patients with cirrhosis may have an enlarged 
left lobe of the liver, which is felt below the xiphoid, and 
an enlarged spleen. A grossly enlarged nodular liver or 
an obvious abdominal mass suggests malignancy. An 
enlarged tender liver could be viral or alcoholic hepati-
tis; an infiltrative process such as amyloid; or, less often, 
an acutely congested liver secondary to right-sided 
heart failure. Severe right upper quadrant tenderness 
with respiratory arrest on inspiration (Murphy’s sign) 
suggests cholecystitis or, occasionally, ascending chol-
angitis. Ascites in the presence of jaundice suggests 
either cirrhosis or malignancy with peritoneal spread.
Laboratory Tests  When the physician encounters 
a patient with unexplained jaundice, there is a battery 
of tests that are helpful in the initial evaluation. These 
include total and direct serum bilirubin with fraction-
ation, aminotransferases, alkaline phosphatase, albu-
min, and prothrombin time tests. Enzyme tests [alanine  
aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), 
and alkaline phosphatase (ALP)] are helpful in differen-
tiating between a hepatocellular process and a choles-
tatic process (Table 36-1; Fig. 8-1), a critical step in deter-
mining what additional workup is indicated. Patients 
with a hepatocellular process generally have a dispro-
portionate rise in the aminotransferases compared to 
the ALP. Patients with a cholestatic process have a dis-
proportionate rise in the ALP compared to the amino-
transferases. The bilirubin can be prominently elevated 
in both hepatocellular and cholestatic conditions and, 
therefore, is not necessarily helpful in differentiating 
between the two.
In addition to the enzyme tests, all jaundiced 
patients should have additional blood tests, specifically 
an albumin level and a prothrombin time, to assess liver 
function. A low albumin level suggests a chronic pro-
cess such as cirrhosis or cancer. A normal albumin level 
is suggestive of a more acute process such as viral hepa-
titis or choledocholithiasis. An elevated ­prothrombin 
time indicates either vitamin K deficiency due to 
 
CHAPTER 8
Jaundice
67
­prolonged jaundice and malabsorption of vitamin K or 
significant hepatocellular dysfunction. The failure of the 
prothrombin time to correct with parenteral administra-
tion of vitamin K indicates severe hepatocellular injury.
The results of the bilirubin, enzyme tests, albu-
min, and prothrombin time tests will usually indicate 
whether a jaundiced patient has a hepatocellular or 
a cholestatic disease, as well as some indication of the 
duration and severity of the disease. The causes and 
evaluation of hepatocellular and cholestatic diseases are 
quite different.
Hepatocellular Conditions  Hepatocellular dis-
eases that can cause jaundice include viral hepatitis, 
drug or environmental toxicity, alcohol, and end-stage 
cirrhosis from any cause (Table 8-2). ­Wilson’s disease, 
once believed to occur primarily in young adults, 
should be considered in all adults if no other cause of 
jaundice is found. Autoimmune hepatitis is typically 
seen in young to middle-aged women but may affect 
men and women of any age. Alcoholic hepatitis can 
be differentiated from viral and toxin-related hepatitis 
by the pattern of the aminotransferases. Patients with 
alcoholic hepatitis typically have an AST:ALT ratio of at 
least 2:1. The AST rarely exceeds 300 U/L. Patients with 
acute viral hepatitis and toxin-related injury severe 
enough to produce jaundice typically have amino-
transferases >500 U/L, with the ALT greater than or 
equal to the AST. The degree of aminotransferase ele-
vation can occasionally help in differentiating between 
hepatocellular and cholestatic processes. While ALT 
and AST values less than 8 times normal may be seen 
in either hepatocellular or cholestatic liver disease, 
values 25 times normal or higher are seen primarily in 
acute hepatocellular diseases. Patients with jaundice 
Table 8-2
Hepatocellular Conditions That May 
Produce Jaundice
Viral hepatitis
  Hepatitis A, B, C, D, and E
  Epstein-Barr virus
  Cytomegalovirus
  Herpes simplex
Alcohol
Drug toxicity
  Predictable, dose-dependent (e.g., acetaminophen)
  Unpredictable, idiosyncratic (e.g., isoniazid)
Environmental toxins
  Vinyl chloride
  Jamaica bush tea—pyrrolizidine alkaloids
  Kava Kava
  Wild mushrooms—Amanita phalloides or A. verna
Wilson’s disease
Autoimmune hepatitis
from cirrhosis can have normal or only slight elevations 
of the aminotransferases.
When the physician determines that the patient has 
a hepatocellular disease, appropriate testing for acute 
viral hepatitis includes a hepatitis A IgM antibody, a 
hepatitis B surface antigen and core IgM antibody, and a 
hepatitis C viral RNA test. It can take many weeks for the 
hepatitis C antibody to become detectable, making it an 
unreliable test if acute hepatitis C is suspected. Depend-
ing on circumstances, studies for hepatitis D and E, 
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), and cytomegalovirus (CMV) 
may be indicated. Ceruloplasmin is the initial screening 
test for Wilson’s disease. Testing for autoimmune hepa-
titis usually includes an antinuclear antibody and mea-
surement of specific immunoglobulins.
Drug-induced hepatocellular injury can be classi-
fied either as predictable or unpredictable. Predict-
able drug reactions are dose-dependent and affect all 
patients who ingest a toxic dose of the drug in question. 
The classic example is acetaminophen hepatotoxicity. 
Unpredictable or idiosyncratic drug reactions are not 
dose-dependent and occur in a minority of patients. A 
great number of drugs can cause idiosyncratic hepatic 
injury. Environmental toxins are also an important cause 
of hepatocellular injury. Examples include industrial 
chemicals such as vinyl chloride, herbal preparations 
containing pyrrolizidine alkaloids (Jamaica bush tea) 
and Kava Kava, and the mushrooms Amanita phalloides 
or A. verna that contain highly hepatotoxic amatoxins.
Cholestatic Conditions  When the pattern of 
the liver tests suggests a cholestatic disorder, the next 
step is to determine whether it is intra- or extrahepatic 
cholestasis (Fig. 8-1). Distinguishing intrahepatic from 
extrahepatic cholestasis may be difficult. History, physi-
cal examination, and laboratory tests are often not help-
ful. The next appropriate test is an ultrasound. The ultra-
sound is inexpensive, does not expose the patient to 
ionizing radiation, and can detect dilation of the intra- 
and extrahepatic biliary tree with a high degree of sen-
sitivity and specificity. The absence of biliary dilatation 
suggests intrahepatic cholestasis, while the presence 
of biliary dilatation indicates extrahepatic cholesta-
sis. False-negative results occur in patients with partial 
obstruction of the common bile duct or in patients with 
cirrhosis or primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) where 
scarring prevents the intrahepatic ducts from dilating.
Although ultrasonography may indicate extrahepatic 
cholestasis, it rarely identifies the site or cause of obstruc-
tion. The distal common bile duct is a particularly diffi-
cult area to visualize by ultrasound because of overlying 
bowel gas. Appropriate next tests include CT, magnetic 
resonance cholangiography (MRCP), and endoscopic ret-
rograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP). CT scanning 
and MRCP are better than ultrasonography for assessing 
SECTION I
68
Cardinal Manifestations of Gastrointestinal Disease
the head of the pancreas and for identifying choledocho-
lithiasis in the distal common bile duct, particularly when 
the ducts are not dilated. ERCP is the “gold standard” for  
identifying choledocholithiasis. It is ­performed by intro-
ducing a side-viewing endoscope perorally into the  
duodenum. The ampulla of Vater is visualized, and a cath-
eter is advanced through the ampulla. Injection of dye 
allows for the visualization of the common bile duct and 
the pancreatic duct. Beyond its diagnostic capabilities, 
ERCP allows for therapeutic interventions, including the 
removal of common bile duct stones and the placement 
of stents. In patients in whom ERCP is unsuccessful and 
there is a high likelihood of the need for a therapeutic 
intervention, transhepatic cholangiography can provide 
the same information and allow for intervention. MRCP 
has replaced ERCP as the initial diagnostic test in cases 
where the need for intervention is felt to be small.
In patients with apparent intrahepatic cholesta-
sis, the diagnosis is often made by serologic testing in 
combination with percutaneous liver biopsy. The list of  
possible causes of intrahepatic cholestasis is long and 
varied (Table 8-3). A number of conditions that typically 
cause a hepatocellular pattern of injury can also present 
as a cholestatic variant. Both hepatitis B and C can cause 
a cholestatic hepatitis (fibrosing cholestatic hepatitis). 
This disease variant has been reported in patients who 
have undergone solid organ transplantation. Hepatitis 
A, alcoholic hepatitis, EBV, and CMV may also present as 
cholestatic liver disease.
Drugs may cause intrahepatic cholestasis, a vari-
ant of drug-induced hepatitis. Drug-induced cholesta-
sis is usually reversible after eliminating the offending 
drug, although it may take many months for cholesta-
sis to resolve. Drugs most commonly associated with 
cholestasis are the anabolic and contraceptive ste-
roids. Cholestatic hepatitis has been reported with 
chlorpromazine, imipramine, tolbutamide, sulindac, 
cimetidine, and erythromycin estolate. It also occurs in 
patients taking trimethoprim; sulfamethoxazole; and 
penicillin-based antibiotics such as ampicillin, dicloxa-
cillin, and clavulinic acid. Rarely, cholestasis may be 
chronic and associated with progressive fibrosis despite 
early discontinuation of the drug. Chronic cholestasis 
has been associated with chlorpromazine and prochlor-
perazine.
Primary biliary cirrhosis is an autoimmune disease 
predominantly of middle-aged women in which there is 
a progressive destruction of interlobular bile ducts. The 
diagnosis is made by the presence of the antimitochon-
drial antibody that is found in 95% of patients. Primary 
sclerosing cholangitis is characterized by the destruc-
tion and fibrosis of larger bile ducts. The disease may 
involve only the intrahepatic ducts and present as intra-
hepatic cholestasis. However, in 95% of patients with 
Table 8-3
Cholestatic Conditions That May Produce 
Jaundice
I.  Intrahepatic
A.  Viral hepatitis
1.  Fibrosing cholestatic hepatitis—hepatitis B and C
2.  Hepatitis A, Epstein-Barr virus, cytomegalovirus
B.  Alcoholic hepatitis
C.  Drug toxicity
1.  Pure cholestasis—anabolic and contraceptive 
steroids
2.  Cholestatic hepatitis—chlorpromazine, 
­erythromycin estolate
3.  Chronic cholestasis—chlorpromazine and  
prochlorperazine
D.  Primary biliary cirrhosis
E.  Primary sclerosing cholangitis
F.    Vanishing bile duct syndrome
1.  Chronic rejection of liver transplants
2.  Sarcoidosis
3.  Drugs
G.  Inherited
1.  Progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis
2.  Benign recurrent cholestasis
 H.   Cholestasis of pregnancy
  I.   Total parenteral nutrition
  J.   Nonhepatobiliary sepsis
 K.   Benign postoperative cholestasis
  L.   Paraneoplastic syndrome
M.   Venoocclusive disease
 N.   Graft-versus-host disease
 O.  Infiltrative disease
1.  TB
2.  Lymphoma
3.  Amyloid
P.   Infections
1.  Malaria
2.  Leptospirosis
II.  Extrahepatic
A.  Malignant
1. Cholangiocarcinoma
2. Pancreatic cancer
3. Gallbladder cancer
4. Ampullary cancer
5. Malignant involvement of the porta hepatis lymph 
nodes
B.  Benign
1. Choledocholithiasis
2. Postoperative biliary structures
3. Primary sclerosing cholangitis
4. Chronic pancreatitis
5. AIDS cholangiopathy
6. Mirizzi’s syndrome
7. Parasitic disease (ascariasis)
PSC, both intra- and extrahepatic ducts are involved. 
The diagnosis of PSC is made by imaging the biliary tree. 
The pathognomonic findings are multiple strictures of 
bile ducts with dilatations proximal to the strictures. 
 
CHAPTER 8
Jaundice
69
­Approximately 75% of patients with PSC have inflamma-
tory bowel disease.
The vanishing bile duct syndrome and adult bile ducto-
penia are rare conditions in which there are a decreased 
number of bile ducts seen in liver biopsy specimens. 
The histologic picture is similar to that found in pri-
mary biliary cirrhosis. This picture is seen in patients 
who develop chronic rejection after liver transplanta-
tion and in those who develop graft-versus-host disease 
after bone marrow transplantation. Vanishing bile duct 
syndrome also occurs in rare cases of sarcoidosis, in 
patients taking certain drugs including chlorpromazine, 
and idiopathically.
There are also familial forms of intrahepatic cho-
lestasis. The familial intrahepatic cholestatic syndromes 
include progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis (PFIC) 
types 1–3, and benign recurrent cholestasis (BRC). PFIC1 
and BRC are autosomal recessive diseases that result 
from mutations in the ATP8B1 gene that encodes a pro-
tein belonging to the subfamily of P-type ATPases; the 
exact function of this protein remains poorly defined. 
While PFIC1 is a progressive condition that manifests in 
childhood, BRC presents later than PFIC1 and is marked 
by recurrent episodes of jaundice and pruritus; the  
episodes are self-limited but can be debilitating. 
PFIC2 is caused by mutations in the ABCB11 gene, which 
encodes the bile salt export pump, and PFIC3 is caused 
by mutations in the multidrug-resistant P-glycoprotein 3.  
Cholestasis of pregnancy occurs in the second and 
third trimesters and resolves after delivery. Its cause is 
unknown, but the condition is probably inherited and 
cholestasis can be triggered by estrogen administration.
Other causes of intrahepatic cholestasis include 
total parenteral nutrition (TPN); nonhepatobiliary sep-
sis; benign postoperative cholestasis; and a paraneo-
plastic syndrome associated with a number of different 
malignancies, including Hodgkin’s disease, medullary 
thyroid cancer, renal cell cancer, renal sarcoma, T cell 
lymphoma, prostate cancer, and several gastrointesti-
nal malignancies. The term Stauffer’s syndrome has been 
used for intrahepatic cholestasis specifically associated 
with renal cell cancer. In patients developing cholesta-
sis in the intensive care unit, the major considerations 
should be sepsis, shock liver, and TPN jaundice. Jaundice 
occurring after bone marrow transplantation is most 
likely due to venoocclusive disease or graft-versus-host 
disease. 
Jaundice with associated liver dysfunction can be 
seen in severe cases of Plasmodium falciparum. The 
jaundice in these cases is a combination of indirect 
hyperbilirubinemia from hemolysis and both choles-
tatic and hepatocellular jaundice. Poor outcomes are 
seen in these cases when the jaundice is accompanied 
by encephalopathy and renal failure. Weil’s disease, a 
severe presentation of leptospirosis, is marked by jaun-
dice with renal failure, fever, headache, and muscle pain.
Causes of extrahepatic cholestasis can be split into 
malignant and benign (Table 8-3). Malignant causes 
include pancreatic, gallbladder, ampullary, and cholangio-
carcinoma. The latter is most commonly associated with 
PSC and is exceptionally difficult to diagnose because its 
appearance is often identical to that of PSC. Pancreatic 
and gallbladder tumors, as well as cholangiocarcinoma, 
are rarely resectable and have poor prognoses. Ampul-
lary carcinoma has the highest surgical cure rate of all the 
tumors that present as painless jaundice. Hilar lymphade-
nopathy due to metastases from other cancers may cause 
obstruction of the extrahepatic biliary tree.
Choledocholithiasis is the most common cause of 
extrahepatic cholestasis. The clinical presentation can 
range from mild right upper quadrant discomfort with 
only minimal elevations of the enzyme tests to ascend-
ing cholangitis with jaundice, sepsis, and circulatory col-
lapse. PSC may occur with clinically important strictures 
limited to the extrahepatic biliary tree. In cases where 
there is a dominant stricture, patients can be effectively 
managed with serial endoscopic dilatations. Chronic 
pancreatitis rarely causes strictures of the distal com-
mon bile duct, where it passes through the head of the 
pancreas. AIDS cholangiopathy is a condition, usually 
due to infection of the bile duct epithelium with CMV or 
cryptosporidia, which has a cholangiographic appear-
ance similar to that of PSC. These patients usually pres-
ent with greatly elevated serum alkaline phosphatase 
levels (mean, 800 IU/L), but the bilirubin is often near 
normal. These patients do not typically present with 
jaundice.
Summary
The goal of this chapter is not to provide an encyclo-
pedic review of all of the conditions that can cause 
jaundice. Rather, it is intended to provide a frame-
work that helps a physician to evaluate the patient with 
jaundice in a logical way (Fig. 8-1).
Simply stated, the initial step is to obtain appropri-
ate blood tests to determine if the patient has an isolated 
elevation of serum bilirubin. If so, is the bilirubin eleva-
tion due to an increased unconjugated or conjugated 
fraction? If the hyperbilirubinemia is accompanied by 
other liver test abnormalities, is the disorder hepatocel-
lular or cholestatic? If cholestatic, is it intra- or extra-
hepatic? All of these questions can be answered with a 
thoughtful history, physical examination, and interpre-
tation of laboratory and radiologic tests and procedures.
 Kathleen E. Corey 
I  Lawrence S. Friedman 
70
 ABDOMiNAL sWeLLiNG 
 Abdominal swelling is a manifestation of numerous dis-
eases. Patients may complain of bloating or abdominal 
fullness and may note increasing abdominal girth on 
the basis of increased clothing or belt size. Abdominal 
discomfort is often reported, but pain is less frequent. 
When abdominal pain does accompany swelling, it 
is frequently the result of an intraabdominal infec-
tion, peritonitis, or pancreatitis. Patients with abdomi-
nal distention from ascites (fl uid in the abdomen) may 
report the new onset of an inguinal or umbilical hernia. 
 Dyspnea may result from pressure against the diaphragm 
and the inability to expand the lungs fully. 
 The causes of abdominal swelling can be remem-
bered conveniently by the  six Fs : fl atus, fat, fl uid, fetus, 
feces, or a “fatal growth” (often a neoplasm). 
 Flatus 
 Abdominal swelling may be the result of increased 
intestinal gas. The normal small intestine contains 
approximately 200 mL of gas made up of nitrogen, 
oxygen, carbon dioxide, hydrogen, and methane. Nitrogen 
and oxygen are consumed (swallowed), whereas carbon 
dioxide, hydrogen, and methane are produced intralumi-
nally by bacterial fermentation. Increased intestinal gas can 
occur in a number of conditions. Aerophagia, the swal-
lowing of air, can result in increased amounts of oxygen 
and nitrogen in the small intestine and lead to abdominal 
swelling. Aerophagia typically results from gulping food; 
chewing gum; smoking; or as a response to anxiety, which 
leads to repetitive belching. In some cases, increased intes-
tinal gas is the result of bacterial metabolism of excess 
fermentable substances such as lactose and other oligosac-
charides that can lead to production of hydrogen, carbon 
dioxide, or methane. In many cases, the precise cause of 
abdominal distention cannot be determined. In some 
persons, particularly those with irritable bowel syndrome 
 ABDOMINAL SWELLING AND ASCITES 
 cHAPteR 9 
and bloating, the subjective sense of abdominal pressure is 
attributable to impaired intestinal transit of gas rather than 
increased gas volume. Abdominal distention, an objec-
tive increase in girth, is the result of a lack of coordination 
between diaphragmatic contraction and anterior abdomi-
nal wall relaxation in response to an increase in intraab-
dominal volume loads. Occasionally, increased lumbar lor-
dosis accounts for apparent abdominal distention. 
 Fat 
 Weight gain with an increase in abdominal fat can 
result in an increase in abdominal girth and can be per-
ceived as abdominal swelling. Abdominal fat may be 
the result of an imbalance between calorie intake and 
energy expenditure associated with a poor diet and sed-
entary lifestyle and also can be a manifestation of certain 
diseases such as Cushing’s syndrome. Excess abdominal 
fat has been associated with an increased risk of insulin 
resistance and cardiovascular disease. 
 Fluid 
 Fluid within the abdominal cavity, or ascites, often results 
in abdominal distention and is discussed in detail later in 
the chapter 
 FEtus 
 Pregnancy results in increased abdominal girth. Typi-
cally, an increase in abdominal size is fi rst noted at 12 to 
14 weeks of gestation, when the uterus moves from the 
pelvis into the abdomen. Abdominal distention may be 
seen before this point as a result of fl uid retention and 
relaxation of the abdominal muscles. 
 FEcEs 
 Increased stool in the colon, in the setting of severe 
constipation or intestinal obstruction, also leads to 
 
CHAPTER 9
Abdominal Swelling and Ascites
71
increased abdominal girth. These conditions often are 
accompanied by abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting 
and can be diagnosed by imaging studies.
Fatal Growth
An abdominal mass can result in abdominal swelling. 
Enlargement of the intraabdominal organs, specifically 
the liver (hepatomegaly) or spleen (splenomegaly), or 
an abdominal aortic aneurysm can result in abdominal 
distention. Bladder distention also may result in abdom-
inal swelling. In addition, malignancies, abscesses, or 
cysts can grow to sizes that lead to increased abdominal 
girth.
History and Physical Examination
Determining the etiology of abdominal swelling begins 
with history-taking and a physical examination. Patients 
should be questioned regarding symptoms suggestive 
of malignancy, including weight loss, night sweats, and 
anorexia. Inability to pass stool or flatus together with 
nausea or vomiting suggest bowel obstruction, severe 
constipation, or an ileus (lack of peristalsis). Increased 
eructation and flatus may point toward aerophagia or 
increased intestinal production of gas. Patients should 
be questioned about risk factors for or symptoms of 
chronic liver disease, including excessive alcohol use 
and jaundice, which suggest ascites. Patients should also 
be asked about other symptoms of medical conditions, 
including heart failure and tuberculosis, which may 
cause ascites.
Physical examination should assess for signs of 
systemic disease. The presence of lymphadenopathy, 
especially supraclavicular lymphadenopathy (Virchow’s 
node), suggests metastatic abdominal malignancy. Care 
also should be taken during the cardiac examination 
to evaluate for elevation of jugular venous pressure 
(JVP); Kussmaul’s sign (elevation of the JVP during 
inspiration); or a pericardial knock, which may be seen 
in heart failure or constrictive pericarditis, as well as a 
murmur of tricuspid regurgitation. Spider angiomas, 
palmar erythema, dilated superficial veins around the 
umbilicus (caput medusae), and gynecomastia suggest 
chronic liver disease.
The abdominal examination should begin with 
inspection for the presence of uneven distention or an 
obvious mass. Auscultation should follow. The absence 
of bowel sounds or the presence of high-pitched local-
ized bowel sounds point toward an ileus or intestinal 
obstruction. An umbilical venous hum may suggest the 
presence of portal hypertension, and a harsh bruit over 
the liver is heard rarely in patients with hepatocellu-
lar carcinoma or alcoholic hepatitis. Abdominal swell-
ing caused by intestinal gas can be differentiated from 
swelling caused by fluid or a solid mass by percussion; 
an abdomen filled with gas is tympanic, whereas an 
abdomen containing a mass or fluid is dull to percus-
sion. The absence of abdominal dullness, however, does 
not exclude ascites, because a minimum of 1500 mL of 
ascites is required for detection on physical examina-
tion. Finally, the abdomen should be palpated to assess 
for tenderness, a mass, enlargement of the spleen or 
liver, or presence of a nodular liver suggesting cirrhosis 
or tumor. Light palpation of the liver may detect pulsa-
tions suggesting retrograde vascular flow from the heart 
in patients with right-sided heart failure, particularly tri-
cuspid regurgitation.
Imaging and Laboratory Evaluation
Abdominal x-rays can be used to detect dilated loops 
of bowel, suggesting intestinal obstruction or ileus. An 
abdominal ultrasound can detect as little as 100 mL of 
ascites, hepatosplenomegaly, a nodular liver, or a mass. 
Ultrasound is often inadequate to detect retroperito-
neal lymphadenopathy or a pancreatic lesion because of 
overlying bowel gas. If malignancy or pancreatic disease 
is suspected, CT can be performed. CT may also detect 
changes associated with advanced cirrhosis and portal 
hypertension (Fig. 9-1).
Laboratory evaluation should include liver biochemi-
cal testing, a serum albumin level, a prothrombin time 
Figure 9-1 
CT of a patient with a cirrhotic, nodular liver (white arrow), 
splenomegaly (yellow arrow), and ascites (arrowheads).
SECTION I
72
Cardinal Manifestations of Gastrointestinal Disease
(international normalized ratio) to assess hepatic func-
tion, and a complete blood count to evaluate for the 
presence of cytopenias that may result from portal 
hypertension or leukocytosis, anemia, and thrombo-
cytosis that may result from systemic infection. Serum 
amylase and lipase levels should be checked to evaluate 
the patient for acute pancreatitis. Urinary protein quan-
titation is indicated when nephrotic syndrome, which 
may cause ascites, is suspected.
In selected cases, measurement of the hepatic venous 
pressure gradient (pressure across the liver between the 
portal and hepatic veins) can be obtained via cannula-
tion of the hepatic vein to confirm that ascites is caused 
by cirrhosis (see Chap. 42). In some cases, a liver biopsy 
may be necessary to confirm cirrhosis.
Ascites
Pathogenesis in Cirrhosis
Ascites in patients with cirrhosis is the result of portal 
hypertension and renal salt and water retention. Portal 
hypertension signifies elevation of the pressure within 
the portal vein. According to Ohm’s law, pressure is 
the product of resistance and flow. Increased hepatic 
resistance occurs by several mechanisms. First, the 
development of hepatic fibrosis, which defines cirrhosis, 
disrupts the normal architecture of the hepatic sinusoids 
and impedes normal blood flow through the liver. Sec-
ond, activation of hepatic stellate cells, which mediate 
fibrogenesis, leads to smooth muscle contraction and 
fibrosis. Finally, cirrhosis is associated with a decrease in 
endothelial nitric oxide synthetase (eNOS) production, 
which results in decreased nitric oxide production and 
increased intrahepatic vasoconstriction.
The development of cirrhosis is also associated with 
increased systemic circulating levels of nitric oxide 
(contrary to the decrease seen intrahepatically) as well 
as increased levels of vascular endothelial growth fac-
tor and tumor necrosis factor that result in splanchnic 
arterial vasodilatation. Vasodilatation of the splanchnic 
circulation results in pooling of blood and a decrease 
in the effective circulating volume, which is perceived 
by the kidneys as hypovolemia. Compensatory vaso-
constriction via release of antidiuretic hormone ensues, 
thereby leading to free water retention and activation of 
the sympathetic nervous system and renin angiotensin 
aldosterone system, leading in turn to renal sodium and 
water retention.
Pathogenesis in the Absence  
of Cirrhosis
Ascites in the absence of cirrhosis generally results 
from peritoneal carcinomatosis, peritoneal infection, or 
pancreatic disease. Peritoneal carcinomatosis can result 
from primary peritoneal malignancies such as mesotheli-
oma or sarcoma, abdominal malignancies such as gastric 
or colonic adenocarcinoma, or metastatic disease from 
breast or lung carcinoma or melanoma (Fig. 9-2). The 
tumor cells lining the peritoneum produce a protein-
rich fluid that contributes to the development of ascites. 
Fluid from the extracellular space is drawn into the 
peritoneum, further contributing to the development 
of ascites. Tuberculous peritonitis causes ascites via a 
similar mechanism; tubercles deposited on the peri-
toneum exude a proteinaceous fluid. Pancreatic asci-
tes results from leakage of pancreatic enzymes into the 
peritoneum.
Causes
Cirrhosis accounts for 84% of cases of ascites. Cardiac 
ascites, peritoneal carcinomatosis, and “mixed” ascites 
resulting from cirrhosis and a second disease account 
for 10 to 15% of cases. Less common causes of ascites 
include massive hepatic metastasis, infection (tuberculo-
sis, Chlamydia), pancreatitis, and renal disease (nephrotic 
syndrome). Rare causes of ascites include hypothyroid-
ism and familial Mediterranean fever.
Evaluation
Once the presence of ascites has been confirmed, the 
etiology of the ascites is best determined by paracentesis. 
Paracentesis is a bedside procedure in which a needle 
or small catheter is passed transcutaneously to extract 
Figure 9-2 
CT of a patient with peritoneal carcinomatosis (white 
arrow) and ascites (yellow arrow).
 
CHAPTER 9
Abdominal Swelling and Ascites
73
ascitic fluid from the peritoneum. The lower quadrants 
are the most frequent sites for paracentesis. Occasionally, 
an infraumbilical approach is used. The left lower quad-
rant is preferred because of the greater depth of ascites 
and thinner abdominal wall. Paracentesis is a safe proce-
dure even in patients with coagulopathy; complications, 
including abdominal wall hematomas, hypotension, hep-
atorenal syndrome, and infection, are infrequent.
Once ascitic fluid has been extracted, its gross 
appearance should be examined. Turbid fluid can result 
from infection or tumor cells within the fluid. White, 
milky fluid indicates the presence of triglycerides in 
levels >200 mg/dL (and often >1000 mg/dL), which 
is the hallmark of chylous ascites. Chylous ascites results 
from lymphatic disruption that may occur with trauma, 
cirrhosis, tumor, tuberculosis, or certain congenital 
abnormalities. Dark brown fluid can reflect a high bili-
rubin concentration and indicates biliary tract perfora-
tion. Black fluid may indicate the presence of pancreatic 
necrosis or metastatic melanoma.
The ascitic fluid should be sent for measurement of 
the albumin and total protein levels, cell and differential 
counts, and, if infection is suspected, Gram’s stain and 
culture, with inoculation of the fluid into blood culture 
bottles at the patient’s bedside to maximize the yield. In 
addition, a serum albumin level should be sent simulta-
neously to permit calculation of the serum-ascites albumin 
gradient (SAAG).
The SAAG is useful for distinguishing ascites caused 
by portal hypertension from nonportal hypertensive 
ascites (Fig. 9-3). The SAAG reflects the pressure 
within the hepatic sinusoids and correlates with the 
hepatic venous pressure gradient. The SAAG is calcu-
lated by subtracting the ascitic albumin from the serum 
albumin and does not change with diuresis. A SAAG 
≥1.1 g/dL reflects the presence of portal hyperten-
sion and indicates that the ascites is from an increased 
pressure in the hepatic sinusoids. According to Starling’s 
law, a high SAAG reflects the oncotic pressure that 
counterbalances the portal pressure. Possible causes 
include cirrhosis, cardiac ascites, sinusoidal obstruction 
syndrome (venoocclusive disease), massive liver metasta-
sis, or hepatic vein thrombosis (Budd-Chiari syndrome). 
A SAAG <1.1 g/dL indicates that the ascites is not 
related to portal hypertension as in tuberculous perito-
nitis, peritoneal carcinomatosis, or pancreatic ascites.
For high-SAAG (≥1.1) ascites, the ascitic protein level 
can provide further clues to the etiology (see Fig. 9-3). An 
ascitic protein level of ≥2.5 g/dL indicates that the hepatic 
sinusoids are normal and allows passage of protein into 
the ascites, as occurs in cardiac ascites, sinusoidal obstruc-
tion syndrome, or early Budd-Chiari syndrome. An ascitic 
protein level <2.5 g/dL indicates that the hepatic sinusoids 
have been damaged and scarred and no longer allow pas-
sage of protein, as occurs with cirrhosis, late Budd-Chiari 
syndrome, or massive liver metastases. Pro-brain-type 
natriuretic peptide (BNP) is a natriuretic hormone released 
by the heart as a result of increased volume and ventricular 
wall stretch. High levels of BNP in serum occur in heart 
failure and may be useful in identifying congestive heart 
failure as the cause of high-SAAG ascites.
Further tests are indicated only in specific clinical cir-
cumstances. When secondary peritonitis resulting from 
a perforated hollow viscus is suspected, ascitic glucose 
and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) levels can be sent. In 
contrast to “spontaneous” bacterial peritonitis (SBP), 
which may complicate cirrhotic ascites, secondary peri-
tonitis is suggested by an ascitic glucose level <50 mg/
dL, an ascitic LDH greater than the serum LDH level, 
and multiple pathogens on ascitic fluid culture. When 
pancreatic ascites is suspected, an ascitic amylase should 
be measured and is typically >1000 mg/dL. Cytology 
can be useful in the diagnosis of peritoneal carcinoma-
tosis. At least 50 mL of fluid should be obtained and 
sent for immediate processing. Tuberculous peritonitis 
can be difficult to diagnose by paracentesis. A smear for 
acid-fast bacilli has a sensitivity of only 0 to 3%, and a 
culture increases the sensitivity for diagnosis to 35 to 
Figure 9-3 
Algorithm for the diagnosis of ascites 
according to the serum-ascites albumin 
gradient (SAAG). IVC, inferior vena cava.
< 1.1 g/dL
Ascitic protein ≥ 2.5 g/dL
Cirrhosis
Late Budd-Chiari syndrome
Massive liver metastases
≥ 1.1 g/dL
Congestive heart failure/
constrictive pericarditis
Early Budd-Chiari syndrome
IVC obstruction
Sinusoidal obstruction
syndrome
Biliary leak
Nephrotic syndrome
Pancreatitis
Peritoneal carcinomatosis
Tuberculosis
Ascitic protein < 2.5 g/dL
SAAG
SECTION I
74
Cardinal Manifestations of Gastrointestinal Disease
50%. In patients without cirrhosis, an elevated ascitic 
adenosine deaminase level has a sensitivity of more 
than 90% when a cut-off value of 30 to 45 U/L is used. 
When the cause of ascites remains uncertain, laparot-
omy or laparoscopy with peritoneal biopsies for histol-
ogy and culture remains the gold standard.
Treatment	
Ascites
The initial treatment of cirrhotic ascites is restriction of 
sodium intake to 2 g/d. When sodium restriction alone 
is inadequate to control ascites, oral diuretics, typically 
the combination of spironolactone and furosemide, are 
used. Spironolactone is an aldosterone antagonist that 
inhibits Na+ resorption in the distal convoluted tubule 
of the kidney. Use of spironolactone may be limited by 
hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, and painful gynecomastia. 
If the gynecomastia is distressing, amiloride, 5–40 mg/d, 
may be substituted for spironolactone. Furosemide 
is a loop diuretic that is generally combined with spi-
ronolactone in a ratio of 40:100; maximal daily doses of  
spironolactone and furosemide are generally 400 mg 
and 160 mg, respectively.
Refractory cirrhotic ascites is defined by the persis-
tence of ascites despite sodium restriction and maximal 
(or maximally tolerated) diuretic use. Refractory asci-
tes can be managed by serial large volume paracente-
sis (LVP) or a transjugular intrahepatic peritoneal shunt 
(TIPS), a radiologically placed portosystemic shunt 
to decompress the hepatic sinusoids. TIPS is superior 
to LVP in reducing the reaccumulation of ascites but 
is associated with an increased frequency of hepatic 
encephalopathy with no difference in mortality rates.
Malignant ascites does not respond to sodium 
restriction or diuretics. Patients must undergo serial 
LVPs, transcutaneous drainage catheter placement, or, 
rarely, creation of a peritovenous shunt (a shunt from 
the abdominal cavity to the vena cava).
Ascites caused by tuberculous peritonitis is treated 
with standard antituberculosis therapy. Noncirrhotic 
ascites of other causes is treated by correction of the 
precipitating condition.
Complications
Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis (SBP) is a common and 
potentially lethal complication of cirrhotic ascites. 
SBP also can occasionally complicate ascites caused 
by nephrotic syndrome, heart failure, acute hepatitis, 
and acute liver failure but is rare in malignant ascites. 
Patients with SBP generally note an increase in abdomi-
nal girth; however, abdominal tenderness is found in 
only 40% of patients, and rebound tenderness is rare. 
Patients may present with fever, nausea, vomiting, or 
the new onset of or exacerbation of preexisting hepatic 
encephalopathy.
SBP is defined by a polymorphonuclear neutrophil 
(PMN) count of ≥250/mm3 in the ascitic fluid. Ascitic 
fluid cultures typically reveal one bacterial pathogen. 
The presence of multiple pathogens in the setting of an 
elevated ascitic PMN count suggests secondary perito-
nitis from a ruptured viscus or abscess. The presence of 
multiple pathogens without an elevated PMN count 
suggests bowel perforation from the paracentesis needle. 
SBP is generally the result of enteric bacteria that have 
translocated across an edematous bowel wall. The most 
common pathogens are Gram-negative rods, including 
Escherichia coli and Klebsiella, as well as streptococci and 
enterococci.
Treatment of SBP with an antibiotic such as intrave-
nous cefotaxime is effective against gram-negative and 
Gram-positive aerobes. Five days of treatment are suf-
ficient if the patient improves clinically.
Cirrhotic patients with a history of SBP, an ascitic 
fluid total protein concentration <1 g/dL, or active gas-
trointestinal bleeding should receive prophylactic anti-
biotics to prevent SBP; oral norfloxacin is commonly 
used. Diuresis increases the activity of ascitic fluid pro-
tein opsonins and may decrease the risk of SBP.
Hepatic hydrothorax occurs when ascites, often caused 
by cirrhosis, migrates via fenestrae in the diaphragm into 
the pleural space and can result in shortness of breath, 
hypoxia, and infection. Treatment is similar to that of 
cirrhotic ascites and includes sodium restriction, diuret-
ics, and, if needed, thoracentesis or TIPS placement. 
Chest tube placement should be avoided.
 Russell G. Robertson 
I  J. Larry Jameson 
75
 Involuntary weight loss (IWL) is frequently insidi-
ous and can have important implications, often 
serving as a harbinger of serious underlying disease. 
Clinically important weight loss is defi ned as the loss 
of 10 pounds (4.5 kg) or >5% of one’s body weight 
over a period of 6–12 months. IWL is encountered in 
up to 8% of all adult outpatients and 27% of frail per-
sons age 65 years and older. There is no identifi able 
cause in up to one-quarter of patients despite extensive 
investigation. Conversely, up to half of people who 
claim to have lost weight have no documented evi-
dence of weight loss. People with no known cause of 
weight loss generally have a better prognosis than do 
those with known causes, particularly when the source 
is neoplastic. Weight loss in older persons is associ-
ated with a variety of deleterious effects, including hip 
fracture, pressure ulcers, impaired immune function, 
decreased functional status, and death. Not surpris-
ingly, signifi cant weight loss is associated with increased 
mortality, which can range from 9% to as high as 38% 
within 1 to 2.5 years in the absence of clinical aware-
ness and attention. 
 PhysIology of WeIght regulAtIon 
WIth AgIng 
 (See also  Chap. 57 ) Among healthy aging people, total 
body weight peaks in the sixth decade of life and gener-
ally remains stable until the ninth decade, after which 
it gradually falls. In contrast, lean body mass (fat-free 
mass) begins to decline at a rate of 0.3 kg per year in the 
third decade, and the rate of decline increases further 
beginning at age 60 in men and age 65 in women. 
These changes in lean body mass largely refl ect the age-
dependent decline in growth hormone secretion and, 
consequently, circulating levels of insulin-like growth 
factor type I (IGF-I) that occur with normal aging. In 
the healthy elderly, an increase in fat tissue balances the 
loss in lean body mass until very old age, when loss of 
both fat and skeletal muscle occurs. Age-dependent 
changes also occur at the cellular level. Telomeres 
shorten, and body cell mass—the fat-free portion of 
cells—declines steadily with aging. 
 Between ages 20 and 80, mean energy intake is 
reduced by up to 1200 kcal/d in men and 800 kcal/d 
in women. Decreased hunger is a refl ection of reduced 
physical activity and loss of lean body mass, produc-
ing lower demand for calories and food intake. Several 
important age-associated physiologic changes also pre-
dispose elderly persons to weight loss, such as declining 
chemosensory function (smell and taste), reduced effi -
ciency of chewing, slowed gastric emptying, and altera-
tions in the neuroendocrine axis, including changes in 
levels of leptin, cholecystokinin, neuropeptide Y, and 
other hormones and peptides. These changes are associ-
ated with early satiety and a decline in both appetite and 
the hedonistic appreciation of food. Collectively, they 
contribute to the “anorexia of aging.” 
 CAuses of InvoluntAry WeIght loss 
 Most causes of IWL belong to one of four categories: 
(1) malignant neoplasms, (2) chronic infl ammatory or 
infectious diseases, (3) metabolic disorders (e.g., hyper-
thyroidism and diabetes), or (4) psychiatric disorders 
( Table 10-1 ). Not infrequently, more than one of 
these causes can be responsible for IWL. In most series, 
IWL is caused by malignant disease in a quarter of 
patients and by organic disease in one-third, with the 
remainder due to psychiatric disease, medications, or 
uncertain causes. 
 The most common malignant causes of IWL are gas-
trointestinal, hepatobiliary, hematologic, lung, breast, 
genitourinary, ovarian, and prostate. Half of all patients 
with cancer lose some body weight; one-third lose 
more than 5% of their original body weight, and up to 
20% of all cancer deaths are caused directly by cachexia 
(through immobility and/or cardiac/respiratory failure). 
 INVOLUNTARY WEIGHT LOSS 
 CHAPTER 10 
SECTION I
76
Cardinal Manifestations of Gastrointestinal Disease
Tuberculosis, fungal diseases, parasites, subacute 
bacterial endocarditis, and HIV are well-documented 
causes of IWL. Cardiovascular and pulmonary diseases 
cause unintentional weight loss through increased meta-
bolic demand and decreased appetite and caloric intake. 
Uremia produces nausea, anorexia, and vomiting. Con-
nective tissue diseases may increase metabolic demand 
and disrupt nutritional balance. As the incidence of 
diabetes mellitus increases with aging, the associated 
glucosuria can contribute to weight loss. Hyperthy-
roidism in the elderly may have less prominent sym-
pathomimetic features and may present as “apathetic 
hyperthyroidism” or T3 toxicosis.
Neurologic injuries such as stroke, quadriplegia, and 
multiple sclerosis may lead to visceral and autonomic 
dysfunction that can impair caloric intake. Dysphagia 
from these neurologic insults is a common mechanism. 
Functional disability that compromises activities of daily 
living (ADLs) is a common cause of undernutrition in 
the elderly. Visual impairment from ophthalmic or cen-
tral nervous system disorders such as a tremor can limit 
the ability of people to prepare and eat meals. IWL 
may be one of the earliest manifestations of Alzheimer’s 
dementia.
Isolation and depression are significant causes of 
IWL that may manifest as an inability to care for one-
self, including nutritional needs. A cytokine-mediated 
inflammatory metabolic cascade can be both a cause of 
and a manifestation of depression. Bereavement can be 
a cause of IWL and, when present, is more pronounced 
in men. More intense forms of mental illness such as 
paranoid disorders may lead to delusions about food 
and cause weight loss. Alcoholism can be a significant 
source of weight loss and malnutrition.
Elderly persons living in poverty may have to choose 
between purchasing food and purchasing medications. 
Institutionalization is an independent risk factor, as up 
to 30–50% of nursing home patients have inadequate 
food intake.
Medications can cause anorexia, nausea, vomit-
ing, gastrointestinal distress, diarrhea, dry mouth, and 
changes in taste. This is particularly an issue in the 
elderly, many of whom take five or more medications.
Assessment
The four major manifestations of IWL are (1) anorexia 
(loss of appetite), (2) sarcopenia (loss of muscle mass), 
(3) cachexia (a syndrome that combines weight loss, loss 
of muscle and adipose tissue, anorexia, and weakness), 
and (4) dehydration. The current obesity epidemic 
adds complexity, as excess adipose tissue can mask the 
development of sarcopenia and delay awareness of the 
development of cachexia. If it is not possible to measure 
weight directly, a change in clothing size, corroboration 
Table 10-1 
Causes of Involuntary Weight Loss
Cancer
  Colon
  Hepatobiliary
  Hematologic
  Lung
  Breast
  Genitourinary
  Ovarian
  Prostate
Gastrointestinal
disorders
  Malabsorption
  Peptic ulcer
  Inflammatory bowel 
  disease
  Pancreatitis
  Obstruction/constipation
  Pernicious anemia
Endocrine and metabolic
  Hyperthyroidism
  Diabetes mellitus
  Pheochromocytoma
  Adrenal insufficiency
Cardiac disorders
  Chronic ischemia
  Chronic congestive 
heart 
  failure
Respiratory disorders
  Emphysema
  Chronic obstructive 
  pulmonary disease
Renal insufficiency
Rheumatologic disease
Infections
  HIV
  Tuberculosis
  Parasitic infection
  Subacute bacterial 
  endocarditis
Medications
  Sedatives
  Antibiotics
  Nonsteroidal anti- 
  inflammatory drugs
  Serotonin reuptake 
  inhibitors
  Metformin
  Levodopa
  Angiotensin-converting 
  enzyme inhibitors
  Other drugs
Disorders of the mouth
and teeth
  Caries
  Dygeusia
Age-related factors
  Physiologic changes
  Visual impairment
  Decreased taste and smell
  Functional disabilities
Neurologic
  Stroke
  Parkinson’s disease
  Neuromuscular disorders
  Dementia
Social
  Isolation
  Economic hardship
Psychiatric and behavioral
  Depression
  Anxiety
  Paranoia
  Bereavement
  Alcoholism
  Eating disorders
  Increased activity or 
  exercise
Idiopathic
The greatest incidence of weight loss is seen among 
patients with solid tumors. Malignancy that reveals itself 
through significant weight loss usually has a very poor 
prognosis.
In addition to malignancies, gastrointestinal causes 
are among the most prominent causes of IWL. Peptic 
ulcer disease, inflammatory bowel disease, dysmotil-
ity syndromes, chronic pancreatitis, celiac disease, con-
stipation, and atrophic gastritis are some of the more 
common entities. Oral and dental problems are easily 
overlooked and may manifest with halitosis, poor oral 
hygiene, xerostomia, inability to chew, reduced masti-
catory force, nonocclusion, temporomandibular joint 
syndrome, edentulousness, and pain due to caries or 
abscesses.
 
CHAPTER 10
Involuntary Weight Loss
77
of weight loss by a relative or friend, and a numeric 
estimate of weight loss provided by the patient are sug-
gestive of true weight loss.
Initial assessment includes a comprehensive history 
and physical, a complete blood count, tests of liver 
enzyme levels, a C-reactive protein, erythrocyte sedi-
mentation rate, renal function studies, thyroid function 
tests, chest radiography, and an abdominal ultrasound 
(Table 10-2). Age, sex, and risk factor–specific cancer 
Table 10-2
Assessment and Testing for Involuntary 
Weight Loss
Indications
  5% weight loss in 30 d
  10% weight loss in 180 d
  Body mass index <21
  25% of food left uneaten 
  after 7 d
  Change in fit of clothing
  Change in appetite, smell, 
  or taste
  Abdominal pain, nausea, 
  vomiting, diarrhea,  
constipation, dysphagia
Assessment
  Complete physical exam, 
  including dental evaluation
  Medication review
  Recommended cancer 
  screening
  Mini-Mental State  
  Examinationa
  Mini-Nutritional 
  Assessmenta
  Nutrition Screening 
  Initiativea
  Simplified Nutritional
  Assessment Questionnairea
  Observation of eatinga
  Activities of daily livinga
  Instrumental activities of 
  daily livinga
Laboratory
  Complete blood count
  Comprehensive 
  electrolyte and meta-
bolic panel, including 
liver and renal function 
tests
  Thyroid function tests
  Erythrocyte 
  sedimentation rate
  C-reactive protein
  Ferritin
  HIV testing, if indicated
Radiology
  Chest x-ray
  Abdominal ultrasound
aMay be more specific to assess weight loss in the elderly.
screening tests, such as mammography and colonos-
copy, should be performed. Patients at risk should have 
HIV testing. All elderly patients with weight loss should 
undergo screening for dementia and depression by using 
instruments such as the Mini-Mental State Examina-
tion and the Geriatric Depression Scale, respectively. 
The Mini-Nutritional Assessment (www.mna-elderly.com) 
and the Nutrition Screening Initiative (www.aafp.org/
afp/980301ap/edits.html) are also available for the nutri-
tional assessment of elderly patients. Almost all patients 
with a malignancy and >90% of those with other 
organic diseases have at least one laboratory abnormal-
ity. In patients presenting with substantial IWL, major 
organic and malignant diseases are unlikely when a base-
line evaluation is completely normal. Careful follow-up 
rather than undirected testing is advised since the prog-
nosis of weight loss of undetermined cause is generally 
favorable.
Treatment	
Unintentional Weight Loss
The first priority in managing weight loss is to identify 
and treat the underlying causes systematically. Treat-
ment of underlying metabolic, psychiatric, infectious, 
or other systemic disorders may be sufficient to restore 
weight and functional status gradually. Medications 
that cause nausea or anorexia should be withdrawn 
or changed, if possible. For those with unexplained 
IWL, oral nutritional supplements such as high-
energy drinks sometimes reverse weight loss. Advis-
ing patients to consume supplements between meals 
rather than with a meal may help minimize appetite 
suppression and facilitate increased overall intake. 
Orexigenic, anabolic, and anticytokine agents are 
under investigation. In selected patients, the antide-
pressant mirtazapine results in a significant increase in 
body weight, body fat mass, and leptin concentration. 
Patients with wasting conditions who can comply with 
an appropriate exercise program gain muscle protein 
mass, strength, and endurance and may be more capa-
ble of performing ADL.
This page intentionally left blank 
Evaluation of the 
Patient with  
Alimentary Tract 
Syndromes
SECTION II
 william l. hasler  I   chung owyang 
80
 anatoMic considErations 
 The gastrointestinal (GI) tract extends from the mouth 
to the anus and is composed of several organs with dis-
tinct functions. Specialized independently controlled 
thickened sphincters that assist in gut compartmental-
ization separate the organs. The gut wall is organized 
into well-defi ned layers that contribute to functional 
activities in each region. The mucosa is a barrier to 
luminal contents or as a site for transfer of fl uids or 
nutrients. Gut smooth muscle mediates propulsion from 
one region to the next. Many GI organs possess a sero-
sal layer that provides a supportive foundation but that 
also permits external input. 
 Interactions with other organ systems serve the needs 
both of the gut and the body. Pancreaticobiliary con-
duits deliver bile and enzymes into the duodenum. A 
rich vascular supply is modulated by GI tract activity. 
Lymphatic channels assist in gut immune activities. 
Intrinsic gut wall nerves provide the basic controls for 
propulsion and fl uid regulation. Extrinsic neural input 
provides volitional or involuntary control to degrees 
that are specifi c for each gut region. 
 functions of thE 
GastrointEstinal tract 
 The GI tract serves two main functions—assimilating 
nutrients and eliminating waste. The gut anatomy is 
organized to serve these functions. In the mouth, food 
is processed, mixed with salivary amylase, and delivered 
to the gut lumen. The esophagus propels the bolus into 
the stomach; the lower esophageal sphincter prevents 
oral refl ux of gastric contents. The esophageal mucosa 
has a protective squamous histology, which does not 
permit signifi cant diffusion or absorption. Propulsive 
 APPROACH TO THE PATIENT WITH 
GASTROINTESTINAL DISEASE 
 chaPtEr 11 
esophageal activities are exclusively aboral and coordi-
nate with relaxation of the upper and lower esophageal 
sphincters on swallowing. 
 The stomach furthers food preparation by triturat-
ing and mixing the bolus with pepsin and acid. Gastric 
acid also sterilizes the upper gut. The proximal stomach 
serves a storage function by relaxing to accommodate 
the meal. The distal stomach exhibits phasic contrac-
tions that propel solid food residue against the pylorus, 
where it is repeatedly propelled proximally for further 
mixing before it is emptied into the duodenum. Finally, 
the stomach secretes intrinsic factor for vitamin B 12
absorption. 
 The small intestine serves most of the nutrient 
absorptive function of the gut. The intestinal mucosa 
exhibits villus architecture to provide maximal sur-
face area for absorption and is endowed with special-
ized enzymes and transporters. Triturated food from 
the stomach mixes with pancreatic juice and bile in the 
duodenum to facilitate digestion. Pancreatic juice con-
tains the main enzymes for carbohydrate, protein, and 
fat digestion as well as bicarbonate to optimize the pH 
for activation of these enzymes. Bile secreted by the 
liver and stored in the gallbladder is essential for intes-
tinal lipid digestion. The proximal intestine is opti-
mized for rapid absorption of nutrient breakdown 
products and most minerals, while the ileum is bet-
ter suited for absorption of vitamin B 12 and bile acids. 
The small intestine also aids in waste elimination. Bile 
contains by-products of erythrocyte degradation, tox-
ins, metabolized and unmetabolized medications, and 
cholesterol. Motor function of the small intestine deliv-
ers indigestible food residue and sloughed enterocytes 
into the colon for further processing. The small intes-
tine terminates in the ileocecal junction, a sphincteric 
structure that prevents coloileal refl ux and maintains 
small-intestinal sterility. 
 
CHAPTER 11
Approach to the Patient with Gastrointestinal Disease
81
The colon prepares the waste material for controlled 
evacuation. The colonic mucosa dehydrates the stool, 
decreasing daily fecal volumes from 1000–1500 mL 
delivered from the ileum to 100–200 mL expelled from 
the rectum. The colonic lumen possesses a dense bacte-
rial colonization that ferments undigested carbohydrates 
and short-chain fatty acids. Whereas transit times in the 
esophagus are on the order of seconds and times in the 
stomach and small intestine range from minutes to a few 
hours, propagation through the colon takes more than one 
day in most individuals. Colonic motor patterns exhibit a 
to-and-fro character that facilitates slow fecal desiccation. 
The proximal colon serves to mix and absorb fluid, while 
the distal colon exhibits peristaltic contractions and mass 
actions that function to expel the stool. The colon termi-
nates in the anus, a structure with volitional and involun-
tary controls to permit retention of the fecal bolus until it 
can be released in a socially convenient setting.
Extrinsic Modulation  
of Gut Function
GI function is modified by influences outside of the 
gut. Unlike other organ systems, the gut is in conti-
nuity with the outside environment. Thus, protective 
mechanisms are vigilant against deleterious effects of 
foods, medications, toxins, and infectious organisms. 
Mucosal immune mechanisms include chronic lympho-
cyte and plasma cell populations in the epithelial layer 
and lamina propria backed up by lymph node chains 
to prevent noxious agents from entering the circula-
tion. All substances absorbed into the bloodstream are 
filtered through the liver via the portal venous circula-
tion. In the liver, many drugs and toxins are detoxified 
by a variety of mechanisms. Although intrinsic nerves 
control most basic gut activities, extrinsic neural input 
modulates many functions. Two activities under volun-
tary control are swallowing and defecation. Many nor-
mal GI reflexes involve extrinsic vagus or splanchnic 
nerve pathways. The brain gut axis further alters func-
tion in regions not under volitional regulation. As an 
example, stress has potent effects on gut motor, secre-
tory, and sensory functions.
Overview of Gastrointestinal 
Diseases
GI diseases develop as a result of abnormalities within or 
outside of the gut and range in severity from those that 
produce mild symptoms and no long-term morbidity to 
those with intractable symptoms or adverse outcomes. 
Diseases may be localized to one organ or exhibit dif-
fuse involvement at many sites.
Classification of GI Diseases
GI diseases are manifestations of alterations in nutrient 
assimilation or waste evacuation or in the activities sup-
porting these main functions.
Impaired digestion and absorption
Diseases of the stomach, intestine, biliary tree, and pan-
creas can disrupt digestion and absorption. The most 
common intestinal maldigestion syndrome, lactase defi-
ciency, produces gas and diarrhea after dairy products 
and has no adverse outcomes. Other intestinal enzyme 
deficiencies produce similar symptoms after ingestion of 
other simple sugars. Conversely, celiac disease, bacte-
rial overgrowth, infectious enteritis, Crohn’s ileitis, and 
radiation damage, which affect digestion and/or absorp-
tion more diffusely, produce anemia, dehydration, elec-
trolyte disorders, or malnutrition. Gastric hypersecretory 
conditions such as Zollinger-Ellison syndrome damage 
the intestinal mucosa, impair pancreatic enzyme acti-
vation, and accelerate transit due to excess gastric acid. 
Biliary obstruction from stricture or neoplasm impairs 
fat digestion. Impaired pancreatic enzyme release in 
chronic pancreatitis or pancreatic cancer decreases intra-
luminal digestion and can lead to malnutrition.
Altered secretion
Selected GI diseases result from dysregulation of 
gut secretion. Gastric acid hypersecretion occurs in 
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, G cell hyperplasia, retained 
antrum syndrome, and some individuals with duode-
nal ulcers. Conversely, patients with atrophic gastri-
tis or pernicious anemia release little or no gastric acid. 
Inflammatory and infectious small-intestinal and colonic 
diseases produce fluid loss through impaired absorption 
or enhanced secretion. Common intestinal and colonic 
hypersecretory conditions cause diarrhea and include 
acute bacterial or viral infection, chronic Giardia or 
cryptosporidia infections, small-intestinal bacterial over-
growth, bile salt diarrhea, microscopic colitis, diabetic 
diarrhea, and abuse of certain laxatives. Less common 
causes include large colonic villus adenomas and endo-
crine neoplasias with tumor overproduction of secreta-
gogue transmitters like vasoactive intestinal polypeptide.
Altered gut transit
Impaired gut transit may be secondary to mechani-
cal obstruction. Esophageal occlusion often results 
from acid-induced stricture or neoplasm. Gastric outlet 
obstruction develops from peptic ulcer disease or gas-
tric cancer. Small-intestinal obstruction most commonly 
results from adhesions but may also occur with Crohn’s 
disease, radiation- or drug-induced strictures, and less 
likely malignancy. The most common cause of colonic 
SECTION II
Evaluation of the Patient with Alimentary Tract Syndromes
82
obstruction is colon cancer, although inflammatory 
strictures develop in patients with inflammatory bowel 
disease, after certain infections such as diverticulitis, or 
with some drugs.
Retardation of propulsion also develops from dis-
ordered motor function. Achalasia is characterized by 
impaired esophageal body peristalsis and incomplete 
lower esophageal sphincter relaxation. Gastroparesis is 
the symptomatic delay in gastric emptying of meals due 
to impaired gastric motility. Intestinal pseudoobstruc-
tion causes marked delays in small-bowel transit due to 
enteric nerve or intestinal smooth-muscle injury. Slow-
transit constipation is produced by diffusely impaired 
colonic propulsion. Constipation also is produced by 
outlet abnormalities such as rectal prolapse, intussuscep-
tion, or dyssynergia—a failure of anal or puborectalis 
relaxation upon attempted defecation.
Disorders of rapid propulsion are less common than 
those with delayed transit. Rapid gastric emptying 
occurs in postvagotomy dumping syndrome, with gastric 
hypersecretion, and in some cases of functional dyspepsia 
and cyclic vomiting syndrome. Exaggerated intestinal or 
colonic motor patterns may be responsible for diarrhea 
in irritable bowel syndrome. Accelerated transit with 
hyperdefecation is noted in hyperthyroidism.
Immune dysregulation
Many inflammatory GI conditions are consequences 
of altered gut immune function. The mucosal inflam-
mation of celiac disease results from dietary inges-
tion of gluten-containing grains. Some patients with 
food allergy also exhibit altered immune populations. 
Eosinophilic esophagitis and eosinophilic gastroenteri-
tis are inflammatory disorders with prominent mucosal 
eosinophils. Ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease are 
disorders of uncertain etiology that produce muco-
sal injury primarily in the lower gut. The microscopic 
colitides, lymphocytic and collagenous colitis, exhibit 
colonic subepithelial infiltrates without visible mucosal 
damage. Bacterial, viral, and protozoal organisms may 
produce ileitis or colitis in selected patient populations.
Impaired gut blood flow
Different GI regions are at variable risk for ischemic 
damage from impaired blood flow. Rare cases of gas-
troparesis result from blockage of the celiac and supe-
rior mesenteric arteries. More commonly encountered 
are intestinal and colonic ischemia that are conse-
quences of arterial embolus, arterial thrombosis, venous 
thrombosis, or hypoperfusion from dehydration, sep-
sis, hemorrhage, or reduced cardiac output. These may 
produce mucosal injury, hemorrhage, or even perfo-
ration. Some cases of radiation enterocolitis exhibit 
reduced mucosal blood flow.
Neoplastic degeneration
All GI regions are susceptible to malignant degeneration 
to varying degrees. In the United States, colorectal cancer 
is most common and usually presents after age 50 years. 
Worldwide, gastric cancer is prevalent especially in cer-
tain Asian regions. Esophageal cancer develops with 
chronic acid reflux or after an extensive alcohol or 
tobacco use history. Small-intestinal neoplasms are rare 
and occur with underlying inflammatory disease. Anal 
cancers arise after prior anal infection or inflammation. 
Pancreatic and biliary cancers elicit severe pain, weight 
loss, and jaundice and have poor prognoses. Hepatocellu-
lar carcinoma usually arises in the setting of chronic viral 
hepatitis or cirrhosis secondary to other causes. Most GI 
cancers exhibit carcinomatous histology; however, lym-
phomas and other cell types also are observed.
Disorders without obvious  
organic abnormalities
The most common GI disorders show no abnormalities on 
biochemical or structural testing and include irritable bowel 
syndrome, functional dyspepsia, functional chest pain, and 
functional heartburn. These disorders exhibit altered gut 
motor function; however, the pathogenic relevance of 
these abnormalities is uncertain. Exaggerated visceral sen-
sory responses to noxious stimulation may cause discomfort 
in these disorders. Symptoms in other patients result from 
altered processing of visceral pain sensations in the cen-
tral nervous system. Functional bowel patients with severe 
symptoms may exhibit significant emotional disturbances 
on psychometric testing. Subtle immunologic defects may 
contribute to functional symptoms as well.
Genetic influences
Although many GI diseases result from environmental 
factors, others exhibit hereditary components. Family 
members of inflammatory bowel disease patients show 
a genetic predisposition to disease development them-
selves. Colonic and esophageal malignancies arise in 
certain inherited disorders. Rare genetic dysmotil-
ity syndromes are described. Familial clustering is even 
observed in the functional bowel disorders, although 
this may be secondary learned familial illness behavior 
rather than a true hereditary factor.
Symptoms of Gastrointestinal 
Disease
The most common GI symptoms are abdominal pain, 
heartburn, nausea and vomiting, altered bowel habits, 
GI bleeding, and jaundice (Table 11-1). Others are 
dysphagia, anorexia, weight loss, fatigue, and extraintes-
tinal symptoms.
 
CHAPTER 11
Approach to the Patient with Gastrointestinal Disease
83
Abdominal pain
Abdominal pain results from GI disease and extraintestinal 
conditions involving the genitourinary tract, abdominal 
wall, thorax, or spine. Visceral pain generally is midline 
in location and vague in character, while parietal pain is 
localized and precisely described. Common inflamma-
tory diseases with pain include peptic ulcer, appendicitis, 
diverticulitis, inflammatory bowel disease, and infectious 
enterocolitis. Other intraabdominal causes of pain include 
gallstone disease and pancreatitis. Noninflammatory vis-
ceral sources include mesenteric ischemia and neoplasia. 
The most common causes of abdominal pain are irritable 
bowel syndrome and functional dyspepsia.
Heartburn
Heartburn, a burning substernal sensation, is reported 
intermittently by at least 40% of the population. Clas-
sically, heartburn is felt to result from excess gastro-
esophageal reflux of acid. However, some cases exhibit 
normal esophageal acid exposure and may result from 
reflux of nonacidic material or heightened sensitivity of 
esophageal mucosal nerves.
Nausea and vomiting
Nausea and vomiting are caused by GI diseases, medi-
cations, toxins, acute and chronic infection, endocrine 
disorders, labyrinthine conditions, and central ner-
vous system disease. The best-characterized GI etiolo-
gies relate to mechanical obstruction of the upper gut; 
however, disorders of propulsion including gastroparesis 
and intestinal pseudoobstruction also elicit prominent 
symptoms. Nausea and vomiting also are commonly 
reported by patients with irritable bowel syndrome and 
functional disorders of the upper gut (including chronic 
idiopathic nausea and functional vomiting).
Altered bowel habits
Altered bowel habits are common complaints of 
patients with GI disease. Constipation is reported 
as infrequent defecation, straining with defecation, 
passage of hard stools, or a sense of incomplete fecal 
evacuation. Causes of constipation include obstruction, 
motor disorders of the colon, medications, and endo-
crine diseases such as hypothyroidism and hyperpara-
thyroidism. Diarrhea is reported as frequent defecation, 
passage of loose or watery stools, fecal urgency, or a 
similar sense of incomplete evacuation. The differential 
diagnosis of diarrhea is broad and includes infections, 
inflammatory causes, malabsorption, and medications. 
Irritable bowel syndrome produces constipation, diar-
rhea, or an alternating bowel pattern. Fecal mucus is 
common in irritable bowel syndrome, while pus char-
acterizes inflammatory disease. Steatorrhea develops 
with malabsorption.
GI bleeding
Hemorrhage may develop from any gut organ. Most 
commonly, upper GI bleeding presents with melena or 
hematemesis, whereas lower GI bleeding produces pas-
sage of bright red or maroon stools. However, briskly 
bleeding upper sites can elicit voluminous red rectal 
bleeding, while slowly bleeding ascending colon sites 
may produce melena. Chronic slow GI bleeding may 
present with iron-deficiency anemia. The most com-
mon upper GI causes of bleeding are ulcer disease, gas-
troduodenitis, and esophagitis. Other etiologies include 
portal hypertensive causes, malignancy, tears across the 
gastroesophageal junction, and vascular lesions. The 
most prevalent lower GI sources of hemorrhage include 
hemorrhoids, anal fissures, diverticula, ischemic colitis, 
and arteriovenous malformations. Other causes include 
Table 11-1 
Common Causes of Common GI Symptoms
Abdominal Pain
Nausea and Vomiting
Diarrhea
GI Bleeding
Obstructive 
Jaundice
Appendicitis
Gallstone disease
Pancreatitis
Diverticulitis
Ulcer disease
Esophagitis
GI obstruction
Inflammatory bowel 
disease
Functional bowel dis-
order
Vascular disease
Gynecologic causes
Renal stone
Medications
GI obstruction
Motor disorders
Functional bowel disorder
Enteric infection
Pregnancy
Endocrine disease
Motion sickness
Central nervous system 
disease
Infection
Poorly absorbed sugars
Inflammatory bowel disease
Microscopic colitis
Functional bowel disorder
Celiac disease
Pancreatic insufficiency
Hyperthyroidism
Ischemia
Endocrine tumor
Ulcer disease
Esophagitis
Varices
Vascular lesions
Neoplasm
Diverticula
Hemorrhoids
Fissures
Inflammatory 
bowel disease
Infectious colitis
Bile duct stones
Cholangiocarcinoma
Cholangitis
Sclerosing cholangitis
Ampullary stenosis
Ampullary carcinoma
Pancreatitis
Pancreatic tumor
SECTION II
Evaluation of the Patient with Alimentary Tract Syndromes
84
neoplasm, inflammatory bowel disease, infectious colitis, 
drug-induced colitis, and other vascular lesions.
Jaundice
Jaundice results from prehepatic, intrahepatic, or pos-
thepatic disease. Posthepatic causes of jaundice include 
biliary diseases such as choledocholithiasis, acute chol-
angitis, primary sclerosing cholangitis, other strictures, 
and neoplasm and pancreatic disorders, such as acute and 
chronic pancreatitis, stricture, and malignancy.
Other symptoms
Other symptoms are manifestations of GI disease. 
Dysphagia, odynophagia, and unexplained chest pain 
suggest esophageal disease. A globus sensation is reported 
with esophagopharyngeal conditions, but also occurs 
with functional GI disorders. Weight loss, anorexia, 
and fatigue are nonspecific symptoms of neoplastic, 
inflammatory, gut motility, pancreatic, small-bowel 
mucosal, and psychiatric conditions. Fever is reported 
with inflammatory illness, but malignancies also evoke 
febrile responses. GI disorders also produce extraintesti-
nal symptoms. Inflammatory bowel disease is associated 
with hepatobiliary dysfunction, skin and eye lesions, 
and arthritis. Celiac disease may present with dermatitis 
herpetiformis. Jaundice can produce pruritus. Con-
versely, systemic diseases can have GI consequences. 
Systemic lupus may cause gut ischemia, presenting with 
pain or bleeding. Overwhelming stress or severe burns 
may lead to gastric ulcer formation.
Evaluation of the Patient with 
Gastrointestinal Disease
Evaluation of the patient with GI disease begins with a 
careful history and examination. Subsequent investiga-
tion with a variety of tools designed to test gut struc-
ture or function are indicated in selected cases. Some 
patients exhibit normal findings on diagnostic testing. 
In these individuals, validated symptom profiles are 
employed to confidently diagnose a functional bowel 
disorder.
History
The history of the patient with suspected GI disease has 
several components. Symptom timing suggests specific 
etiologies. Symptoms of short duration commonly result 
from acute infection, toxin exposure, or abrupt inflam-
mation or ischemia. Long-standing symptoms point to 
underlying chronic inflammatory or neoplastic condi-
tions or functional bowel disorders. Symptoms from 
mechanical obstruction, ischemia, inflammatory bowel 
disease, and functional bowel disorders are worsened 
by meals. Conversely, ulcer symptoms may be relieved 
by eating or antacids. Symptom patterns and duration 
may suggest underlying etiologies. Ulcer pain occurs 
at intermittent intervals lasting weeks to months, while 
biliary colic has a sudden onset and lasts up to several 
hours. Pain from acute inflammation as with acute pan-
creatitis is severe and persists for days to weeks. Meals 
elicit diarrhea in some cases of inflammatory bowel dis-
ease and irritable bowel syndrome. Defecation relieves 
discomfort in inflammatory bowel disease and irritable 
bowel syndrome. Functional bowel disorders are exac-
erbated by stress. Sudden awakening from sound sleep 
suggests organic rather than functional disease. Diarrhea 
from malabsorption usually improves with fasting, while 
secretory diarrhea persists without oral intake.
Symptom relation to other factors narrows the list 
of diagnostic possibilities. Obstructive symptoms with 
prior abdominal surgery raise concern for adhesions, 
whereas loose stools after gastrectomy or gallbladder 
excision suggest dumping syndrome or postcholecys-
tectomy diarrhea. Symptom onset after travel prompts 
a search for enteric infection. Medications may pro-
duce pain, altered bowel habits, or GI bleeding. Lower 
GI bleeding likely results from neoplasms, diverticula, 
or vascular lesions in an older person and from ano-
rectal abnormalities or inflammatory bowel disease in a 
younger individual. Celiac disease is prevalent in peo-
ple of northern European descent, while inflammatory 
bowel disease is more common in certain Jewish popu-
lations. A sexual history may raise concern for sexually 
transmitted diseases or immunodeficiency.
For more than two decades, working groups have 
been convened to devise symptom criteria to improve 
the confident diagnosis of functional bowel disorders 
and to minimize the numbers of unnecessary diagnostic 
tests performed. The most widely accepted symptom-
based criteria are the Rome criteria. When tested against 
findings of structural investigations, the Rome criteria 
exhibit diagnostic specificities exceeding 90% for many 
of the functional bowel disorders.
Physical Examination
The physical exam complements information from 
the history. Abnormal vital signs provide diagnostic 
clues and determine the need for acute intervention. 
Fever suggests inflammation or neoplasm. Orthostasis 
is found with significant blood loss, dehydration, sep-
sis, or autonomic neuropathy. Skin, eye, or joint find-
ings may point to specific diagnoses. Neck exam with 
swallowing assessment evaluates dysphagia. Cardiopul-
monary disease may present with abdominal pain or 
nausea; thus lung and cardiac exams are important. Pelvic 
 
CHAPTER 11
Approach to the Patient with Gastrointestinal Disease
85
examination tests for a gynecologic source of abdomi-
nal pain. Rectal exam may detect blood, indicating gut 
mucosal injury or neoplasm or a palpable inflammatory 
mass in appendicitis. Metabolic conditions and gut motor 
disorders have associated peripheral neuropathy.
Inspection of the abdomen may reveal distention 
from obstruction, tumor, or ascites or vascular abnor-
malities with liver disease. Ecchymoses develop with 
severe pancreatitis. Auscultation can detect bruits or 
friction rubs from vascular disease or hepatic tumors. 
Loss of bowel sounds signifies ileus, while high-pitched, 
hyperactive sounds characterize intestinal obstruction. 
Percussion assesses liver size and can detect shifting 
dullness from ascites. Palpation assesses for hepato-
splenomegaly as well as neoplastic or inflammatory 
masses. Abdominal exam is helpful in evaluating unex-
plained pain. Intestinal ischemia elicits severe pain but 
little tenderness. Patients with visceral pain may exhibit 
generalized discomfort, while those with parietal pain or 
peritonitis have directed pain, often with involuntary guar­
ding, rigidity, or rebound. Patients with musculoskeletal 
abdominal wall pain may note tenderness exacerbated 
by Valsalva or straight-leg lift maneuvers.
Tools for Patient Evaluation
Laboratory, radiographic, and functional tests can assist 
in diagnosis of suspected GI disease. The GI tract also 
is amenable to internal evaluation with upper and lower 
endoscopy and to examination of luminal contents. Histo­
pathologic exams of GI tissues complement these tests.
Laboratory
Selected laboratory tests facilitate the diagnosis of GI 
disease. Iron-deficiency anemia suggests mucosal blood 
loss, while vitamin B12 deficiency results from small-
intestinal, gastric, or pancreatic disease. Either also can 
result from inadequate oral intake. Leukocytosis and 
increased sedimentation rates and C-reactive proteins 
are found in inflammatory conditions, while leukopenia 
is seen in viremic illness. Severe vomiting or diarrhea 
elicits electrolyte disturbances, acid-base abnormali-
ties, and elevated blood urea nitrogen. Pancreaticobili-
ary or liver disease is suggested by elevated pancreatic 
or liver chemistries. Thyroid chemistries, cortisol, and 
calcium levels are obtained to exclude endocrinologic 
causes of GI symptoms. Pregnancy testing is considered 
for women with unexplained nausea. Serologic tests can 
screen for celiac disease, inflammatory bowel disease, 
rheumatologic diseases like lupus or scleroderma, and 
paraneoplastic dysmotility syndromes. Hormone levels 
are obtained for suspected endocrine neoplasia. Intra­
abdominal malignancies produce other tumor markers 
including the carcinoembryonic antigen CA 19-9 and 
α-fetoprotein. Blood testing also monitors medication 
therapy in some diseases, as with thiopurine metabo-
lite levels in inflammatory bowel disease. Other body 
fluids are sampled under certain circumstances. Ascitic 
fluid is analyzed for infection, malignancy, or findings 
of portal hypertension. Cerebrospinal fluid is obtained 
for suspected central nervous system causes of vomit-
ing. Urine samples screen for carcinoid, porphyria, and 
heavy metal intoxication.
Luminal contents
Luminal contents can be examined for diagnostic clues. 
Stool samples are cultured for bacterial pathogens, 
examined for leukocytes and parasites, or tested for 
Giardia antigen. Duodenal aspirates can be examined 
for parasites or cultured for bacterial overgrowth. Fecal 
fat is quantified in possible malabsorption. Stool elec-
trolytes can be measured in diarrheal conditions. Laxa-
tive screens are done when laxative abuse is suspected. 
Gastric acid is quantified to rule out Zollinger-Ellison 
syndrome. Esophageal pH testing is done for refractory 
symptoms of acid reflux, whereas impedance techniques 
assess for nonacidic reflux. Pancreatic juice is analyzed 
for enzyme or bicarbonate content to exclude pancre-
atic exocrine insufficiency.
Endoscopy
The gut is accessible with endoscopy, which can pro-
vide the diagnosis of the causes of bleeding, pain, nausea 
and vomiting, weight loss, altered bowel function, and 
fever. Table 11-2 lists the most common indications 
for the major endoscopic procedures. Upper endoscopy 
evaluates the esophagus, stomach, and duodenum, while 
colonoscopy assesses the colon and distal ileum. Upper 
endoscopy is advocated as the initial structural test 
performed in patients with suspected ulcer disease, 
esophagitis, neoplasm, malabsorption, and Barrett’s 
metaplasia because of its ability to directly visualize as 
well as biopsy the abnormality. Colonoscopy is the 
procedure of choice for colon cancer screening and 
surveillance as well as diagnosis of colitis secondary to 
infection, ischemia, radiation, and inflammatory bowel 
disease. Sigmoidoscopy examines the colon up to the 
splenic flexure and is currently used to exclude distal 
colonic inflammation or obstruction in young patients 
not at significant risk for colon cancer. For elusive GI 
bleeding secondary to arteriovenous malformations or 
superficial ulcers, small-intestinal examination is per-
formed with push enteroscopy, capsule endoscopy, or 
double-balloon enteroscopy. Capsule endoscopy also 
can visualize small-intestinal Crohn’s disease in individ-
uals with negative barium radiography. Endoscopic ret-
rograde cholangiopancreaticography (ERCP) provides 
diagnoses of pancreatic and biliary disease. Endoscopic 
ultrasound is useful for evaluating extent of disease in 
SECTION II
Evaluation of the Patient with Alimentary Tract Syndromes
86
GI malignancy as well as exclusion of choledocholi-
thiasis, evaluation of pancreatitis, drainage of pancreatic 
pseudocysts, and assessment of anal continuity.
Radiography/nuclear medicine
Radiographic tests evaluate diseases of the gut and 
extraluminal structures. Oral or rectal contrast agents 
like barium provide mucosal definition from the esoph-
agus to the rectum. Contrast radiography also assesses 
gut transit and pelvic floor dysfunction. Barium swal-
low is the initial procedure for evaluation of dyspha-
gia to exclude subtle rings or strictures and assess for 
achalasia, whereas small-bowel contrast radiology reli-
ably diagnoses intestinal tumors and Crohn’s ileitis. 
Contrast enemas are performed when colonoscopy is 
unsuccessful or contraindicated. Ultrasound and com-
puted tomography (CT) evaluate regions not accessible 
by endoscopy or contrast studies, including the liver, 
pancreas, gallbladder, kidneys, and retroperitoneum. 
These tests are useful for diagnosis of mass lesions, 
fluid collections, organ enlargement, and in the case 
of ultrasound, gallstones. CT and magnetic resonance 
(MR) colonography are being evaluated as alternatives 
to colonoscopy for colon cancer screening. MR imag-
ing assesses the pancreaticobiliary ducts to exclude neo-
plasm, stones, and sclerosing cholangitis, and the liver to 
characterize benign and malignant tumors. Specialized 
CT or MR enterography can assess intensity of inflam-
matory bowel disease. Angiography excludes mesen-
teric ischemia and determines spread of malignancy. 
Angiographic techniques also access the biliary tree in 
obstructive jaundice. CT and MR techniques can be 
used to screen for mesenteric occlusion, thereby limit-
ing exposure to angiographic dyes. Positron emission 
tomography can facilitate distinguishing malignant from 
benign disease in several organ systems.
Scintigraphy both evaluates structural abnormalities 
and quantifies luminal transit. Radionuclide bleeding 
scans localize bleeding sites in patients with brisk hem-
orrhage so that therapy with endoscopy, angiography, 
or surgery may be directed. Radiolabeled leukocyte 
scans can search for intraabdominal abscesses not visu-
alized on CT. Biliary scintigraphy is complementary to 
Table 11-2
Common Indications for Endoscopy
Upper  
Endoscopy
Colonoscopy
Endoscopic Retrograde 
Cholangiopancreatography
Endoscopic 
Ultrasound
Capsule 
Endoscopy
Double 
Balloon 
Endoscopy
Dyspepsia despite 
treatment
Dyspepsia with 
signs of organic 
disease
Refractory vomiting
Dysphagia
Upper GI bleeding
Anemia
Weight loss
Malabsorption
Biopsy radiologic 
abnormality
Polypectomy
Place gastrostomy
Barrett’s  
surveillance
Palliate neoplasm
Sample duodenal 
tissue/fluid
Remove foreign 
body
Endoscopic muco-
sal resection or 
ablation of dys-
plastic Barrett’s 
mucosa
Place stent across 
stenosis
Cancer  
screening
Lower GI bleeding
Anemia
Diarrhea
Polypectomy
Obstruction
Biopsy radiologic 
abnormality
Cancer surveil-
lance: family  
history prior 
polyp/cancer, 
colitis
Palliate neoplasm
Remove foreign 
body
Place stent across 
stenosis
Jaundice
Postbiliary surgery complaints
Cholangitis
Gallstone pancreatitis
Pancreatic/biliary/ampullary  
tumor
Unexplained pancreatitis
Pancreatitis with unrelenting  
pain
Fistulas
Biopsy radiologic abnormality
Pancreaticobiliary drainage
Sample bile
Sphincter of Oddi manometry
Staging of 
malignancy
Characterize 
and biopsy 
submucosal 
mass
Bile duct 
stones
Chronic  
pancreatitis
Drain  
pseudocyst
Large gastric 
folds
Anal continuity
Obscure GI 
bleeding
Suspected 
Crohn’s  
disease of 
the small 
intestine
Ablation of 
small- 
intestinal 
bleeding 
sources
Biopsy of 
suspicious 
small- 
intestinal 
masses/
ulcers
 
CHAPTER 11
Approach to the Patient with Gastrointestinal Disease
87
ultrasound in the assessment of cholecystitis. Scintigra-
phy to quantify esophageal and gastric emptying is well 
established, while techniques to measure small-intestinal 
or colonic transit are less widely used.
Histopathology
Gut mucosal biopsies obtained at endoscopy evaluate for 
inflammatory, infectious, and neoplastic disease. Deep 
rectal biopsies assist with diagnosis of Hirschsprung’s 
disease or amyloid. Liver biopsy is indicated in cases 
with abnormal liver chemistries, unexplained jaundice, 
following liver transplant to exclude rejection, and to 
characterize the degree of inflammation in patients with 
chronic viral hepatitis prior to initiating antiviral ther-
apy. Biopsies obtained during CT or ultrasound can 
evaluate for other intraabdominal conditions not acces-
sible by endoscopy.
Functional testing
Tests of gut function provide important data when 
structural testing is nondiagnostic. In addition to gastric 
acid and pancreatic function testing, functional testing of 
motor activity is provided by manometric techniques. 
Esophageal manometry is useful for suspected achalasia, 
whereas small-intestinal manometry tests for pseudoob-
struction. A wireless motility capsule is now available to 
measure transit and contractile activity in the stomach, 
small intestine, and colon in a single test. Anorectal 
manometry with balloon expulsion testing is employed 
for unexplained incontinence or constipation from out-
let dysfunction. Anorectal manometry and electromy-
ography also assess anal function in fecal incontinence. 
Biliary manometry tests for sphincter of Oddi dysfunc-
tion with unexplained biliary pain. Measurement of 
breath hydrogen while fasting and after oral mono- or 
oligosaccharide challenge can screen for carbohydrate 
intolerance and small-intestinal bacterial overgrowth.
Treatment	
Gastrointestinal Disease
Management options for the patient with GI disease 
depend on the cause of symptoms. Available treatments 
include modifications in dietary intake, medications, 
interventional endoscopy or radiology techniques,  
surgery, and therapies directed to external influences.
Nutritional Manipulation  Dietary modi-
fications for GI disease include treatments that only 
reduce symptoms, therapies that correct pathologic 
defects, and measures that replace normal food intake 
with enteral or parenteral formulations. Changes that 
improve symptoms but do not reverse an organic abnor-
mality include lactose restriction for lactase deficiency, 
liquid meals in gastroparesis, carbohydrate restrictions 
with dumping syndrome, and high-fiber diets in irritable 
bowel syndrome. The gluten-free diet for celiac disease 
exemplifies a modification that serves as primary ther-
apy to reduce mucosal inflammation. Enteral medium-
chain triglycerides replace normal fats with short-gut 
syndrome or severe ileal disease. Perfusion of liquid 
meals through a gastrostomy is performed in those who 
cannot swallow safely. Enteral feeding through a jeju-
nostomy is considered for gastric dysmotility syndromes 
that preclude feeding into the stomach. Intravenous 
hyperalimentation is employed for individuals with gen-
eralized gut malfunction who cannot tolerate or who 
cannot be sustained with enteral nutrition.
Pharmacotherapy  Several medications are 
available to treat GI diseases. Considerable health care 
resources are expended on over-the-counter remedies. 
Many prescription drug classes are offered as short-term 
or continuous therapy of GI illness. A plethora of alterna-
tive treatments have gained popularity in GI conditions 
for which traditional therapies provide incomplete relief.
Over-the-Counter Agents  Over-the-counter agents 
are reserved for mild GI symptoms. Antacids and his-
tamine H2 antagonists decrease symptoms in gastro-
esophageal reflux and dyspepsia, whereas antiflatulents 
and adsorbents reduce gaseous symptoms. More potent 
acid inhibitors such as proton pump inhibitors are now 
available over the counter for treatment of chronic gas-
troesophageal reflux disease (GERD). Fiber supplements, 
stool softeners, enemas, and laxatives are used for consti-
pation. Laxatives are categorized as stimulants, osmotic 
agents (including isotonic preparations containing 
polyethylene glycol), and poorly absorbed sugars. Non-
prescription antidiarrheal agents include bismuth sub-
salicylate, kaolin-pectin combinations, and loperamide. 
Supplemental enzymes include lactase pills for lactose 
intolerance and bacterial α-galactosidase to treat excess 
gas. In general, use of a nonprescription preparation for 
more than a short time for chronic persistent symptoms 
should be supervised by a health care provider.
Prescription 
Drugs  Prescription drugs for GI 
diseases are a major focus of attention from pharma-
ceutical companies. Potent acid suppressants including 
drugs that inhibit the proton pump are advocated for 
acid reflux when over-the-counter preparations are inad-
equate. Cytoprotective agents rarely are used for upper 
gut ulcers. Prokinetic drugs stimulate GI propulsion in 
gastroparesis and pseudoobstruction. Prosecretory drugs 
are prescribed for constipation refractory to other agents. 
Prescription antidiarrheals include opiate drugs, anti-
cholinergic antispasmodics, tricyclics, bile acid binders, 
and serotonin antagonists. Antispasmodics and antide-
pressants also are useful for functional abdominal pain, 
SECTION II
Evaluation of the Patient with Alimentary Tract Syndromes
88
whereas narcotics are used for pain control in organic 
conditions such as disseminated malignancy and chronic 
pancreatitis. Antiemetics in several classes reduce nau-
sea and vomiting. Potent pancreatic enzymes decrease 
malabsorption and pain from pancreatic disease. Antise-
cretory drugs such as the somatostatin analogue octreo-
tide treat hypersecretory states. Antibiotics treat ulcer 
disease secondary to Helicobacter pylori, infectious diar-
rhea, diverticulitis, intestinal bacterial overgrowth, and 
Crohn’s disease. Some cases of irritable bowel syndrome 
(especially those with diarrhea) respond to nonabsorb-
able antibiotic therapy. Anti-inflammatory and immuno-
suppressive drugs are used in ulcerative colitis, Crohn’s 
disease, microscopic colitis, refractory celiac disease, and 
gut vasculitis. Chemotherapy with or without radiother-
apy is offered for GI malignancies. Most GI carcinomas 
respond poorly to such therapy, whereas lymphomas 
may be cured with such intervention.
Alternative 
Therapies  Alternative treatments 
are marketed to treat selected GI symptoms. Ginger, 
acupressure, and acustimulation have been advocated 
for nausea, while pyridoxine has been investigated for 
nausea of first-trimester pregnancy. Probiotics con-
taining active bacterial cultures are used as adjuncts in 
some cases of infectious diarrhea and irritable bowel  
syndrome. Probiotics that selectively nourish benign 
luminal bacteria may ultimately show benefit in func-
tional disorders as well. Low-potency pancreatic enzyme 
preparations are sold as general digestive aids but have 
little evidence to support their efficacy.
Enteric 
Therapies/Interventional  
End­oscopy and Radiology  Simple luminal 
inter­ventions are commonly performed for GI diseases. 
Nasogastric tube suction decompresses the upper gut 
in ileus or mechanical obstruction. Nasogastric lavage of 
saline or water in the patient with upper GI hemorrhage 
determines the rate of bleeding and helps evacuate 
blood prior to endoscopy. Enteral feedings can be initi-
ated through a nasogastric or nasoenteric tube. Enemas 
relieve fecal impaction or assist in gas evacuation in acute 
colonic pseudoobstruction. A rectal tube can be left in 
place to vent the distal colon in colonic pseudoobstruc-
tion and other colonic distention disorders.
In addition to its diagnostic role, endoscopy has thera-
peutic capabilities in certain settings. Cautery techniques 
can stop hemorrhage from ulcers, vascular malforma-
tions, and tumors. Injection with vasoconstrictor sub-
stances or sclerosants is used for bleeding ulcers, vascu-
lar malformations, varices, and hemorrhoids. Endoscopic 
encirclement of varices and hemorrhoids with constrict-
ing bands stops hemorrhage from these sites, while 
endoscopically placed clips can occlude arterial bleeding 
sites. Endoscopy can remove polyps or debulk lumen-
narrowing malignancies. Endoscopic mucosal resection 
and radio frequency techniques can remove or ablate 
some cases of Barrett’s esophagus with dysplasia. Endo-
scopic sphincterotomy of the ampulla of Vater relieves 
symptoms of choledocholithiasis. Obstructions of the gut 
lumen and pancreaticobiliary tree are relieved by endo-
scopic dilatation or placement of plastic or expandable 
metal stents. In cases of acute colonic pseudoobstruction, 
colonoscopy is employed to withdraw luminal gas. Finally, 
endoscopy is commonly used to insert feeding tubes.
Radiologic measures also are useful in GI disease. Angio-
graphic embolization or vasoconstriction decreases bleed-
ing from sites not amenable to endoscopic intervention. 
Dilatation or stenting with fluoroscopic guidance relieves 
luminal strictures. Contrast enemas can reduce volvulus 
and evacuate air in acute colonic pseudoobstruction. CT 
and ultrasound help drain abdominal fluid collections, in 
many cases obviating the need for surgery. Percutaneous 
transhepatic cholangiography relieves biliary obstruction 
when ERCP is contraindicated. Lithotripsy can fragment 
gallstones in patients who are not candidates for surgery. 
In some instances, radiologic approaches offer advantages 
over endoscopy for gastroenterostomy placement. Finally, 
central venous catheters for parenteral nutrition may be 
placed using radiographic techniques.
Surgery  Surgery is performed to cure disease, con-
trol symptoms without cure, maintain nutrition, or pal-
liate unresectable neoplasm. Medication-unresponsive 
ulcerative colitis, diverticulitis, cholecystitis, appendicitis, 
and intraabdominal abscess are curable with surgery, 
while only symptom control without cure is possible 
with Crohn’s disease. Surgery is mandated for ulcer com-
plications such as bleeding, obstruction, or perforation 
and intestinal obstructions that persist after conservative 
care. Fundoplication of the gastroesophageal junction 
is performed for severe ulcerative esophagitis and drug-
refractory symptomatic acid reflux. Achalasia responds to 
operations to relieve lower esophageal sphincter pressure. 
Operations for motor disorders have been introduced 
including implanted electrical stimulators for gastropare-
sis and electrical devices and artificial sphincters for fecal 
incontinence. Surgery may be needed to place a jejunos-
tomy for long-term enteral feedings. The threshold for 
performing surgery depends on the clinical setting. In all 
cases, the benefits of operation must be weighed against 
the potential for postoperative complications.
Therapy 
Directed 
to 
External  
Influences  In some conditions, GI symptoms 
respond to treatments directed outside the gut. Psy-
chological therapies including psychotherapy, behavior 
modification, hypnosis, and biofeedback have shown 
efficacy in functional bowel disorders. Patients with sig-
nificant psychological dysfunction and those with little 
response to treatments targeting the gut are likely to 
benefit from this form of therapy.
 Louis Michel Wong Kee Song  I   Mark Topazian 
89
 Gastrointestinal endoscopy has been attempted for over 
200 years, but the introduction of semirigid gastroscopes 
in the middle of the twentieth century marked the 
dawn of the modern endoscopic era. Since then, rapid 
advances in endoscopic technology have led to dramatic 
changes in the diagnosis and treatment of many diges-
tive diseases. Innovative endoscopic devices and new 
endoscopic treatment modalities continue to expand the 
use of endoscopy in patient care. 
 Flexible endoscopes provide either an optical image 
(transmitted over fi beroptic bundles) or an electronic 
video image (generated by a charge-coupled device in the 
tip of the endoscope). Operator controls permit defl ec-
tion of the endoscope tip; fi beroptic bundles bring light 
to the tip of the endoscope; and working channels allow 
washing, suctioning, and the passage of instruments. Pro-
gressive changes in the diameter and stiffness of endo-
scopes have improved the ease and patient tolerance of 
endoscopy. 
 Endoscopic pRocEdUREs 
 UppeR endosCopy 
 Upper endoscopy, also referred to as esophagogastro-
duodenoscopy (EGD), is performed by passing a fl ex-
ible endoscope through the mouth into the esophagus, 
stomach, bulb, and second duodenum. The proce-
dure is the best method of examining the upper gas-
trointestinal mucosa. While the upper gastrointestinal 
radiographic series has similar accuracy for diagno-
sis of duodenal ulcer  ( Fig. 12-1 ) , EGD is superior for 
detection of gastric ulcers  ( Fig. 12-2 ) and fl at mucosal 
lesions such as Barrett’s esophagus  ( Fig. 12-3 ) , and it 
permits directed biopsy and endoscopic therapy. Intra-
venous conscious sedation is given to most patients in 
the United States to ease the anxiety and discomfort 
of the procedure, although in many countries EGD is 
routinely performed with topical pharyngeal anesthesia 
only. Patient tolerance of unsedated EGD is improved 
by the use of an ultrathin, 5-mm diameter endoscope 
that can be passed transorally or transnasally. 
 GASTROINTESTINAL ENDOSCOPY 
 cHAptER 12 
A
B
 Figure 12-1 
duodenal ulcers. A. Ulcer with a clean base. B. Ulcer with 
a visible vessel ( arrow ) in a patient with recent hemorrhage. 
A
B
 Figure 12-2  
gastric ulcers.  A. Benign gastric ulcer.  B. Malignant gastric 
ulcer involving greater curvature of stomach. 
SECTION II
Evaluation of the Patient with Alimentary Tract Syndromes
90
A
B
C
D
A
B
C
D
Figure 12-4 
Causes of colitis. A. Chronic ulcerative colitis with diffuse 
ulcerations and exudates. B. Severe Crohn’s colitis with 
deep ulcers. C. Pseudomembranous colitis with yellow, 
adherent pseudomembranes. D. Ischemic colitis with patchy 
mucosal edema, subepithelial hemorrhage, and cyanosis.
Colonoscopy
Colonoscopy is performed by passing a flexible colono-
scope through the anal canal into the rectum and colon. 
The cecum is reached in >95% of cases, and the termi-
nal ileum can often be examined. Colonoscopy is the 
gold standard for diagnosis of colonic mucosal disease. 
Colonoscopy has greater sensitivity than barium enema 
for colitis (Fig. 12-4), polyps (Fig. 12-5), and cancer 
(Fig. 12-6). CT colonography is an emerging technol-
ogy that rivals colonoscopy’s accuracy for detection of 
polyps and cancer. Conscious sedation is usually given 
before colonoscopy in the United States, although a 
willing patient and a skilled examiner can complete the 
procedure without sedation in many cases.
Flexible Sigmoidoscopy
Flexible sigmoidoscopy is similar to colonoscopy but 
visualizes only the rectum and a variable portion of the 
left colon, typically to 60 cm from the anal verge. This 
procedure causes abdominal cramping, but it is brief and 
is usually performed without sedation. Flexible sigmoid-
oscopy is primarily used for evaluation of diarrhea and 
rectal outlet bleeding.
Figure 12-3 
Barrett’s esophagus. A. Pink tongues of Barrett’s mucosa 
extending proximally from the gastroesophageal junction. 
B. Barrett’s esophagus with a suspicious nodule (arrow) iden­
tified during endoscopic surveillance. C. Histologic finding 
of intramucosal adenocarcinoma in the endoscopically 
resected nodule. Tumor extends into the esophageal submu­
cosa (arrow). D. Barrett’s esophagus with locally advanced 
adenocarcinoma.
 
CHAPTER 12
Gastrointestinal Endoscopy
91
Figure 12-8 
Radiograph of a double-balloon enteroscope in the small 
intestine.
Figure 12-6 
Colon adenocarcinoma growing into the lumen.
Figure 12-7 
Capsule endoscopy image of jejunal vascular ectasia.
Small-Bowel Endoscopy
Three techniques are currently used to evaluate the 
small intestine, most often in patients presenting with 
presumed small-bowel bleeding. For capsule endoscopy 
the patient swallows a disposable capsule that contains 
a complementary metal oxide silicon (CMOS) chip 
camera. Color still images (Fig. 12-7) are transmit-
ted wirelessly to an external receiver at several frames 
per second until the capsule’s battery is exhausted or it 
is passed into the toilet. Although capsule endoscopy 
enables visualization of the jejunal and ileal mucosa 
beyond the reach of a conventional endoscope, it 
remains solely a diagnostic procedure at present.
Push enteroscopy is performed with a long endoscope 
similar in design to an upper endoscope. The entero-
scope is pushed down the small bowel, sometimes with 
the help of a stiffening overtube that extends from the 
mouth to the small intestine. The proximal to mid-jeju-
num is usually reached, and the endoscope’s instrument 
channel allows for biopsies or endoscopic therapy.
Deeper insertion into the small bowel can be accom-
plished by single- or double-balloon enteroscopy or spi-
ral enteroscopy (Fig. 12-8). These instruments enable 
pleating of the small intestine onto an overtube. With 
balloon-assisted enteroscopy, the entire small bowel 
can be visualized in some patients when both the oral 
and anal routes of insertion are used. Biopsies and 
A
B
Figure 12-5 
Colonic polyps. A. Pedunculated colon polyp on a thick 
stalk covered with normal mucosa (arrow). B. Sessile rectal 
polyp.
SECTION II
Evaluation of the Patient with Alimentary Tract Syndromes
92
endoscopic therapy can be performed throughout the 
visualized small bowel (Fig. 12-9).
Endoscopic Retrograde 
Cholangiopancreatography (ERCP)
During ERCP, a side-viewing endoscope is passed 
through the mouth to the duodenum, the ampulla of 
Vater is identified and cannulated with a thin plastic 
catheter, and radiographic contrast material is injected 
into the bile duct and pancreatic duct under fluoroscopic 
guidance (Fig. 12-10). When indicated, the sphincter of 
Oddi can be opened using the technique of endoscopic 
sphincterotomy (Fig. 12-11). Stones can be retrieved 
from the ducts, biopsies can be performed, strictures can 
be dilated and/or stented (Fig. 12-12), and ductal leaks 
can be stented (Fig. 12-13). ERCP is often performed 
for therapy but remains important in diagnosis, especially 
for ductal strictures and bile duct stones.
Endoscopic Ultrasound (EUS)
EUS utilizes high-frequency ultrasound transducers 
incorporated into the tip of a flexible endoscope. Ultra-
sound images are obtained of the gut wall and adjacent 
organs, vessels, and lymph nodes. By sacrificing depth 
of ultrasound penetration and bringing the ultrasound 
transducer close to the area of interest via endoscopy, 
A
B
C
A
B
Figure 12-10 
Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) 
for bile duct stones with cholangitis. A. Faceted bile 
duct stones are demonstrated in the common bile duct. 
B. After endoscopic sphincterotomy, the stones are extrac­
ted with a Dormia basket. A small abscess communicates 
with the left hepatic duct.
A
B
C
D
Figure 12-11 
Endoscopic sphincterotomy. A. A normal-appearing ampulla 
of Vater. B. Sphincterotomy is performed with electrocautery. 
C. Bile duct stones are extracted with a balloon catheter. 
D. Final appearance of the sphincterotomy.
Figure 12-9 
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID)-induced 
proximal ileal stricture diagnosed by double-balloon 
endoscopy. A. Ileal stricture causing obstructive symptoms. 
B. Balloon dilatation of the ileal stricture. C. Appearance of 
stricture after dilatation.
 
CHAPTER 12
Gastrointestinal Endoscopy
93
high-resolution images are obtained. EUS provides 
the most accurate preoperative local staging of esopha-
geal, pancreatic, and rectal malignancies (Fig. 12-14), 
although it does not detect most distant metastases. EUS 
is also useful for diagnosis of bile duct stones, gallbladder 
disease, submucosal gastrointestinal lesions, and chronic 
pancreatitis. Fine-needle aspirates and core biopsies of 
masses and lymph nodes in the posterior mediastinum, 
abdomen, pancreas, retroperitoneum, and pelvis can be 
obtained under EUS guidance (Fig. 12-15).
Natural Orifice Transluminal 
Endoscopic Surgery (NOTES)
NOTES is an evolving collection of endoscopic methods 
that entail passage of an endoscope or its accessories 
through the wall of the gastrointestinal tract (e.g., stom-
ach) to perform diagnostic or therapeutic interventions. 
Some NOTES procedures, such as percutaneous endo-
scopic gastrostomy (PEG) or endoscopic necrosectomy 
of pancreatic necrosis, are established clinical procedures; 
others, such as endoscopic appendectomy, cholecystec-
tomy, and tubal ligation, are in development, and their 
ultimate clinical application is presently unclear. NOTES 
is currently an area of intense innovation and endoscopic 
research.
Risks of Endoscopy
Medications used during conscious sedation may cause 
respiratory depression or allergic reactions. All endo-
scopic procedures carry some risk of bleeding and gas-
trointestinal perforation. These risks are quite low with 
diagnostic upper endoscopy and colonoscopy (<1:1000 
procedures), although the risk is as high as 2:100 when 
therapeutic procedures such as polypectomy, control of 
hemorrhage, or stricture dilatation are performed. Bleed-
ing and perforation are rare with flexible sigmoidoscopy. 
The risks for diagnostic EUS (without needle aspiration) 
are similar to the risks for diagnostic upper endoscopy.
Infectious complications are unusual with most 
endoscopic procedures. Some procedures carry a higher 
incidence of postprocedure bacteremia, and prophylac-
tic antibiotics may be indicated (Table 12-1).
ERCP carries additional risks. Pancreatitis occurs 
in about 5% of patients undergoing ERCP and in up 
to 25% of patients with sphincter of Oddi dysfunc-
tion. Young anicteric patients with normal ducts are at 
increased risk. Post-ERCP pancreatitis is usually mild 
and self-limited but may rarely result in prolonged hos-
pitalization, surgery, diabetes, or death. Bleeding occurs 
in 1% of endoscopic sphincterotomies. Ascending chol-
angitis, pseudocyst infection, retroperitoneal perfora-
tion, and abscess may occur as a result of ERCP.
A
B
C
D
Figure 12-12 
Endoscopic diagnosis, staging, and palliation of hilar 
cholangiocarcinoma. A. Endoscopic retrograde cholan­
giopancreatography (ERCP) in a patient with obstructive 
jaundice demonstrates a malignant-appearing stricture of 
the biliary confluence extending into the left and right intra­
hepatic ducts. B. Intraductal ultrasound of the biliary stric­
ture demonstrates marked bile duct wall thickening due 
to tumor (T) with partial encasement of the hepatic artery 
(arrow). C. Intraductal biopsy obtained during ERCP demon­
strates malignant cells infiltrating the submucosa of the bile 
duct wall (arrow). D. Endoscopic placement of bilateral self-
expanding metal stents (arrow) relieves the biliary obstruc­
tion. GB, gallbladder. ( Image C courtesy of Dr. Thomas 
Smyrk; with permission.)
Figure 12-13 
Bile leak (arrow) from a duct of Luschka after laparoscopic 
cholecystectomy. Contrast leaks from a small right intrahe­
patic duct into the gallbladder fossa, then flows into the pig­
tail of a percutaneous drainage catheter.
SECTION II
Evaluation of the Patient with Alimentary Tract Syndromes
94
A
B
Figure 12-15 
Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS)-guided fine-needle aspira-
tion (FNA). A. Ultrasound image of a 22-gauge needle passed 
through the duodenal wall and positioned in a hypoechoic pan­
creatic head mass. B. Micrograph of aspirated malignant cells. 
( Image B courtesy of Dr. Michael R. Henry; with permission.)
A
B
C
Percutaneous gastrostomy tube placement during 
EGD is associated with a 10–15% incidence of compli-
cations, most often wound infections. Fasciitis, pneu-
monia, bleeding, buried bumper syndrome, and colonic 
injury may result from gastrostomy tube placement.
Urgent Endoscopy
Acute Gastrointestinal Hemorrhage
Endoscopy is an important diagnostic and therapeutic 
technique for patients with acute gastrointestinal hem-
orrhage. Although gastrointestinal bleeding stops sponta-
neously in most cases, some patients will have persistent 
or recurrent hemorrhage that may be life-threatening. 
Figure 12-14 
Local staging of gastrointestinal cancers with endo-
scopic ultrasound. In each example the white arrowhead 
marks the primary tumor and the black arrow indicates the 
muscularis propria (mp) of the intestinal wall. A. T1 gastric 
cancer. The tumor does not invade the mp. B. T2 esophageal 
cancer. The tumor invades the mp. C. T3 esophageal can­
cer. The tumor extends through the mp into the surrounding 
tissue, and focally abuts the aorta. AO, aorta.
Clinical predictors of rebleeding help identify patients 
most likely to benefit from urgent endoscopy and endo-
scopic, angiographic, or surgical hemostasis.
Initial evaluation
The initial evaluation of the bleeding patient focuses 
on the magnitude of hemorrhage as reflected by the 
postural vital signs, the frequency of hematemesis or 
melena, and (in some cases) findings on nasogastric 
lavage. Decreases in hematocrit and hemoglobin lag 
behind the clinical course and are not reliable gauges 
of the magnitude of acute bleeding. This initial eval-
uation, completed well before the bleeding source is 
confidently identified, guides immediate supportive 
care of the patient and helps determine the timing of 
endoscopy. The severity of the initial hemorrhage is 
the most important indication for urgent endoscopy, 
since a large initial bleed increases the likelihood of 
ongoing or recurrent bleeding. Patients with rest-
ing hypotension, repeated hematemesis, bloody naso-
gastric aspirate that does not clear with large volume 
lavage, or orthostatic change in vital signs, or those 
requiring blood transfusions, should be considered for 
urgent endoscopy. In addition, patients with cirrhosis, 
coagulopathy, or respiratory or renal failure, and those 
over 70 years of age are more likely to have significant 
rebleeding.
Bedside evaluation also suggests an upper or lower 
gastrointestinal source of bleeding in most patients. 
Over 90% of patients with melena are bleeding proxi-
mal to the ligament of Treitz, and about 90% of patients 
with hematochezia are bleeding from the colon. Melena 
can result from bleeding in the small bowel or right 
colon, especially in older patients with slow colonic 
transit. Conversely, some patients with massive hema-
tochezia may be bleeding from an upper gastrointestinal 
 
CHAPTER 12
Gastrointestinal Endoscopy
95
source, such as a gastric Dieulafoy’s lesion or duodenal 
ulcer, with rapid intestinal transit. Early upper endos-
copy should be considered in such patients.
Endoscopy should be performed after the patient has 
been resuscitated with intravenous fluids and transfu-
sions as necessary. Marked coagulopathy or thrombocy-
topenia is usually treated before endoscopy, since cor-
rection of these abnormalities may lead to resolution of 
bleeding, and techniques for endoscopic hemostasis are 
limited in such patients. Metabolic derangements should 
also be addressed. Tracheal intubation for airway pro-
tection should be considered before upper endoscopy 
in patients with repeated recent hematemesis and sus-
pected variceal hemorrhage.
Most patients with impressive hematochezia can 
undergo colonoscopy after a rapid colonic purge with 
a polyethylene glycol solution; the preparation fluid 
may be administered via a nasogastric tube. Colonos-
copy has a higher diagnostic yield than radionuclide 
bleeding scans or angiography in lower gastrointesti-
nal bleeding, and endoscopic therapy can be applied in 
some cases. In a minority of cases, endoscopic assess-
ment is hindered by poor visualization due to persis-
tent vigorous bleeding with recurrent hemodynamic 
instability, and other techniques (such as angiography 
or emergent subtotal colectomy) must be employed. 
In such patients, massive bleeding originating from an 
upper gastrointestinal source should also be considered 
Table 12-1
Antibiotic Prophylaxis for Endoscopic Procedures
Patient Condition
Procedure Contemplated
Goal of Prophylaxis
Periprocedural  
Antibiotic Prophylaxis
All cardiac conditions
Any endoscopic procedure
Prevention of infective  
endocarditis
Not indicated
Bile-duct obstruction in the 
absence of cholangitis
ERCP with complete  
drainage
Prevention of cholangitis
Not recommended
Bile-duct obstruction in absence 
of cholangitis
ERCP with anticipated  
incomplete drainage (e.g., 
PSC, hilar strictures)
Prevention of cholangitis
Recommended; continue 
antibiotics after the  
procedure
Sterile pancreatic fluid collection 
(e.g., pseudocyst, necrosis), 
which communicates with  
pancreatic duct
ERCP
Prevention of cyst infection
Recommended
Sterile pancreatic fluid collection
Transmural drainage
Prevention of cyst infection
Recommended
Solid lesion along upper GI tract
EUS-FNA
Prevention of local infection
Not recommendeda
Solid lesion along lower GI tract
EUS-FNA
Prevention of local infection
Insufficient data to make  
firm recommendationb
Cystic lesions along GI tract 
(including mediastinum)
EUS-FNA
Prevention of cyst infection
Recommended
All patients
Percutaneous endoscopic 
feeding tube placement
Prevention of peristomal 
infection
Recommended
Cirrhosis with acute GI bleeding
Required for all patients, 
regardless of endoscopic 
procedures
Prevention of infectious com­
plications and reduction of 
mortality
Upon admissionc
Synthetic vascular graft and 
other nonvalvular cardiovascular 
devices
Any endoscopic procedure
Prevention of graft and 
device infection
Not recommendedd
Prosthetic joints
Any endoscopic procedure
Prevention of septic arthritis
Not recommendede
aLow rates of bacteremia and local infection.
bEndoscopists may choose on a case-by-case basis.
cRisk for bacterial infection associated with cirrhosis and GI bleeding is well established.
dNo reported cases of infection associated with endoscopy.
eVery low risk of infection.
Abbreviations: ERCP, endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography; EUS-FNA, endoscopic ultrasound–fine-needle aspiration; PSC, primary 
sclerosing cholangitis.
Source: Adapted from S Banerjee et al: Gastrointest Endosc 67:719, 2008; with permission from Elsevier.
SECTION II
Evaluation of the Patient with Alimentary Tract Syndromes
96
and excluded by upper endoscopy. The anal and rectal 
mucosa should be visualized endoscopically early in the 
course of massive rectal bleeding, as bleeding lesions 
in or close to the anal canal may be identified that are 
amenable to endoscopic or surgical transanal hemostatic 
techniques.
Peptic ulcer
The endoscopic appearance of peptic ulcers provides 
useful prognostic information and guides the need for 
endoscopic therapy in patients with acute hemorrhage 
(Fig. 12-16). A clean-based ulcer is associated with a 
low, 3–5% risk of rebleeding; patients with melena and 
a clean-based ulcer are often discharged home from the 
emergency room or endoscopy suite if they are young, 
reliable, and otherwise healthy. Flat pigmented spots 
and adherent clots covering the ulcer base have a 10 and 
20% risk of rebleeding, respectively. Endoscopic therapy 
is often considered for an ulcer with an adherent clot. 
When a platelet plug is seen protruding from a vessel wall 
in the base of an ulcer (so-called sentinel clot or visible 
vessel), the risk of rebleeding from the ulcer is 40%. This 
finding generally leads to endoscopic therapy to decrease 
the rebleeding rate. Occasionally, active spurting from an 
ulcer is seen with >90% risk of ongoing bleeding without 
therapy.
Endoscopic therapy of ulcers with high-risk stigmata 
typically lowers the rebleeding rate to 5–10%. Several 
hemostatic techniques are available, including injection 
of epinephrine or a sclerosant into and around the ves-
sel, “coaptive coagulation” of the vessel in the base of 
the ulcer using a thermal probe that is pressed against 
the site of bleeding, placement of hemoclips, or a com-
bination of these modalities. In conjunction with endo-
scopic therapy, the administration of a proton pump 
inhibitor decreases the risk of rebleeding and improves 
patient outcome.
Varices
Two complementary strategies guide therapy of bleed-
ing varices: local treatment of the bleeding varices and 
treatment of the underlying portal hypertension. Local 
therapies, including endoscopic variceal sclerotherapy, 
endoscopic variceal band ligation, and balloon tam-
ponade with a Sengstaken-Blakemore tube, effectively 
control acute hemorrhage in most patients, although 
therapies that decrease portal pressure (pharmacologic 
treatment, surgical shunts, or radiologically placed 
intrahepatic portosystemic shunts) also play an impor-
tant role.
Endoscopic variceal ligation (EVL) is indicated for 
the prevention of a first bleed from large esophageal 
A
D
E
B
C
Figure 12-16 
Stigmata of hemorrhage in peptic ulcers. A. Gastric 
antral ulcer with a clean base. B. Duodenal ulcer with flat 
pigmented spots. C. Duodenal ulcer with a dense adherent 
clot. D. Gastric ulcer with a pigmented protuberance/visible 
vessel. E. Duodenal ulcer with active spurting (arrow).
 
CHAPTER 12
Gastrointestinal Endoscopy
97
varices (Fig. 12-17), particularly in patients in whom 
beta blockers are contraindicated or not tolerated 
(primary prophylaxis). EVL is also the preferred endo-
scopic therapy for control of active esophageal variceal 
bleeding and for subsequent eradication of esophageal 
varices (secondary prophylaxis). During EVL, a varix is 
suctioned into a cap fitted on the end of the endoscope, 
and a rubber band is released from the cap, ligating the 
varix. EVL controls acute hemorrhage in up to 90% of 
patients. Complications of EVL, such as postbanding 
ulcer bleeding and esophageal stenosis, are uncommon. 
Endoscopic variceal sclerotherapy (EVS) involves the 
injection of a sclerosing, thrombogenic solution into or 
next to the esophageal varices. EVS also controls acute 
hemorrhage in most patients but has a higher compli-
cation rate than EVL. These techniques are used when 
varices are actively bleeding during endoscopy or (more 
commonly) when varices are the only identifiable cause 
of acute hemorrhage. Bleeding from large gastric fun-
dic varices (Fig. 12-18) is best treated with endoscopic 
cyanoacrylate (“glue”) injection, since EVL or EVS of 
these varices is associated with a high rebleeding rate. 
Complications of cyanoacrylate injection include infec-
tion and glue embolization to other organs, such as the 
lungs, brain, and spleen.
After treatment of the acute hemorrhage, an elective 
course of endoscopic therapy can be undertaken with 
the goal of eradicating esophageal varices and prevent-
ing rebleeding months to years later. However, this 
chronic therapy is less successful, preventing long-term 
rebleeding in ∼50% of patients. Pharmacologic therapies 
that decrease portal pressure have similar efficacy, and 
the two modalities may be combined.
Dieulafoy’s lesion
This lesion, also called persistent caliber artery, is a large-
caliber arteriole that runs immediately beneath the gas-
trointestinal mucosa and bleeds through a pinpoint 
mucosal erosion (Fig. 12-19). Dieulafoy’s lesion is seen 
most commonly on the lesser curvature of the proxi-
mal stomach, causes impressive arterial hemorrhage, and 
may be difficult to diagnose; it is often recognized only 
after repeated endoscopy for recurrent bleeding. Endo-
scopic therapy, such as thermal coagulation, is typically 
effective for control of bleeding and ablation of the 
underlying vessel once the lesion has been identified. 
Rescue therapies, such as angiographic embolization or 
surgical oversewing, are considered in situations where 
endoscopic therapy has failed.
Mallory-Weiss tear
A Mallory-Weiss tear is a linear mucosal rent near or 
across the gastroesophageal junction that is often asso-
ciated with retching or vomiting (Fig. 12-20). When 
the tear disrupts a submucosal arteriole, brisk hemor-
rhage may result. Endoscopy is the best method of 
diagnosis, and an actively bleeding tear can be treated 
Figure 12-17 
Esophageal varices.
Figure 12-18 
Gastric fundic varices.
A
B
Figure 12-19 
Dieulafoy’s lesion. A. Actively spurting jejunal Dieulafoy’s 
lesion. There is no underlying mucosal lesion. B. Histology 
of a gastric Dieulafoy’s lesion. A persistent caliber artery 
(arrows) is present in the gastric submucosa, immediately 
beneath the mucosa.
SECTION II
Evaluation of the Patient with Alimentary Tract Syndromes
98
endoscopically with epinephrine injection, coaptive 
coagulation, band ligation, or hemoclips. Unlike peptic 
ulcer, a Mallory-Weiss tear with a nonbleeding sentinel 
clot in its base rarely rebleeds and thus does not neces-
sitate endoscopic therapy.
Vascular ectasias
Vascular ectasias are flat mucosal vascular anomalies that 
are best diagnosed by endoscopy. They usually cause 
slow intestinal blood loss and occur either in a sporadic 
fashion or in a well-defined pattern of distribution [e.g., 
gastric antral vascular ectasia (GAVE) or “watermelon 
stomach”] (Fig. 12-21). Cecal vascular ectasias (senile 
lesions), GAVE, and radiation-induced rectal ectasias 
are often responsive to local endoscopic ablative ther-
apy, such as argon plasma coagulation. Patients with 
diffuse small-bowel vascular ectasias (associated with 
chronic renal failure and with hereditary hemorrhagic 
telangiectasia) may continue to bleed despite endo-
scopic treatment of easily accessible lesions by conven-
tional endoscopy. These patients may benefit from deep 
enteroscopy with endoscopic therapy, pharmacologic 
treatment with octreotide or estrogen/progesterone ther-
apy, or intraoperative enteroscopy.
Colonic diverticula
Diverticula form where nutrient arteries penetrate the 
muscular wall of the colon en route to the colonic 
mucosa (Fig. 12-22). The artery found in the base of 
a diverticulum may bleed, causing painless and impres-
sive hematochezia. Colonoscopy is indicated in patients 
with hematochezia and suspected diverticular hemor-
rhage, since other causes of bleeding (such as vascular 
ectasias, colitis, and colon cancer) must be excluded. In 
addition, an actively bleeding diverticulum may be seen 
and treated during colonoscopy.
Figure 12-20 
Mallory-Weiss tear at the gastroesophageal junction.
A
B
C
Figure 12-22 
Colonic diverticula.
Figure 12-21 
Gastrointestinal vascular ectasias. A. Gastric antral vas­
cular ectasia (“watermelon stomach”) characterized by 
stripes of prominent flat or raised vascular ectasias. B. Cecal 
vascular ectasias. C. Radiation-induced vascular ectasias of 
the rectum in a patient previously treated for prostate cancer.
 
CHAPTER 12
Gastrointestinal Endoscopy
99
Gastrointestinal Obstruction  
and Pseudoobstruction
Endoscopy is useful for evaluation and treatment of 
some forms of gastrointestinal obstruction. An impor-
tant exception is small bowel obstruction due to surgical 
adhesions, which is generally not diagnosed or treated 
endoscopically. Esophageal, gastroduodenal, and colonic 
obstruction or pseudoobstruction can all be diagnosed 
and often managed endoscopically.
Acute esophageal obstruction
Esophageal obstruction by impacted food (Fig. 12-23) or 
an ingested foreign body is a potentially life-threatening 
event and represents an endoscopic emergency. Left 
untreated, the patient may develop esophageal ulceration, 
ischemia, and perforation. Patients with persistent esopha-
geal obstruction often have hypersalivation and are usually 
unable to swallow water; endoscopy is generally the best 
initial test in such patients, since endoscopic removal of the 
obstructing material is usually possible, and the presence 
of an underlying esophageal pathology can often be deter-
mined. Radiographs of the chest and neck should be con-
sidered before endoscopy in patients with fever, obstruction 
for ≥24 h, or ingestion of a sharp object such as a fishbone. 
Radiographic contrast studies interfere with subsequent 
endoscopy and are not advisable in most patients with a 
clinical picture of esophageal obstruction. Occasionally, sub-
lingual nifedipine or nitrates, or intravenous glucagon, may 
resolve an esophageal food impaction, but in most patients 
an underlying web, ring, or stricture is present and endo-
scopic removal of the obstructing food bolus is necessary.
Gastric outlet obstruction
Obstruction of the gastric outlet is commonly caused by 
gastric, duodenal, or pancreatic malignancy, or chronic 
peptic ulceration with stenosis of the pylorus. Patients 
vomit partially digested food many hours after eating. 
Gastric decompression with a nasogastric tube and sub-
sequent lavage for removal of retained material is the 
first step in treatment. The diagnosis can then be con-
firmed with a saline load test, if desired. Endoscopy is 
useful for diagnosis and treatment. Patients with benign 
pyloric stenosis may be treated with endoscopic balloon 
dilatation of the pylorus, and a course of endoscopic 
dilatation results in long-term relief of symptoms in 
about 50% of patients. Malignant gastric outlet obstruc-
tion can be relieved with endoscopically placed expand-
able stents (Fig. 12-24) in patients with inoperable 
malignancy.
Colonic obstruction and pseudoobstruction
These both present with abdominal distention and dis-
comfort; tympany; and a dilated, air-filled colon on 
plain abdominal radiography. The radiographic appear-
ance can be characteristic of a particular condition, 
such as sigmoid volvulus (Fig. 12-25). Both structural 
obstruction and pseudoobstruction may lead to colonic 
perforation if untreated. Acute colonic pseudoobstruc-
tion is a form of colonic ileus that is usually attribut-
able to electrolyte disorders, narcotic and anticholinergic 
A
C
D
B
Figure 12-24 
Biliary and duodenal self-expanding metal stents (SEMS) 
for obstruction caused by pancreatic cancer. A. Endo­
scopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) dem­
onstrates a distal bile duct stricture (arrow). B. A biliary 
SEMS is placed. C. Contrast injection demonstrates a duo­
denal stricture (arrow). D. Biliary and duodenal SEMS in 
place.
Figure 12-23
Esophageal food (meat) impaction.
SECTION II
Evaluation of the Patient with Alimentary Tract Syndromes
100
medications, immobility (as after surgery), and retroperi-
toneal hemorrhage or mass. Multiple causative factors 
are often present. Colonoscopy, water-soluble contrast 
enema, or CT may be used to look for an obstructing 
lesion and differentiate obstruction from pseudoobstruc-
tion. One of these diagnostic studies should be strongly 
considered if the patient does not have clear risk factors 
for pseudoobstruction, if radiographs do not show air 
in the rectum, or if the patient fails to improve when 
underlying causes of pseudoobstruction have been 
addressed. The risk of cecal perforation in pseudo­
obstruction rises when the cecal diameter exceeds 12 cm, 
and decompression of the colon may be achieved using 
intravenous neostigmine or via colonoscopic decom-
pression (Fig. 12-26). Most patients should receive 
a trial of conservative therapy (with correction of 
electrolyte disorders, removal of offending medica-
tions, and increased mobilization) before undergo-
ing an invasive decompressive procedure for colonic 
pseudoobstruction.
Colonic obstruction is an indication for urgent 
intervention. Emergent diverting colostomy may be 
performed with a subsequent second operation after 
bowel preparation to treat the underlying cause of 
obstruction. Colonoscopic placement of an expand-
able stent is an alternative that can relieve malignant 
obstruction without emergency surgery and permit 
bowel preparation for an elective one-stage operation 
(Fig. 12-27).
Acute Biliary Obstruction
The steady, severe pain that occurs when a gallstone 
acutely obstructs the common bile duct often brings 
patients to a hospital. The diagnosis of a ductal stone is 
suspected when the patient is jaundiced or when serum 
liver tests or pancreatic enzyme levels are elevated; it is 
confirmed by direct cholangiography (performed endo-
scopically, percutaneously, or during surgery). ERCP 
is currently the primary means of diagnosing and treat-
ing common bile duct stones in most hospitals in the 
United States (Figs. 12-10 and 12-11).
Bile duct imaging
While transabdominal ultrasound diagnoses only a 
minority of bile duct stones, magnetic resonance chol-
angiopancreatography (MRCP) and EUS are >90% 
accurate and have an important role in diagnosis. Exam-
ples of these modalities are shown in Fig. 12-28.
If the suspicion for a bile duct stone is high and 
urgent treatment is required (as in a patient with 
obstructive jaundice and biliary sepsis), ERCP is the 
procedure of choice, since it remains the gold standard 
for diagnosis and allows for immediate treatment. If a 
Figure 12-25 
Sigmoid volvulus with the characteristic radiologic appear-
ance of a “bent inner tube.”
A
B
Figure 12-26 
Acute colonic pseudoobstruction. A. Acute colonic dilatation 
occurring in a patient soon after knee surgery. B. Colonoscopic 
placement of decompression tube with marked improvement in 
colonic dilatation.
 
CHAPTER 12
Gastrointestinal Endoscopy
101
persistent bile duct stone is unlikely (as in a patient with 
gallstone pancreatitis), ERCP may be supplanted by less 
invasive imaging techniques, such as EUS or MRCP.
Ascending cholangitis
Charcot’s triad of jaundice, abdominal pain, and fever is 
present in about 70% of patients with ascending cholan-
gitis and biliary sepsis. These patients are managed ini-
tially with fluid resuscitation and intravenous antibiotics. 
Abdominal ultrasound is often performed to assess for 
gallbladder stones and bile duct dilation. However, 
the bile duct may not be dilated early in the course of 
acute biliary obstruction. Medical management usu-
ally improves the patient’s clinical status, providing a 
window of approximately 24 h during which bili-
ary drainage should be established, typically by ERCP. 
Undue delay can result in recrudescence of overt sepsis 
and increased morbidity and mortality rates. In addition 
to Charcot’s triad, the additional presence of shock and 
A
B
C
Figure 12-27 
Obstructing colonic carcinoma. A. Colonic adenocarci­
noma causing marked luminal narrowing of the descending 
colon. B. Endoscopic placement of a self-expanding metal 
stent. C. Radiograph of expanded stent across the obstruct­
ing tumor with a residual waist (arrow). (Image A courtesy of 
Dr. Glenn Alexander; with permission.)
A
B
C
Figure 12-28 
Methods of bile duct imaging. Arrows mark bile duct 
stones. Arrowheads indicate the common bile duct, and the 
asterisk marks the portal vein. A. Endoscopic ultrasound 
(EUS). B. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography 
(MRCP). C. Helical computed tomography (CT).
SECTION II
Evaluation of the Patient with Alimentary Tract Syndromes
102
confusion (Reynolds’s pentad) is associated with high 
mortality rate and should prompt an urgent intervention 
to restore biliary drainage.
Gallstone pancreatitis
Gallstones may cause acute pancreatitis as they pass 
through the ampulla of Vater. The occurrence of gallstone 
pancreatitis usually implies passage of a stone into the duo-
denum, and only about 20% of patients harbor a persistent 
stone in the ampulla or the common bile duct. Retained 
stones are more common in patients with jaundice, rising 
serum liver tests following hospitalization, severe pancre-
atitis, or superimposed ascending cholangitis.
Urgent ERCP decreases the morbidity rate of gall-
stone pancreatitis in a subset of patients with retained 
bile duct stones. It is unclear whether the benefit of 
ERCP is mainly attributable to treatment and preven-
tion of ascending cholangitis or to relief of pancreatic 
duct obstruction. ERCP is warranted early in the course 
of gallstone pancreatitis if ascending cholangitis is sus-
pected, especially in a jaundiced patient. Urgent ERCP 
also appears to benefit patients predicted to have severe 
pancreatitis using a clinical index of severity such as the 
Glasgow or Ranson score. Since the benefit of ERCP 
is limited to patients with a retained bile duct stone, a 
strategy of initial MRCP or EUS for diagnosis decreases 
the utilization of ERCP in gallstone pancreatitis and 
improves clinical outcomes by limiting the occurrence 
of ERCP-related complications.
A
B
C
D
Figure 12-29 
Causes of esophagitis. A. Severe reflux esophagitis with 
mucosal ulceration and friability. B. Cytomegalovirus esoph­
agitis. C. Herpes simplex virus esophagitis with target-type 
shallow ulcerations. D. Candida esophagitis with white 
plaques adherent to the esophageal mucosa.
Elective Endoscopy
Dyspepsia
Dyspepsia is a chronic or recurrent burning discomfort 
or pain in the upper abdomen that may be caused by 
diverse processes such as gastroesophageal reflux, peptic 
ulcer disease, and “nonulcer dyspepsia,” a heterogeneous 
category that includes disorders of motility, sensation, 
and somatization. Gastric and esophageal malignan-
cies are less common causes of dyspepsia. Careful 
history-taking allows accurate differential diagnosis of 
dyspepsia in only about half of patients. In the remain-
der, endoscopy can be a useful diagnostic tool, espe-
cially in patients whose symptoms are not resolved by 
an empirical trial of symptomatic treatment. Endoscopy 
should be performed at the outset in patients with dys-
pepsia and alarm features, such as weight loss or iron-
deficiency anemia.
Gastroesophageal Reflux  
Disease (GERD)
When classic symptoms of gastroesophageal reflux are 
present, such as water brash and substernal heartburn, 
presumptive diagnosis and empirical treatment are 
often sufficient. Endoscopy is a sensitive test for diag-
nosis of esophagitis (Fig. 12-29), but will miss noner-
osive reflux disease (NERD) since some patients have 
 
CHAPTER 12
Gastrointestinal Endoscopy
103
symptomatic reflux without esophagitis. The most sen-
sitive test for diagnosis of GERD is 24-h ambulatory 
pH monitoring. Endoscopy is indicated in patients with 
reflux symptoms refractory to antisecretory therapy; in 
those with alarm symptoms such as dysphagia, weight 
loss, or gastrointestinal bleeding; and in those with 
recurrent dyspepsia after treatment that is not clearly 
due to reflux on clinical grounds alone. Endo­scopy 
may be considered in patients with long-standing (≥10 
years) GERD with frequent symptoms, as they have a 
sixfold increased risk of harboring Barrett’s esophagus 
compared to a patient with <1 year of reflux symp-
toms. Patients with Barrett’s esophagus (Fig. 12-3) 
generally undergo a surveillance program of periodic 
endoscopy with biopsies to detect dysplasia or early 
carcinoma.
Barrett’s esophagus
Barrett’s esophagus is specialized columnar metaplasia 
that replaces the normal squamous mucosa of the dis-
tal esophagus in some persons with GERD. Barrett’s 
epithelium is a major risk factor for adenocarcinoma of 
the esophagus and is readily detected endoscopically, 
due to proximal displacement of the squamocolum-
nar junction (Fig. 12-3). A screening EGD for Bar-
rett’s esophagus may be considered in patients with a 
chronic history (>10 year) of GERD symptoms. Endo-
scopic biopsy is the gold standard for confirmation of 
Barrett’s esophagus, and for dysplasia or cancer aris-
ing in Barrett’s mucosa. Endoscopic therapies such as 
endoscopic mucosal resection (EMR), endoscopic sub-
mucosal dissection (ESD), photodynamic therapy (PDT), 
and radiofrequency ablation (RFA) are effective modal-
ities for treatment of high-grade dysplasia and intramu-
cosal cancer in Barrett’s esophagus.
Peptic Ulcer
Peptic ulcer classically causes epigastric gnawing or 
burning, often occurring nocturnally and promptly 
relieved by food or antacids. Although endoscopy is the 
most sensitive diagnostic test for peptic ulcer, it is not 
a cost-effective strategy in young patients with ulcer-
like dyspeptic symptoms unless endoscopy is available at 
low cost. Patients with suspected peptic ulcer should be 
evaluated for Helicobacter pylori infection. Serology (past 
or present infection), urea breath testing (current infec-
tion), and stool tests are noninvasive and less costly than 
endoscopy with biopsy. Patients with alarm symptoms 
and those with persistent symptoms despite treatment 
should undergo endoscopy to exclude gastric malig-
nancy and other etiologies.
Nonulcer Dyspepsia
Nonulcer dyspepsia may be associated with bloating 
and, unlike peptic ulcer, tends not to remit and recur. 
Most patients describe marginal relief on acid-reducing, 
prokinetic, or anti-Helicobacter therapy, and are referred 
for endoscopy to exclude a refractory ulcer and assess 
for other causes. Although endoscopy is useful for 
excluding other diagnoses, its impact on the treatment 
of patients with nonulcer dyspepsia is limited.
Dysphagia
About 50% of patients presenting with difficulty swal-
lowing have a mechanical obstruction; the remain-
der has a motility disorder, such as achalasia or diffuse 
esophageal spasm. Careful history-taking often points 
to a presumptive diagnosis and leads to the appro-
priate use of diagnostic tests. Esophageal strictures 
(Fig. 12-30) typically cause progressive dysphagia, 
first for solids, then for liquids; motility disorders often 
cause intermittent dysphagia for both solids and liquids. 
Some underlying disorders have characteristic historic 
features: Schatzki’s ring (Fig. 12-31) causes episodic 
dysphagia for solids, typically at the beginning of a 
meal; oropharyngeal motor disorders typically present 
with difficulty initiating deglutition (transfer dysphagia) 
and nasal reflux or coughing with swallowing; and 
achalasia may cause nocturnal regurgitation of undi-
gested food.
Figure 12-30 
Peptic esophageal stricture associated with ulceration 
and scarring of the distal esophagus.
SECTION II
Evaluation of the Patient with Alimentary Tract Syndromes
104
When mechanical obstruction is suspected, endos-
copy is a useful initial diagnostic test, since it permits 
immediate biopsy and/or dilatation of strictures, masses, 
or rings. The presence of linear furrows and mul-
tiple corrugated rings throughout a narrowed esopha-
gus (feline esophagus) should raise suspicion for eosino-
philic esophagitis, an increasingly recognized cause for 
recurrent dysphagia and food impaction (Fig. 12-32). 
Blind or forceful passage of an endoscope may lead to 
perforation in a patient with stenosis of the cervical 
esophagus or a Zenker’s diverticulum, but gentle pas-
sage of an endoscope under direct visual guidance is 
reasonably safe. Endoscopy can miss a subtle stricture or 
ring in some patients.
When transfer dysphagia is evident or an esophageal 
motility disorder is suspected, esophageal radiography 
and/or a video-swallow study are the best initial diag-
nostic tests. The oropharyngeal swallowing mechanism, 
esophageal peristalsis, and the lower esophageal sphincter 
can all be assessed. In some disorders, subsequent esoph-
ageal manometry may also be important for diagnosis.
Anemia and Occult Blood  
in the Stool
Iron-deficiency anemia may be attributed to poor 
iron absorption (as in celiac sprue) or, more com-
monly, chronic blood loss. Intestinal bleeding should 
be strongly suspected in men and postmenopausal 
women with iron-deficiency anemia, and colonos-
copy is indicated in such patients, even in the absence 
of detectable occult blood in the stool. Approxi-
mately 30% will have large colonic polyps, 10% will 
have colorectal cancer, and a few additional patients 
will have colonic vascular lesions. When a convincing 
source of blood loss is not found in the colon, upper 
gastrointestinal endoscopy should be considered; if no 
lesion is found, duodenal biopsies should be obtained 
to exclude sprue (Fig. 12-33). Small bowel evalua-
tion with capsule endoscopy or deep enteroscopy 
may be appropriate if both EGD and colonoscopy are 
unrevealing (Fig. 12-34).
Tests for occult blood in the stool detect hemo-
globin or the heme moiety and are most sensitive for 
Figure 12-31 
Schatzki’s ring at the gastroesophageal junction.
Figure 12-32 
Eosinophilic esophagitis with multiple circular rings of 
the esophagus creating a corrugated appearance, and 
an impacted grape at the narrowed esophagogastric 
junction. The diagnosis requires biopsy with histologic find­
ing of >15–20 eosinophils/high-power field.
Figure 12-33 
Scalloped duodenal folds in a patient with celiac sprue.
 
CHAPTER 12
Gastrointestinal Endoscopy
105
colonic blood loss, although they will also detect larger 
amounts of upper gastrointestinal bleeding. Patients 
over age 50 with occult blood in normal-appear-
ing stool should undergo colonoscopy to diagnose or 
exclude colorectal neoplasia. The diagnostic yield is 
lower than in ­iron-deficiency anemia. Whether upper 
endoscopy is also indicated depends on the patient’s 
symptoms.
The small intestine may be the source of chronic 
intestinal bleeding, especially if colonoscopy and 
upper endoscopy are not diagnostic. The utility of 
small bowel evaluation varies with the clinical setting 
and is most important in patients in whom bleeding 
causes chronic or recurrent anemia. In contrast to the 
low diagnostic yield of small bowel radiography, posi-
tive findings on capsule endoscopy are seen in 50–70% 
of patients with suspected small-intestinal bleeding. 
The most common finding is mucosal vascular ecta-
sias. Deep enteroscopy may follow capsule endoscopy 
for biopsy of lesions or to provide specific therapy, 
such as argon plasma coagulation of vascular ectasias 
(Fig. 12-35).
Colorectal Cancer Screening
The majority of colon cancers develop from pre­
existing colonic adenomas, and colorectal cancer can 
be largely prevented by the detection and removal of 
adenomatous polyps. The choice of screening strategy 
for an asymptomatic person depends on personal and 
family history. Individuals with inflammatory bowel 
disease, a history of colorectal polyps or cancer, fam-
ily members with adenomatous polyps or cancer, or 
certain familial cancer syndromes (Fig. 12-36) are 
at increased risk for colorectal cancer. An individual 
without these factors is generally considered at average 
risk.
Screening strategies are summarized in Table 12-2. 
While stool tests for occult blood have been shown to 
decrease mortality rate from colorectal cancer, they do 
not detect some cancers and many polyps, and direct 
visualization of the colon is a more effective screening 
Figure 12-34 
Capsule endoscopy images of a mildly scalloped jeju-
nal fold (left) and an ileal tumor (right) in a patient with 
celiac sprue. ( Images courtesy of Dr. Elizabeth Rajan; with 
permission.)
A
B
Figure 12-35 
A. Mid-jejunal vascular ectasia identified by double-balloon endoscopy. B. Ablation of vascular ectasia with argon plasma 
coagulation.
Figure 12-36
Innumerable colon polyps of various sizes in a patient 
with familial adenomatous polyposis syndrome.
SECTION II
Evaluation of the Patient with Alimentary Tract Syndromes
106
Table 12-2
Colorectal Cancer Screening Strategies
Choices/Recommendations
Comments
Average-Risk Patients
Asymptomatic individuals ≥50 years of 
age (≥45 years of age for 
African Americans)
Colonoscopy every 10 yearsa
Preferred cancer prevention strategy
Annual fecal immunochemical test (FIT) 
for occult bleeding, fecal DNA testing 
every 3 years
Cancer detection strategy;  
fails to detect many polyps  
and some cancers
CT colonography every 5 years
Evolving technology (see text)
Flexible sigmoidoscopy every 5 years
Fails to detect proximal colon  
polyps and cancers
Double-contrast barium enema every 5 
years
Less sensitive than colonoscopy or  
CT colonography, misses some  
rectosigmoid polyps and cancers
Personal History of Polyps or Colorectal Cancer
1 or 2 small (<1 cm) adenomas with  
low-grade dysplasia
Repeat colonoscopy in 5 years
Assuming complete polyp resection
3 to 9 adenomas, or any adenoma ≥1 cm 
or containing high-grade dysplasia or  
villus features
Repeat colonoscopy in 3 years;  
subsequent colonoscopy based on 
findings
Assuming complete polyp resection
≥10 adenomas
Colonoscopy in <3 years based on  
clinical judgment
Consider evaluation for FAP or HNPCC; 
see recommendations below
Piecemeal removal of a sessile polyp
Exam in 2 to 6 months to verify  
complete removal
Small (<1 cm) hyperplastic polyps of  
sigmoid and rectum
Colonoscopy in 10 years
>2 serrated polyps, or any serrated or 
hyperplastic polyp ≥1 cm
Repeat colonoscopy in 3 years
Incompletely removed serrated  
polyp ≥1 cm
Exam in 2 to 6 months to verify  
complete removal
Colon cancer
Evaluate entire colon around the time of 
resection, then repeat colonoscopy in 
3 years
Inflammatory Bowel Disease
Long-standing (>8 years) ulcerative  
colitis or Crohn’s colitis, or left-sided 
ulcerative colitis of >15 years’ duration
Colonoscopy with biopsies every 1 to 3 
years
Family History of Polyps or Colorectal Cancer
First-degree relatives with only small  
tubular adenomas
Same as average risk
Single first-degree relative with CRC or 
advanced adenoma at age ≥60 years
Same as average risk
Single first-degree relative with CRC or 
advanced adenoma at age <60 years,  
OR two first-degree relatives with  
CRC or advanced adenomas at any age
Colonoscopy every 5 years beginning 
at age 40 years or 10 years younger 
than age at diagnosis of the youngest 
affected relative
FAP
Sigmoidoscopy or colonoscopy annually, 
beginning at age 10–12 years
Consider genetic counseling and  
testing
HNPCC
Colonoscopy every 2 years beginning 
at age 20–25 years until age 40, then 
annually thereafter
Consider histologic evaluation for  
microsatellite instability in tumor 
specimens of patients who meet 
Bethesda criteria; consider genetic 
counseling and testing
aAssumes good colonic preparation and complete exam to cecum.
Abbreviations: CRC, colorectal cancer; FAP, familial adenomatous polyposis; HNPCC, hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer.
Source: Adapted from SJ Winawer et al: Gastroenterology 130:1872, 2006 and B Levin et al: CA Cancer J Clin 58:130, 2008.
 
CHAPTER 12
Gastrointestinal Endoscopy
107
strategy. Either sigmoidoscopy or colonoscopy may be 
used for cancer screening in asymptomatic average-risk 
individuals. The use of sigmoidoscopy was based on the 
historical finding that the majority of colorectal cancers 
occurred in the rectum and left colon, and that patients 
with right-sided colon cancers had left-sided polyps. 
Over the past several decades, however, the distribution 
of colon cancers has changed, with proportionally fewer 
rectal and left-sided cancers than in the past. Large 
studies of colonoscopy for screening of average-risk 
individuals show that cancers are roughly equally dis-
tributed between left and right colon and half of 
patients with right-sided lesions have no polyps in the 
left colon. Visualization of the entire colon thus appears 
to be the optimal strategy for colorectal cancer screen-
ing and prevention.
Virtual colonoscopy (VC) is a radiologic technique 
that images the colon with CT following rectal insuf-
flation of the colonic lumen. Computer render-
ing of CT images generates an electronic display of 
a virtual “flight” along the colonic lumen, simulating 
colonoscopy (Fig. 12-37). Comparative studies of 
virtual and routine colonoscopy have shown conflict-
ing results, but technical refinements have improved 
the performance characteristics of VC. The use of 
VC for colorectal cancer screening may become more 
widespread in the future, particularly at institutions 
with demonstrated skill with this technique. Find-
ings detected during virtual colonoscopy often require 
subsequent conventional colonoscopy for confirma-
tion and treatment.
Diarrhea
Most cases of diarrhea are acute, self-limited, and due 
to infections or medication. Chronic diarrhea (lasting 
>6 weeks) is more often due to a primary inflamma-
tory, malabsorptive, or motility disorder; is less likely 
to resolve spontaneously; and generally requires diag-
nostic evaluation. Patients with chronic diarrhea or 
severe, unexplained acute diarrhea often undergo 
endoscopy if stool tests for pathogens are unrevealing. 
The choice of endoscopic testing depends on the clini-
cal setting.
Patients with colonic symptoms and findings such 
as bloody diarrhea, tenesmus, fever, or leukocytes in 
stool generally undergo sigmoidoscopy or colonos-
copy to assess for colitis (Fig. 12-4). Sigmoidoscopy is 
an appropriate initial test in most patients. Conversely, 
patients with symptoms and findings suggesting small-
bowel disease, such as large-volume watery stools, 
substantial weight loss, and malabsorption of iron, cal-
cium, or fat may undergo upper endoscopy with duo-
denal aspirates for assessment of bacterial overgrowth 
and biopsies for assessment of mucosal diseases, such as 
celiac sprue.
Many patients with chronic diarrhea do not fit either 
of these patterns. In the setting of a long-standing his-
tory of alternating constipation and diarrhea dating to 
early adulthood, without findings such as blood in the 
stool or anemia, a diagnosis of irritable bowel syndrome 
may be made without direct visualization of the bowel. 
Steatorrhea and upper abdominal pain may prompt 
evaluation of the pancreas rather than the gut. Patients 
whose chronic diarrhea is not easily categorized often 
undergo initial colonoscopy to examine the entire colon 
and terminal ileum for inflammatory or neoplastic 
­disease (Fig. 12-38).
Figure 12-38 
Ulcerated ileal carcinoid tumor.
Figure 12-37 
Virtual colonoscopy image of a colon polyp (arrow). 
(Image courtesy of Dr. Jeff Fidler; with permission.)
SECTION II
Evaluation of the Patient with Alimentary Tract Syndromes
108
Minor Hematochezia
Bright red blood passed with or on formed brown 
stool usually has a rectal, anal, or distal sigmoid source 
(Fig. 12-39). Patients with even trivial amounts of 
hematochezia should be investigated with flexible sig-
moidoscopy and anoscopy to exclude polyps or cancers 
in the distal colon. Patients reporting red blood on the 
toilet tissue only, without blood in the toilet or on the 
stool, are generally bleeding from a lesion in the anal 
canal. Careful external inspection, digital examination, 
and proctoscopy with anoscopy are sufficient for diag-
nosis in most cases.
Pancreatitis
About 20% of patients with pancreatitis have no identi-
fied cause after routine clinical investigation (including a 
review of medication and alcohol use, measurement of 
serum triglyceride and calcium levels, abdominal ultra-
sonography, and CT). Endoscopic assessment leads to a 
specific diagnosis in the majority of such patients, often 
altering clinical management. Endoscopic investigation 
is particularly appropriate if the patient has had more 
than one episode of pancreatitis.
Microlithiasis, or the presence of microscopic crys-
tals in bile, is a leading cause of previously unexplained 
acute pancreatitis and is sometimes seen during abdomi-
nal ultrasonography as layering sludge or flecks of float-
ing, echogenic material in the gallbladder. Gallbladder 
bile can be obtained for microscopic analysis by admin-
istering a cholecystokinin analogue during endoscopy, 
causing contraction of the gallbladder. Bile is suctioned 
from the duodenum as it drains from the papilla, and 
the darkest fraction is examined for cholesterol crystals 
or bilirubinate granules. The combination of EUS of 
the gallbladder and bile microscopy is probably the most 
sensitive means of diagnosing microlithiasis.
Previously undetected chronic pancreatitis, pan-
creatic malignancy, or pancreas divisum may be diag-
nosed by either ERCP or EUS. Sphincter of Oddi 
dysfunction or stenosis is a potential cause for pancre-
atitis and can be diagnosed by manometric studies per-
formed during ERCP. Autoimmune pancreatitis may 
require EUS-guided pancreatic biopsy for histologic 
diagnosis.
Severe pancreatitis often results in pancreatic fluid 
collections. Both pseudocysts and areas of organized 
pancreatic necrosis can be drained into the stomach 
or duodenum endoscopically, using transpapillary and 
transmural endoscopic techniques. Pancreatic necrosis 
can be treated by direct endoscopic necrosectomy.
Cancer Staging
Local staging of esophageal, gastric, pancreatic, bile 
duct, and rectal cancers can be obtained with EUS 
(Fig. 12-14). EUS with fine-needle aspiration (Fig. 12-15) 
currently provides the most accurate preoperative assess-
ment of local tumor and nodal staging, but it does not 
detect most distant metastases. Details of the local tumor 
stage can guide treatment decisions including resectabil-
ity and need for neoadjuvant therapy. EUS with trans-
esophageal needle biopsy may also be used to assess the 
presence of non-small cell lung cancer in mediastinal 
nodes.
Open-Access Endoscopy
Direct scheduling of endoscopic procedures by primary 
care physicians without preceding gastroenterology 
consultation, or open-access endoscopy, is common. When 
the indications for endoscopy are clear-cut and appro-
priate, the procedural risks are low, and the patient 
understands what to expect, open-access endoscopy 
streamlines patient care and decreases costs.
Patients referred for open-access endoscopy should 
have a recent history, physical examination, and medi-
cation review. A copy of such an evaluation should 
be available when the patient comes to the endoscopy 
suite. Patients with unstable cardiovascular or respi-
ratory conditions should not be referred directly for 
open-access endoscopy. Patients with particular con-
ditions and undergoing certain procedures should be 
prescribed prophylactic antibiotics prior to endoscopy 
(Table 12-1). In addition, patients taking anticoagulants 
Figure 12-39 
Internal hemorrhoids with bleeding (arrow) as seen on a 
retroflexed view of the rectum.
 
CHAPTER 12
Gastrointestinal Endoscopy
109
and/or antiplatelet drugs may require adjustment of 
these agents before endoscopy based on the procedure 
risk for bleeding and condition risk for a thrombo­
embolic event (Figs. 12-40 and 12-41). Common 
indications for open-access EGD include dyspepsia 
resistant to a trial of appropriate therapy; dysphagia; gas-
trointestinal bleeding; and persistent anorexia or early 
satiety. Open-access colonoscopy is often requested in 
men or postmenopausal women with iron-deficiency 
anemia, in patients over age 50 with occult blood in 
the stool, in patients with a previous history of colorec-
tal adenomatous polyps or cancer, and for colorectal 
cancer screening. Flexible sigmoidoscopy is commonly 
performed as an open-access procedure.
Aspirin/NSAID
Low
bleeding risk
Continue
Consider
continuing
Continue
High
bleeding risk
Low
thromboembolic
risk
High
thromboembolic
risk
Warfarin
Low
bleeding risk
Continue
High
bleeding risk
Thienopyridines (e.g., clopidogrel)
Low
bleeding risk
Continue
Discontinue
7–10 days prior
Consider
discontinuing
7–10 days prior
High
bleeding risk
Low
thromboembolic
risk
High
thromboembolic risk
In patients with high thromboembolic
risk on thienopyridines undergoing
elective procedures with high risk for
bleeding, consider postponing
procedure to time when
thromboembolic risk is low
In patients on dual antiplatelet therapy or
monotherapy with a thienopyridine, consider
continuing aspirin (dual therapy patients) or
starting aspirin (thienopyridine monotherapy
patients) in the periendoscopic period
Discontinue
In patients with high
thromboembolic
risk, consider
bridge therapy
MANAGEMENT OF ANTITHROMBOTIC AGENTS FOR ELECTIVE ENDOSCOPIC PROCEDURES
Figure 12-40 
Management of antithrombotic agents for elective endo-
scopic procedures. Higher-risk procedures for bleeding: 
Polypectomy, biliary or pancreatic sphincterotomy, thera­
peutic balloon-assisted enteroscopy, PEG placement, pneu­
matic or bougie dilatation, treatment of varices, endoscopic 
hemostasis, tumor ablation by any technique, cystogastros­
tomy, EUS with FNA. Low-risk procedures for bleeding: Diag­
nostic (EGD, colonoscopy, flexible sigmoidoscopy) including 
biopsy, ERCP without sphincterotomy, EUS without FNA, 
enteroscopy and diagnostic balloon-assisted enteroscopy, cap­
sule endoscopy, enteral stent deployment (without dilatation). 
Higher-risk conditions for thromboembolic event: Atrial fibrilla­
tion associated with valvular heart disease, prosthetic valves, 
active congestive heart failure, left ventricular ejection fraction 
<35%, a history of a thromboembolic event, hypertension, 
diabetes mellitus, or age >75 years; mechanical valve in the 
mitral position; mechanical valve in any position and previous 
thromboembolic event; recently (<1 year) placed coronary 
stent; acute coronary syndrome; non-stented percutane­
ous coronary intervention after myocardial infarction. Low-
risk conditions for thromboembolic event: Uncomplicated or 
paroxysmal nonvalvular atrial fibrillation; bioprosthetic valve; 
mechanical valve in the aortic position; deep vein thrombo­
sis. (Adapted from MA Anderson et al: Gastrointest Endosc 
70:1060, 2009; with permission from Elsevier.)
SECTION II
Evaluation of the Patient with Alimentary Tract Syndromes
110
Aspirin/NSAID
Low
bleeding risk
Continue
Consider
continuing
Continue
High
bleeding risk
Low
thromboembolic
risk
High
thromboembolic
risk
Warfarin
Low
bleeding risk
Continue
High
bleeding risk
Discontinue
In patients with high
thromboembolic
risk, consider
bridge therapy
Thienopyridines (e.g., clopidogrel)
Low
bleeding risk
Continue
Discontinue
Consider
discontinuing
High
bleeding risk
Low
thromboembolic
risk
High
thromboembolic
risk
If unable to delay procedure for 7–10 days, hold as many as possible up to 7–10 days
In patients on dual antiplatelet therapy or monotherapy with a thienopyridine, consider
continuing aspirin (dual therapy patients) or starting aspirin (thienopyridine monotherapy
patients) in the periendoscopic period
MANAGEMENT OF ANTITHROMBOTIC AGENTS FOR URGENT ENDOSCOPIC PROCEDURES
When patients are referred for open-access colonos-
copy, the primary care provider may need to choose a 
colonic preparation. Commonly used oral preparations 
include polyethylene glycol lavage solution, with or 
without citric acid. A “split-dose” regimen improves 
the quality of colonic preparation. Sodium phosphate 
purgatives may cause fluid and electrolyte abnormalities 
and renal toxicity, especially in patients with renal fail-
ure or congestive heart failure and those over 70 years 
of age.
Figure 12-41 
Management of antithrombotic agents for urgent endo-
scopic procedures. Higher-risk procedures for bleeding: 
Polypectomy, biliary or pancreatic sphincterotomy, thera­
peutic balloon-assisted entero-scopy, PEG placement, 
pneumatic or bougie dilatation, treatment of varices, endo­
scopic hemostasis, tumor ablation by any technique, cys­
togastrostomy, EUS with FNA. Low-risk procedures for 
bleeding: Diagnostic (EGD, colonoscopy, flexible sigmoidos­
copy) including biopsy, ERCP without sphincterotomy, EUS 
without FNA, enteroscopy and diagnostic balloon-assisted 
enteroscopy, capsule endoscopy, enteral stent deployment 
(without dilatation). Higher-risk conditions for thromboem­
bolic event: Atrail fibrillation associated with valvular heart 
­disease, prosthetic valves, active congestive heart failure, 
left ventricular ejection fraction <35%, a history of a throm­
boembolic event, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, or age 
>75 years; mechanical valve in the mitral position; mechani­
cal valve in any position and previous thromboembolic event; 
recently (>1 year) placed coronary stent; acute coronary 
syndrome; non-stented percutaneous coronary intervention 
after myocardial infarction. Low-risk conditions for thrombo­
embolic event: Uncomplicated or paroxysmal nonvalvular 
atrial fibrillation; bioprosthetic valve; mechanical valve in the 
aortic position, deep vein thrombosis. (Adapted from MA 
Anderson et al: Gastrointest Endosc 70:1060, 2009; with per-
mission from Elsevier.)
Disorders of the  
Alimentary Tract
SECTION III
 Peter J. Kahrilas  I   ikuo hirano 
112
 esophageal structure 
anD function 
 The esophagus is a hollow muscular tube coursing 
through the posterior mediastinum joining the hypo-
pharynx to the stomach with a sphincter at each end. 
It functions to transport food and fl uid between these 
ends, otherwise remaining empty. The physiology of 
swallowing, esophageal motility, and oral and pha-
ryngeal dysphagia are described in  Chap. 4 . Esopha-
geal diseases can be manifested by impaired function 
or pain. Key functional impairments are swallowing 
disorders and excessive gastroesophageal refl ux. Pain, 
sometimes indistinguishable from cardiac chest pain, 
can result from infl ammation, infection, dysmotility, or 
neoplasm. 
 sYmptoms of esophageal Disease 
 The clinical history remains central to the evalua-
tion of esophageal symptoms. A thoughtfully obtained 
history will often expedite management. Important 
details include weight gain or loss, gastrointestinal 
bleeding, dietary habits including the timing of meals, 
smoking, and alcohol consumption. The major esopha-
geal symptoms are heartburn, regurgitation, chest pain, 
dysphagia, odynophagia, and globus sensation. 
 Heartburn (pyrosis), the most common esopha-
geal symptom, is characterized by a discomfort or 
burning sensation behind the sternum that arises 
from the epigastrium and may radiate toward the 
neck. Heartburn is an intermittent symptom, most 
commonly experienced after eating, during exer-
cise, and while lying recumbent. The discomfort 
is relieved with drinking water or antacid but can 
occur frequently and interfere with normal activi-
ties including sleep. The association between heart-
burn and gastroesophageal refl ux disease (GERD) 
 DISEASES OF THE ESOPHAGUS 
 chapter 13 
is so strong that empirical therapy for GERD has 
become accepted management. However, the term 
“heartburn” is often misused and/or referred to with 
other terms such as “indigestion” or “repeating,” 
making it important to clarify the intended meaning. 
Regurgitation is the effortless return of food or fl uid 
into the pharynx without nausea or retching. Patients 
report a sour or burning fl uid in the throat or mouth 
that may also contain undigested food particles. Bend-
ing, belching, or maneuvers that increase intraabdomi-
nal pressure can provoke regurgitation. A clinician 
needs to discriminate among regurgitation, vomit-
ing, and rumination.  Vomiting is preceded by nausea 
and accompanied by retching.  Rumination is a behav-
ior in which recently swallowed food is regurgitated 
and then reswallowed repetitively for up to an hour. 
Although there is some linkage between rumination 
and mental defi ciency, the behavior is also exhibited 
by unimpaired individuals who sometimes even fi nd it 
pleasurable. 
Chest pain is a common esophageal symptom with 
characteristics similar to cardiac pain, sometimes mak-
ing this distinction diffi cult. Esophageal pain is usu-
ally experienced as a pressure type sensation in the 
mid chest, radiating to the mid back, arms, or jaws. 
The similarity to cardiac pain is likely because the two 
organs share a nerve plexus and the nerve endings in 
the esophageal wall have poor discriminative ability 
among stimuli. Esophageal distention or even chemo-
stimulation (e.g., with acid) will often be perceived as 
chest pain. Gastroesophageal refl ux is the most common 
cause of esophageal chest pain. 
 Esophageal  dysphagia (see also  Chap. 4 ) is often 
described as a feeling of food “sticking” or even lodg-
ing in the chest. Important distinctions are between 
uniquely solid food dysphagia as opposed to liquid and 
solid, episodic versus constant dysphagia, and progres-
sive versus static dysphagia. If the dysphagia is for liq-
uids as well as solid food, it suggests a motility disorder 
 
CHAPTER 13
Diseases of the Esophagus
113
such as achalasia. Conversely, uniquely solid food dys-
phagia is suggestive of a stricture, ring, or tumor. Of 
note, a patient’s localization of food hang-up in the 
esophagus is notoriously imprecise. Approximately 
30% of distal esophageal obstructions are perceived as 
cervical dysphagia. In such instances, the absence of 
concomitant symptoms generally associated with oro-
pharyngeal dysphagia such as aspiration, nasopha-
ryngeal regurgitation, cough, drooling, or obvious 
neuromuscular compromise should suggest an esopha-
geal etiology.
Odynophagia is pain either caused by or exacerbated 
by swallowing. Odynophagia is more common with 
pill or infectious esophagitis than with reflux esophagi-
tis and should prompt a search for these entities. When 
odynophagia does occur in GERD, it is likely related to 
an esophageal ulcer or deep erosion.
Globus sensation, alternatively labeled “globus hystericus,” 
is the perception of a lump or fullness in the throat that is 
felt irrespective of swallowing. Although such patients are 
frequently referred for an evaluation of dysphagia, glo-
bus sensation is often relieved by the act of swallowing. As 
implied by its alternative name (globus hystericus), globus 
sensation often occurs in the setting of anxiety or obsessive-
compulsive disorders. Clinical experience teaches that it is 
often attributable to GERD.
Water brash is excessive salivation resulting from a 
vagal reflex triggered by acidification of the esopha-
geal mucosa. This is not a common symptom. Afflicted 
individuals will describe the unpleasant sensation of the 
mouth rapidly filling with salty thin fluid, often in the 
setting of concomitant heartburn.
Diagnostic Studies
Endoscopy
Endoscopy, also known as esophagogastroduodeno­
scopy (EGD) is the best test for the evaluation of the 
proximal gastrointestinal tract. Modern instruments 
produce high-quality color images of the esophageal, 
gastric, and duodenal lumen. Endoscopes also have an 
instrumentation channel through which biopsy for-
ceps, sclerotherapy catheters, balloon dilators, or cautery 
devices can be utilized. The key advantages of endos-
copy over barium radiography are: (1) increased sen-
sitivity for the detection of mucosal lesions, (2) vastly 
increased sensitivity for the detection of abnormali-
ties mainly identifiable by an abnormal color such as 
Barrett’s metaplasia, (3) the ability to obtain biopsy 
specimens for histologic examination of suspected 
abnormalities, and (4) the ability to dilate strictures dur-
ing the examination. The main disadvantage of endos-
copy is that it usually necessitates the use of conscious 
sedation with medicines such as midazolam (Versed), 
meperidine (Demerol), or fentanyl.
Radiography
Contrast radiography of the esophagus, stomach, and 
duodenum can demonstrate barium reflux, hiatal hernia, 
mucosal granularity, erosions, ulcerations, and strictures. 
The sensitivity of radiography compared with endos-
copy for detecting esophagitis reportedly ranges from 
22–95%, with higher grades of esophagitis (i.e., ulcer-
ation or stricture) exhibiting greater detection rates. 
Conversely, the sensitivity of barium radiography for 
detecting esophageal strictures is greater than that of 
endoscopy, especially when the study is done in con-
junction with barium-soaked bread or a 13-mm bar-
ium tablet. Barium studies also provide an assessment 
of esophageal function and morphology that may be 
undetected on endoscopy. Hypopharyngeal pathology 
and disorders of the cricopharyngeal muscle are better 
appreciated on radiographic examination, particularly 
with videofluoroscopic recording. The major short-
coming of barium radiography is that it rarely obviates 
the need for endoscopy. Either a positive or a nega-
tive study is usually followed by an endoscopic evalu-
ation either to clarify findings in the case of a positive 
examination or to add a level of certainty in the case of 
a negative one.
Endoscopic Ultrasound
Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) instruments combine 
an endoscope with an ultrasound transducer to cre-
ate a transmural image of the tissue surrounding the 
endoscope tip. The key advantage of EUS over alter-
native radiologic imaging techniques is much greater 
resolution attributable to the proximity of the ultra-
sound transducer to the area being examined. Available 
devices can provide either radial imaging (360-degree, 
cross-sectional) or a curved linear image that can guide 
fine-needle aspiration of imaged structures such as 
lymph nodes or tumors. Major esophageal applications 
of EUS are to stage esophageal cancer, to evaluate dys-
plasia in Barrett’s esophagus, and to assess submucosal 
tumors.
Esophageal Manometry
Esophageal manometry, or motility testing, entails posi-
tioning a pressure sensing catheter within the esopha-
gus and then observing the contractility following test 
swallows. The upper and lower esophageal sphincters 
appear as zones of high pressure that relax on swal-
lowing while the intersphincteric esophagus exhibits 
peristaltic contractions. Manometry is used to diagnose 
SECTION III
Disorders of the Alimentary Tract
114
motility disorders (achalasia, diffuse esophageal spasm) 
and to assess peristaltic integrity prior to the surgery for 
reflux disease. Technological advances have rebranded 
esophageal manometry as high-resolution esophageal 
pressure topography (Fig. 13-1). Manometry can also 
be combined with intraluminal impedance monitoring. 
Impedance recordings utilize a catheter with a series of 
paired electrodes. Esophageal luminal contents in con-
tact with the electrodes decrease (liquid) or increase (air) 
the impedance signal allowing detection of anterograde 
or retrograde transit of esophageal bolus transit.
Reflux Testing
GERD is often diagnosed in the absence of endoscopic 
esophagitis, which would otherwise define the disease. 
This occurs in the settings of partially treated disease, 
an abnormally sensitive esophageal mucosa, or with-
out obvious explanation. In such instances, reflux test-
ing can demonstrate excessive esophageal exposure to 
refluxed gastric juice, the physiologic abnormality of 
GERD. This can be done by ambulatory 24- to 48-h 
esophageal pH recording using either a wireless pH-
sensitive transmitter that is anchored to the esophageal 
mucosa or with a transnasally positioned wire electrode 
with the tip stationed in the distal esophagus. Either 
way, the outcome is expressed as the percentage of the 
day that the pH was less than 4 (indicative of recent 
acid reflux), with values exceeding 5% indicative of 
GERD. Reflux testing is useful with atypical symptoms 
or an inexplicably poor response to therapy. Intralumi-
nal impedance monitoring can be added to pH moni-
toring to detect reflux events irrespective of whether or 
not they are acidic, potentially increasing the sensitivity 
of the study.
Structural Disorders
Hiatal Hernia
Hiatus hernia is a herniation of viscera, most commonly 
the stomach, into the mediastinum through the esopha-
geal hiatus of the diaphragm. Four types of hiatus her-
nia are distinguished with type I, or sliding hiatal hernia 
comprising at least 95% of the overall total. A sliding 
hiatal hernia is one in which the gastroesophageal junc-
tion and gastric cardia slide upward as a result of weak-
ening of the phrenoesophageal ligament attaching the 
gastroesophageal junction to the diaphragm at the hiatus. 
True to its name, sliding hernias enlarge with increased 
intraabdominal pressure, swallowing, and respiration. 
The incidence of sliding hernias increases with age 
and conceptually, results from wear and tear: increased 
intraabdominal pressure from abdominal obesity, preg-
nancy, etc., and hereditary factors predisposing to the 
condition. The main significance of sliding hernias is the 
propensity of affected individuals to have GERD.
Types II, III, and IV hiatal hernias are all subtypes of 
paraesophageal hernia in which the herniation into the 
mediastinum includes a visceral structure other than the 
gastric cardia. With type II and III paraesophageal hernias, 
the gastric fundus also herniates with the distinction being 
that in type II, the gastroesophageal junction remains 
fixed at the hiatus, while type III is a mixed sliding/ 
paraesophageal hernia. With type IV hiatal hernias, vis-
cera other than the stomach herniate into the mediasti-
num, most commonly the colon. With type II and III 
paraesophageal hernias, the stomach inverts as it herniates 
and large paraesophageal hernias can lead to an upside 
down stomach, gastric volvulus, and even strangulation 
of the stomach. Because of this risk, surgical repair is 
often advocated for large paraesophageal hernias.
Figure 13-1 
High-resolution esophageal pressure topography (right) 
and conventional manometry (left) of a normal swallow. 
LES, lower esophageal sphincter; E, esophageal body; 
UES, upper esophageal sphincter.
 
CHAPTER 13
Diseases of the Esophagus
115
Rings and Webs
A lower esophageal mucosal ring, also called a B ring, is 
a thin membranous narrowing at the squamocolumnar 
mucosal junction (Fig. 13-2). Its origin is unknown, 
but B rings are demonstrable in about 15% of people 
and are usually asymptomatic. When the lumen diam-
eter is less than 13 mm, distal rings are usually associ-
ated with episodic solid food dysphagia and are called 
Schatzki’s rings. Patients typically present older than 
40 years, consistent with an acquired rather than con-
genital origin. Schatzki’s ring is one of the most com-
mon causes of intermittent food impaction, also known 
as “steakhouse syndrome” as meat is a typical instigator. 
Symptomatic rings are easily treated by dilatation.
Web-like constrictions higher in the esophagus can 
be of congenital or inflammatory origin. Asymptomatic 
cervical esophageal webs are demonstrated in about 10% 
of people and typically originate along the anterior aspect 
of the esophagus. When circumferential, they can cause 
intermittent dysphagia to solids similar to Schatzki’s rings 
and are similarly treated with dilatation. The combi-
nation of symptomatic proximal esophageal webs and 
iron-deficiency anemia in middle-aged women consti-
tutes Plummer-Vinson syndrome.
Diverticula
Esophageal diverticula are categorized by location with 
the most common being epiphrenic, hypopharyngeal 
(Zenker’s), and mid esophageal. Epiphrenic and Zenker’s 
diverticula are false diverticula involving herniation of 
the mucosa and submucosa through the muscular layer 
of the esophagus. These lesions result from increased 
intraluminal pressure associated with distal obstruction. 
In the case of Zenker’s, the obstruction is a stenotic 
cricopharyngeus muscle (upper esophageal sphincter) 
and the hypopharyngeal herniation most commonly 
occurs in an area of natural weakness known as Killian’s 
triangle (Fig. 13-3). Small Zenker’s diverticula are 
usually asymptomatic, but when they enlarge sufficiently 
to retain food and saliva they can be associated with dys-
phagia, halitosis, and aspiration. Treatment is by surgi-
cal diverticulectomy and cricopharyngeal myotomy or a 
Sliding hiatal
hernia
Rugal folds
traversing hiatus
Diaphragmatic
impression
B ring
squamo-columnar
junction
A ring
Phrenic
ampulla
Esophageal
vestibule
Tubular
esophagus
Figure 13-2 
Radiographic anatomy of the gastroesophageal junction.
A
B
C
Figure 13-3 
Examples of small (left) and large (middle, right) Zenker’s 
diverticulum arising from Killian’s triangle in the distal 
hypopharynx. Smaller diverticula are evident only during the 
swallow, whereas larger ones retain food and fluid.
SECTION III
Disorders of the Alimentary Tract
116
marsupialization procedure in which an endoscopic sta-
pling device is used to divide the cricopharyngeus.
Epiphrenic diverticula are usually associated with 
achalasia or a distal esophageal stricture. Mid-esophageal 
diverticula may be caused by traction from adjacent 
inflammation (classically tuberculosis) in which case 
they are true diverticula involving all layers of the 
esophageal wall, or by pulsion associated with esopha-
geal motor disorders. Mid-esophageal and epiphrenic 
diverticula are usually asymptomatic until they enlarge 
sufficiently to retain food and cause dysphagia and 
regurgitation. Symptoms attributable to the diverticula 
tend to correlate more with the underlying esophageal 
disorder than the size of the diverticula. Large diver-
ticula can be removed surgically, usually in conjunc-
tion with a myotomy if the underlying cause is achala-
sia. Diffuse intramural esophageal diverticulosis is a rare 
entity that results from dilatation of the excretory ducts 
of submucosal esophageal glands (Fig. 13-4). Esopha-
geal candidiasis and proximal esophageal strictures are 
commonly found in association with this disorder.
Tumors
Esophageal cancer occurs in about 4.5:100,000 people 
in the United States with the associated mortality being 
only slightly less at 4.4:100,000. It is about 10 times less 
common than colorectal cancer but kills about one-
quarter as many patients. These statistics emphasize both 
the rarity and lethality of esophageal cancer. One nota-
ble trend is the shift of dominant esophageal cancer type 
from squamous cell to adenocarcinoma, strongly linked 
to reflux disease and Barrett’s metaplasia. Other distinc-
tions between cell types are the predilection for adeno-
carcinoma to affect white males in the distal esophagus 
and squamous cell to affect black males in the more 
proximal esophagus with the added risk factors of smok-
ing, alcohol consumption, caustic injury, and human 
papilloma virus infection (Chap. 49).
The typical presentation of esophageal cancer is of 
progressive solid food dysphagia and weight loss. Asso-
ciated symptoms may include odynophagia, iron defi-
ciency, and, with mid-esophageal tumors, hoarseness 
from left recurrent laryngeal nerve injury. Generally, 
these are indications of locally invasive or even meta-
static disease manifest by tracheoesophageal fistulas, 
and vocal cord paralysis. Even when detected as a small 
lesion, esophageal cancer has poor survival because of 
the abundant esophageal lymphatics leading to regional 
lymph node metastases.
Benign esophageal tumors are uncommon and usu-
ally discovered incidentally. In decreasing frequency of 
occurrence, cell types include leiomyomas, fibrovascu-
lar polyps, squamous papillomas, granular cell, lipomas, 
neurofibromas, and inflammatory fibroid polyps. These 
generally become symptomatic only when they are 
associated with dysphagia and merit removal only under 
the same circumstances.
Congenital Anomalies
The most common congenital esophageal anomaly is 
esophageal atresia, occurring in about 1 in 5000 live 
births. Atresia can occur in several permutations, the 
common denominator being developmental failure 
of fusion between the proximal and distal esophagus 
associated with a tracheoesophageal fistula, most com-
monly with the distal segment excluded. Alternatively, 
there can be an H-type configuration in which esoph-
ageal fusion has occurred, but with a tracheoesopha-
geal fistula. Esophageal atresia is usually recognized and 
corrected surgically within the first few days of life. 
Later life complications include dysphagia from anasto-
motic strictures or absent peristalsis and reflux, which 
can be severe. Less common developmental anoma-
lies include congenital esophageal stenosis, webs, and 
duplications.
Figure 13-4 
Intramural esophageal pseudodiverticulosis associated 
with chronic obstruction. Invaginations of contrast into the 
esophageal wall outline deep esophageal glands.
 
CHAPTER 13
Diseases of the Esophagus
117
Dysphagia can also result from congenital abnor-
malities that cause extrinsic compression of the esopha-
gus. In dysphagia lusoria, the esophagus is compressed 
by an aberrant right subclavian artery arising from the 
descending aorta and passing behind the esophagus. 
Alternatively vascular rings may surround and constrict 
the esophagus.
Heterotopic gastric mucosa, also known as an esoph-
ageal inlet patch, is a focus of gastric type epithelium in 
the proximal cervical esophagus; the estimated preva-
lence is 4.5%. The inlet patch is thought to result from 
incomplete replacement of embryonic columnar epi-
thelium with squamous epithelium. The majority of 
patches are asymptomatic, but acid production can 
occur as most contain fundic type gastric epithelium 
with parietal cells.
Esophageal MOTILITY Disorders
Esophageal motility disorders are diseases attributable to 
esophageal neuromuscular dysfunction commonly associ-
ated with dysphagia, chest pain, or heartburn. The major 
entities are achalasia, diffuse esophageal spasm (DES), 
and GERD. Motility disorders can also be secondary to 
broader disease processes as is the case with pseudoachala-
sia, Chagas’ disease, and scleroderma. Not included in this 
discussion are diseases affecting the pharynx and proximal 
esophagus, impairment of which is almost always part of a 
more global neuromuscular disease process.
Achalasia
Achalasia is a rare disease caused by loss of ganglion cells 
within the esophageal myenteric plexus with a popula-
tion incidence of about 1:100,000 and usually presenting 
between age 25 and 60. With long-standing disease, virtual 
aganglionosis is noted. Excitatory (cholinergic) ganglionic 
neurons are variably affected and inhibitory (nitric oxide) 
ganglionic neurons are necessarily involved. Functionally, 
inhibitory neurons mediate deglutitive lower esophageal 
sphincter (LES) relaxation and the sequential propagation 
of peristalsis. Their absence leads to impaired deglutitive 
LES relaxation and absent peristalsis. Increasing evidence 
suggests that the ultimate cause of ganglion cell degen-
eration in achalasia is an autoimmune process attribut-
able to a latent infection with human herpes simplex virus 
1 combined with genetic susceptibility.
Long-standing achalasia is characterized by progres-
sive dilatation and sigmoid deformity of the esophagus 
with hypertrophy of the LES. Clinical manifestations 
may include dysphagia, regurgitation, chest pain, and 
weight loss. Most patients report solid and liquid food 
dysphagia. Regurgitation occurs when food, fluid, and 
secretions are retained in the dilated esophagus. Patients 
with advanced achalasia are at risk for bronchitis, pneu-
monia, or lung abscess from chronic regurgitation and 
aspiration. Chest pain is frequent early in the course 
of achalasia, thought to result from esophageal spasm. 
Patients describe a squeezing, pressure-like retrosternal 
pain, sometimes radiating to the neck, arms, jaw, and 
back. Paradoxically, some patients complain of heart-
burn that may be a chest pain equivalent. Treatment of 
achalasia is less effective in relieving chest pain than it is 
in relieving dysphagia or regurgitation.
The differential diagnosis of achalasia includes DES, 
Chagas’ disease, and pseudoachalasia. Chagas’ disease 
is endemic in areas of central Brazil, Venezuela, and 
northern Argentina, spread by the bite of the reduvid 
(kissing) bug that transmits the protozoan, Trypanosoma 
cruzi. The chronic phase of the disease develops years 
after infection and results from destruction of auto-
nomic ganglion cells throughout the body, includ-
ing the heart, gut, urinary tract, and respiratory tract. 
Tumor infiltration, most commonly seen with car-
cinoma in the gastric fundus or distal esophagus can 
mimic idiopathic achalasia. The resultant “pseudoacha-
lasia” accounts for up to 5% of suspected cases and is 
more likely with advanced age, abrupt onset of symp-
toms (<1 year), and weight loss. Hence, endoscopy 
should be part of the evaluation of achalasia. When the 
clinical suspicion for pseudoachalasia is high and endos-
copy nondiagnostic, CT scanning or endoscopic ultra-
sonography may be of value. Rarely, pseudoachalasia 
can result from a paraneoplastic syndrome with circulat-
ing antineuronal antibodies.
Achalasia is diagnosed by barium swallow x-ray and/
or esophageal manometry; endoscopy has a relatively 
minor role other than to exclude pseudoachalasia. 
The barium swallow x-ray appearance is of a dilated 
esophagus with poor emptying, an air-fluid level, and 
tapering at the LES giving it a beak-like appearance 
(Fig. 13-5). Occasionally, an epiphrenic diverticulum 
is observed. In long-standing achalasia, the esophagus 
may assume a sigmoid configuration. The diagnostic 
criteria for achalasia with esophageal manometry are 
impaired LES relaxation and absent peristalsis. High-
resolution manometry has somewhat advanced this 
diagnosis; three subtypes of achalasia are differentiated 
based on the pattern of pressurization in the nonperi-
staltic esophagus (Fig. 13-6). Because manometry 
identifies early disease before esophageal dilatation and 
food retention, it is the most sensitive diagnostic test.
There is no known way of preventing or reversing 
achalasia. Therapy is directed at reducing LES pressure 
so that gravity and esophageal pressurization promote 
esophageal emptying. Peristalsis rarely, if ever, returns. 
LES pressure can be reduced by pharmacological ther-
apy, forceful dilatation, or surgical myotomy. No large, 
controlled trials of the therapeutic alternatives exist 
and the optimal approach is debated. Pharmacological 
SECTION III
Disorders of the Alimentary Tract
118
therapies are relatively ineffective but are often used 
as temporizing therapies. Nitrates or calcium channel 
blockers are administered before eating, advising cau-
tion because of their effects on blood pressure. Botu-
linum toxin, injected into the LES under endoscopic 
guidance, inhibits acetylcholine release from nerve end-
ings and improves dysphagia in about 66% of cases for 
at least 6 months. Sildenafil, or alternative phosphodies-
terase inhibitors, effectively decrease LES pressure, but 
practicalities limit their clinical use in achalasia.
The only durable therapies for achalasia are pneu-
matic dilatation and Heller myotomy. Pneumatic dila-
tation, with a reported efficacy ranging from 32–98%, 
is an endoscopic technique using a noncompliant, 
cylindrical balloon dilator positioned across the LES 
and inflated to a diameter of 3–4 cm. The major com-
plication is perforation with a reported incidence of 
1–5%. The most common surgical procedure for acha-
lasia is laparoscopic Heller myotomy, usually performed 
in conjunction with an antireflux procedure (partial 
fundoplication); good to excellent results are reported in 
62–100% of cases. Occasionally, patients with advanced 
disease fail to respond to pneumatic dilatation or Heller 
myotomy. In such refractory cases, esophageal resec-
tion with gastric pull-up or interposition of a segment 
of transverse colon may be the only option other than 
gastrostomy feeding.
In untreated or inadequately treated achalasia, esoph-
ageal dilatation predisposes to stasis esophagitis. Pro-
longed stasis esophagitis is the likely explanation for the 
association between achalasia and esophageal squamous 
cell cancer. Tumors develop after years of achalasia, 
usually in the setting of a greatly dilated esophagus with 
the overall squamous cell cancer risk increased 17-fold 
compared to controls.
Diffuse Esophageal Spasm (DES)
DES is manifested by episodes of dysphagia and chest 
pain attributable to abnormal esophageal contractions 
with normal deglutitive LES relaxation. Beyond that, 
there is little consensus. The pathophysiology and nat-
ural history of DES are ill defined. Radiographically, 
A. Classic achalasia
B. Achalasia with compression
C. Spastic achalasia
150
125
100
75
50
25
0
–10
75
70
60
50
40
30
20
15
10
5
0
–5
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
15
10
5
0
–10
–10
mmHg
mmHg
mmHg
0
1
2
3
4
5
Seconds
Seconds
Seconds
6
7
8
9
10
0 Pharynx
5
10
15
20
25
30
35 Stomach
Cm
0 Pharynx
5
10
15
20
25
30
35 Stomach
Cm
0 Pharynx
5
10
15
20
25
30
35 Stomach
Cm
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
10
20
30
40
50
Figure 13-6 
Three subtypes of achalasia: classic (A), with esophageal 
compression (B), and spastic achalasia (C) imaged with 
pressure topography. All are characterized by impaired 
lower esophageal sphincter (LES) relaxation and absent peri-
stalsis. However, classic achalasia has minimal pressurization 
of the esophageal body while substantial fluid pressurization 
is observed in achalasia with esophageal compression and 
spastic esophageal contractions are observed with spastic 
achalasia.
Figure 13-5 
Achalasia with esophageal dilatation, tapering at the 
gastroesophageal junction and an air-fluid level within 
the esophagus. The example on the left shows sigmoid 
deformity with very advanced disease.
 
CHAPTER 13
Diseases of the Esophagus
119
DES has been characterized by tertiary contractions 
or a “corkscrew esophagus” (Fig. 13-7), but in many 
instances these abnormalities are actually indicative of 
achalasia. Manometrically, a variety of defining fea-
tures have been proposed including uncoordinated 
(“spastic”) activity in the distal esophagus, spontane-
ous and repetitive contractions, or high amplitude and 
prolonged contractions. Greatest consensus exists with 
the concept that simultaneous contractions define DES. 
All of these definitions lead to patients with a variety 
of disorders being diagnosed as DES. In fact, high- 
resolution manometry suggests that DES, when defined 
in a restrictive fashion (Fig. 13-8), is actually much less 
common than achalasia and suspected cases are often 
incorrectly categorized achalasia.
Esophageal chest pain closely mimics angina pecto-
ris. Features suggesting esophageal pain include pain 
that is nonexertional, prolonged, interrupts sleep, is 
meal-related, is relieved with antacids, and is accompa-
nied by heartburn, dysphagia, or regurgitation. How-
ever, all of these features exhibit overlap with cardiac 
pain, which still must be the primary consideration. 
Furthermore, even within the spectrum of esophageal 
diseases, both chest pain and dysphagia are also char-
acteristic of peptic or infectious esophagitis. Only after 
these more common entities have been excluded by 
evaluation and/or treatment should a diagnosis of DES 
be pursued.
Although the defining criteria are currently disputed, 
DES is diagnosed by manometry. Endoscopy is useful to 
identify alternative structural and inflammatory lesions 
that may cause chest pain. Radiographically, a “cork-
screw esophagus,” “rosary bead esophagus,” pseudodi-
verticula, or curling can be indicative of DES, but these 
are also found with spastic achalasia. Given these vaga-
ries of defining DES, and the resultant heterogeneity of 
patients identified for inclusion in therapeutic trials, it is 
not surprising that trial results have been disappointing. 
Only small, uncontrolled trials exist, reporting response 
to nitrates, calcium channel blockers, hydralazine, botu-
linum toxin, and anxiolytics. The only controlled trial 
showing efficacy was with an anxiolytic. Surgical ther-
apy (long myotomy or even esophagectomy) should be 
considered only with severe weight loss or unbearable 
pain. These indications are extremely rare.
Figure 13-7 
Diffuse esophageal spasm. The characteristic “corkscrew” 
esophagus results from spastic contraction of the circular 
muscle in the esophageal wall; more precisely, this is actually 
a helical array of muscle. These findings are also seen with 
spastic achalasia.
mmHg
150
100
50
0
Spastic nutcracker
Diffuse esophageal spasm
0
5
10
Time (sec)
Propagated contraction
Non-propagated contraction
15
20
Figure 13-8 
Esophageal pressure topography of the two major variants 
of esophageal spasm: spastic nutcracker (left) and diffuse 
esophageal spasm (right). Spastic nutcracker is defined by the 
extraordinarily vigorous and repetitive contractions with normal 
peristaltic onset. Diffuse esophageal spasm is similar but primarily 
defined by a rapid propagation at the onset of the contraction.
SECTION III
Disorders of the Alimentary Tract
120
Nonspecific Manometric Findings
Manometric studies done to evaluate chest pain and/or 
dysphagia often report minor abnormalities (hyperten-
sive or hypotensive peristalsis, hypertensive LES, etc.) 
that are insufficient to diagnose either achalasia or DES. 
These findings are of unclear significance. Reflux and 
psychiatric diagnoses, particularly anxiety and depres-
sion, are common among such individuals. A lower 
visceral pain threshold and symptoms of irritable bowel 
syndrome are noted in more than half of such patients. 
Consequently, therapy for these individuals should 
either target the most common esophageal disorder, 
GERD, or more global conditions such as depression or 
somatization neurosis that are found to be coexistent.
Gastroesophageal Reflux 
Disease (GERD)
The current conception of GERD is to encompass a 
family of conditions with the commonality that they are 
caused by the gastroesophageal reflux resulting in either 
troublesome symptoms or an array of potential esopha-
geal and extraesophageal manifestations. It is estimated 
that 15% of adults in the United States are affected by 
GERD, although such estimates are based only on self-
reported chronic heartburn. With respect to the esopha-
gus, the spectrum of injury includes esophagitis, stricture, 
Barrett’s esophagus, and adenocarcinoma (Fig. 13-9). 
Of particular concern is the rising incidence of esopha-
geal adenocarcinoma, an epidemiologic trend that par-
allels the increasing incidence of GERD. There were 
about 8000 incident cases of esophageal adenocarci-
noma in the United States in 2010 (half of all esopha-
geal cancers); it is estimated that this disease burden has 
increased two- to sixfold in the last 20 years.
Pathophysiology
The best-defined subset of GERD patients, albeit a 
minority overall, have esophagitis. Esophagitis occurs 
when refluxed gastric acid and pepsin cause necro-
sis of the esophageal mucosa causing erosions and 
ulcers. Note that some degree of gastroesophageal 
reflux is normal, physiologically intertwined with the 
Erosive esophagitis
Barrett’s esophagus
Esophageal adenocarcinoma
with Barrett’s esophagus
Esophageal stricture with chronic
erosive esophagitis
A
B
C
D
Figure 13-9 
Endoscopic appearance of (A) peptic esophagitis, 
(B) a peptic stricture, (C) Barrett’s metaplasia, and 
(D) adenocarcinoma developing within an area of Bar-
rett’s esophagus.
 
CHAPTER 13
Diseases of the Esophagus
121
mechanism of belching (transient LES relaxation), but 
esophagitis results from excessive reflux, often accom-
panied by impaired clearance of the refluxed gastric 
juice. Restricting reflux to that which is physiologi-
cally intended depends on the anatomic and physiologic 
integrity of the esophagogastric junction, a complex 
sphincter comprised of both the LES and the surround-
ing crural diaphragm. Three dominant mechanisms 
of esophagogastric junction incompetence are recog-
nized: (1) transient LES relaxations (a vagovagal reflex 
in which LES relaxation is elicited by gastric distention), 
(2) LES hypotension, or (3) anatomic distortion of the 
esophagogastric junction inclusive of hiatus hernia. 
Of note, the third factor, esophagogastric junction 
anatomic disruption, is both significant unto itself and 
also because it interacts with the first two mechanisms. 
Transient LES relaxations account for at least 90% of 
reflux in normal subjects or GERD patients without 
hiatus hernia, but patients with hiatus hernia have a 
more heterogeneous mechanistic profile. Factors tend-
ing to exacerbate reflux regardless of mechanism are 
abdominal obesity, pregnancy, gastric hypersecretory 
states, delayed gastric emptying, disruption of esopha-
geal peristalsis, and gluttony.
After acid reflux, peristalsis returns the refluxed 
fluid to the stomach and acid clearance is completed 
by titration of the residual acid by bicarbonate con-
tained in swallowed saliva. Consequently, two causes 
of prolonged acid clearance are impaired peristalsis and 
reduced salivation. Impaired peristaltic emptying can 
be attributable to disrupted peristalsis or superimposed 
reflux associated with a hiatal hernia. With super­
imposed reflux, fluid retained within a sliding hiatal 
hernia refluxes back into the esophagus during swallow-
related LES relaxation, a phenomenon that does not 
normally occur.
Inherent in the pathophysiologic model of GERD is 
that gastric juice is harmful to the esophageal epithelium. 
However, gastric acid hypersecretion is usually not a 
dominant factor in the development of esophagitis. An 
obvious exception is with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, 
which is associated with severe esophagitis in about 
50% of patients. Another caveat is with chronic H. pylori 
gastritis, which may have a protective effect by inducing 
atrophic gastritis with concomitant hypoacidity. Pep-
sin, bile, and pancreatic enzymes within gastric secre-
tions can also injure the esophageal epithelium, but 
their noxious properties are either lessened in an acidic 
environment or dependent on acidity for activation. 
Bile warrants attention because it persists in refluxate 
despite acid-suppressing medications. Bile can transverse 
the cell membrane, imparting severe cellular injury in a 
weakly acidic environment, and has also been invoked 
as a cofactor in the pathogenesis of Barrett’s metaplasia 
and adenocarcinoma. Hence, the causticity of gastric 
refluxate extends beyond hydrochloric acid.
Symptoms
Heartburn and regurgitation are the typical symptoms 
of GERD. Somewhat less common are dysphagia and 
chest pain. In each case, multiple potential mecha-
nisms for symptom genesis operate that extend beyond 
the basic concepts of mucosal erosion and activation of 
afferent sensory nerves. Specifically, hypersensitivity and 
functional pain are increasingly recognized as confound-
ing factors. Nonetheless the dominant clinical strategy 
is of empirical treatment with acid inhibitors, reserving 
further evaluation for those who fail to respond. Impor-
tant exceptions to this are patients with chest pain or 
persistent dysphagia, each of which may be indicative 
of more morbid conditions. With chest pain, cardiac 
disease must be carefully considered. In the case of per-
sistent dysphagia, chronic reflux can lead to the devel-
opment of a peptic stricture or adenocarcinoma, each 
of which benefits from early detection and/or specific 
therapy.
Extraesophageal syndromes with an established asso-
ciation to GERD include chronic cough, laryngitis, 
asthma, and dental erosions. A multitude of other con-
ditions including pharyngitis, chronic bronchitis, pul-
monary fibrosis, chronic sinusitis, cardiac arrhythmias, 
sleep apnea, and recurrent aspiration pneumonia have 
proposed associations with GERD. However, in both 
cases it is important to emphasize the word association 
as opposed to causation. In many instances the disorders 
likely coexist because of shared pathogenetic mecha-
nisms rather than strict causality. Potential mechanisms 
for extraesophageal GERD manifestations are of either 
regurgitation with direct contact between the refluxate 
and supra-esophageal structures or via a vagovagal reflex 
wherein reflux activation of esophageal afferent nerves 
triggers efferent vagal reflexes such as bronchospasm, 
cough, or arrhythmias.
Differential Diagnosis
Although generally quite characteristic, symptoms from 
GERD need to be distinguished from symptoms related 
to infectious, pill, or eosinophilic esophagitis, peptic 
ulcer disease, dyspepsia, biliary colic, coronary artery 
disease, and esophageal motility disorders. It is espe-
cially important that coronary artery disease be given 
early consideration because of its potentially lethal 
implications. The remaining elements of the differ-
ential diagnosis can be addressed by endoscopy, upper 
gastrointestinal series, or biliary tract ultrasonography as 
appropriate. The distinction among etiologies of esoph-
agitis is usually easily made by endoscopy with mucosal 
biopsies, which are necessary to evaluate for eosino-
philic inflammation. In terms of endoscopic appearance, 
infectious esophagitis is diffuse and tends to involve the 
proximal esophagus far more frequently than does reflux 
SECTION III
Disorders of the Alimentary Tract
122
esophagitis. The ulcerations seen in peptic esophagitis 
are usually solitary and distal, whereas infectious ulcer-
ations are punctate and diffuse. Eosinophilic esophagi-
tis characteristically exhibits multiple esophageal rings, 
linear furrows, or white punctate exudate. Esophageal 
ulcerations from pill esophagitis are usually singular and 
deep at points of luminal narrowing, especially near the 
carina, with sparing of the distal esophagus.
Complications
The complications of GERD are related to chronic 
esophagitis (bleeding and stricture) and the relation-
ship between GERD and esophageal adenocarcinoma. 
However, both esophagitis and peptic strictures have 
become increasingly rare in the era of potent antise-
cretory medications. Conversely, the most severe his-
tologic consequence of GERD is Barrett’s metaplasia 
with the associated risk of esophageal adenocarcinoma, 
and the incidence of these lesions has increased, not 
decreased, in the era of potent acid suppression. Bar-
rett’s metaplasia, endoscopically recognized by tongues 
of reddish mucosa extending proximally from the gas-
troesophageal junction (Fig. 13-9) or histopathologi-
cally by the finding of specialized columnar metaplasia, 
is associated with at least a 20-fold increased risk for 
development of esophageal adenocarcinoma.
Barrett’s metaplasia can progress to adenocarcinoma 
through the intermediate stages of low- and high-
grade dysplasia (Fig. 13-10). Owing to this risk, areas 
of Barrett’s and especially any included areas of muco-
sal irregularity should be extensively biopsied. The 
rate of cancer development is estimated at 0.5% per 
year, but vagaries in definition and of the extent of 
Barrett’s metaplasia requisite to establish the diagnosis 
have contributed to variability and inconsistency in this 
risk assessment. The group at greatest risk is obese white 
males in their sixth decade of life. However, despite 
common practice, the utility of endoscopic screening 
and surveillance programs intended to control the ade-
nocarcinoma risk has not been established. Also of note, 
no high-level evidence confirms that aggressive antise-
cretory therapy or antireflux surgery causes regression of 
Barrett’s esophagus or prevents adenocarcinoma.
Although the management of Barrett’s esopha-
gus remains controversial, the finding of dysplasia in 
Barrett’s, particularly high-grade dysplasia, mandates 
further intervention. In addition to the high rate of pro-
gression to adenocarcinoma, there is also a high preva-
lence of unrecognized coexisting cancer with high-grade 
dysplasia. Nonetheless, treatment remains controversial. 
Esophagectomy, intensive endoscopic surveillance, and 
mucosal ablation have all been advocated. Currently, 
most experts advocate esophagectomy as treatment for 
high-grade dysplasia in an otherwise healthy patient with 
minimal surgical risk. However, esophagectomy has a 
mortality ranging from 3–10%, along with substantial 
morbidity. That, along with increasing evidence of the 
effectiveness of endoscopic therapy with purpose-built 
radio frequency ablation devices, has led many to favor 
this therapy as a preferable alternative.
Treatment	
Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease (GERD)
Lifestyle modifications are routinely advocated as GERD 
therapy. Broadly speaking, these fall into three catego-
ries: (1) avoidance of foods that reduce lower esopha-
geal sphincter pressure, making them “refluxogenic”  
(these commonly include fatty foods, alcohol, spear-
mint, 
peppermint, 
tomato-based 
foods, 
possibly  
coffee and tea); (2) avoidance of acidic foods that are 
inherently irritating; and (3) adoption of behaviors to 
minimize reflux and/or heartburn. In general, minimal 
evidence supports the efficacy of these measures. How-
ever, clinical experience dictates that subsets of patients 
are benefitted by specific recommendations, based on 
their unique history and symptom profile. A patient 
Barrett’s metaplasia
High-grade dysplasia
Alcian blue stain
H&E stain
Figure 13-10 
Histopathology of Barrett’s metaplasia and Barrett’s with high-grade dysplasia. H&E, hematoxylin and eosin.
 
CHAPTER 13
Diseases of the Esophagus
123
with sleep disturbance from nighttime heartburn is 
likely to benefit from elevation of the head of the bed 
and avoidance of eating before retiring, but those rec-
ommendations are superfluous for a patient without 
nighttime symptoms. The most broadly applicable rec-
ommendation is for weight reduction. Even though the 
benefit with respect to reflux cannot be assured, the 
strong epidemiologic association between obesity and 
GERD and the secondary health gains of weight reduc-
tion are beyond dispute.
The dominant pharmacologic approach to GERD 
management is with inhibitors of gastric acid secretion 
and abundant data support the effectiveness of this 
approach. Pharmacologically reducing the acidity of 
gastric juice does not prevent reflux, but it ameliorates 
reflux symptoms and allows esophagitis to heal. The 
hierarchy of effectiveness among pharmaceuticals par-
allels their antisecretory potency. Proton pump inhibi-
tors (PPIs), are more efficacious than histamine2 receptor 
antagonists (H2RAs), and both are superior to placebo. 
No major differences exist among PPIs, and only modest 
gain is achieved by increased dosage.
Paradoxically, the perceived frequency and sever-
ity of heartburn correlate poorly with the presence 
or severity of esophagitis. When GERD treatments are 
assessed in terms of resolving heartburn, both efficacy 
and differences among pharmaceuticals are less clear-
cut than with the objective of healing esophagitis. 
Although the same overall hierarchy of effectiveness 
exists, observed efficacy rates are lower and vary widely, 
likely reflective of patient heterogeneity.
Reflux symptoms tend to be chronic, irrespective of 
esophagitis. Thus, a common management strategy 
is indefinite treatment with PPIs or H2RAs as necessary 
for symptom control. The side effects of PPI therapy 
are generally minimal. Vitamin B12, calcium, and iron 
absorption may be compromised and susceptibility  
to enteric infections, particularly Clostridium difficile 
colitis, increased with treatment. Consequently, as with 
any medication, dosage should be minimized to that 
necessary.
Laparoscopic Nissen fundoplication, wherein the 
proximal stomach is wrapped around the distal esopha-
gus to create an antireflux barrier, is a surgical alterna-
tive to the management of chronic GERD. Just as with 
PPI therapy, evidence on the utility of fundoplication 
is strongest for treating esophagitis and controlled tri-
als suggest similar efficacy to PPI therapy. However, the 
benefits of fundoplication must be weighed against 
potential deleterious effects, including surgical morbid-
ity and mortality, postoperative dysphagia, failure or 
breakdown requiring reoperation, an inability to belch, 
and increased bloating, flatulence, and bowel symp-
toms after surgery.
Eosinophilic Esophagitis
Eosinophilic esophagitis (EoE) is increasingly recognized 
in adults and children around the world. Population-
based studies suggest the prevalence to be in excess of 
1:1000 with a predilection for white males. The increas-
ing prevalence of EoE is attributable to a combination 
of an increasing incidence and a growing awareness of 
the condition. There is also an incompletely understood, 
but important, overlap between EoE and GERD that 
delays or confuses diagnosis of the disease in many cases.
EoE is diagnosed based on the combination of typical 
esophageal symptoms and esophageal mucosal biopsies 
demonstrating esophageal squamous epithelial infiltra-
tion with eosinophils. Secondary etiologies of esophageal 
eosinophilia including GERD, drug hypersensitivity, 
connective tissue disorders, hypereosinophilic syndrome 
and infection are excluded. Current evidence indicates 
that EoE is an allergic disorder induced by antigen sen-
sitization in susceptible individuals. Studies have dem-
onstrated an important role for dietary allergens in both 
the pathogenesis and treatment of EoE. Aeroallergens 
may also contribute but there is much less evidence in 
this regard. The natural history of the disorder is uncer-
tain as are the consequences of not treating asymptom-
atic or minimally symptomatic patients.
EoE should be strongly considered in children and 
adults with dysphagia and food impactions, regardless 
of the presence or absence of heartburn. Other symp-
toms may include atypical chest pain and heartburn, par-
ticularly heartburn that is refractory to PPI therapy. An 
atopic history of food allergy, asthma, eczema, or allergic 
rhinitis is present in the majority of patients. Cytokines 
such as IL-5, eotaxin, and thymus and activation-related 
chemokine (TARC) may be elevated in the serum. 
The characteristic endoscopic findings include multiple 
esophageal rings, linear furrows, and punctate exudates 
(Fig. 13-11). Histologic confirmation is made with the 
demonstration of increased eosinophils in the esophagal 
mucosa (generally ≥15 eosinophils per high-power field) 
(Fig. 13-12). Fibrosis, narrow caliber esophagus, and 
stricture can occur with EoE, but the predictive vari-
ables for these are not known. Complications of disease 
include food impaction and esophageal perforation.
Treatments for EoE include dietary restrictions, PPIs, 
systemic or topical glucocorticoids, montelukast, immuno­
modulators, and endoscopic dilatation of strictures. 
Notably, allergy testing [radioallergosorbent test (RAST), 
skin prick testing] has demonstrated limited specificity 
in the identification of causative foods. Once esophageal 
eosinophilia is demonstrated, patients in whom GERD 
may be a confounding factor should undergo a trial of 
PPI therapy to determine if this results in clinical or his-
tologic improvement. If symptoms and eosinophilia per-
sist despite PPI therapy, other treatment options should 
SECTION III
Disorders of the Alimentary Tract
124
be pursued. Topical glucocorticoids (fluticasone pro-
pionate or budesonide) are the most commonly used 
treatment in adults, but dietary restriction has proven 
effective primarily in pediatric studies. Systemic glu-
cocorticoids are reserved for severely afflicted patients 
refractory to less morbid treatments. Esophageal dilation 
should be approached cautiously in patients with strictur-
ing because of concerns for increased risk of esophageal 
mural disruption and perforation.
Infectious Esophagitis
With the increased use of immunosuppression for organ 
transplantation as well as chronic inflammatory diseases 
and chemotherapy along with the AIDS epidemic, 
infections with Candida species, herpesvirus, and cyto-
megalovirus (CMV) have become relatively common. 
Although rare, infectious esophagitis also occurs among 
the nonimmunocompromised, with herpes simplex and 
Candida albicans being the most common pathogens. 
Among AIDS patients, infectious esophagitis becomes 
more common as the CD4 count declines; cases are rare 
with the CD4 count >200 and common when <100. 
HIV itself may also be associated with a self-limited syn-
drome of acute esophageal ulceration with oral ulcers 
and a maculopapular skin rash at the time of serocon-
version. Additionally, some patients with advanced dis-
ease have deep, persistent esophageal ulcers treated with 
oral glucocorticoids or thalidomide. However, with the 
widespread use of protease inhibitors, a reduction in 
these HIV complications has been noted.
Regardless of the infectious agent, odynophagia is a 
characteristic symptom of infectious esophagitis; dysphagia, 
chest pain, and hemorrhage are also common. Odynopha-
gia is uncommon with reflux esophagitis, so its presence 
should always raise suspicion of an alternative etiology.
Candida Esophagitis
Candida is normally found in the throat, but can become 
pathogenic and produce esophagitis in a compromised 
host; C. albicans is most common. Candida esophagitis 
also occurs with esophageal stasis secondary to esopha-
geal motor disorders and diverticula. Patients complain 
of odynophagia and dysphagia. If oral thrush is present, 
empirical therapy is appropriate, but coinfection is com-
mon, and persistent symptoms should lead to prompt 
endoscopy with biopsy, which is the most useful diag-
nostic evaluation. Candida esophagitis has a characteristic 
appearance of white plaques with friability. Rarely, 
Candida esophagitis is complicated by bleeding, perfo-
ration, stricture, or systemic invasion. Oral fluconazole 
(200 mg on the first day, followed by 100 mg daily) for 
7–14 days is the preferred treatment. Patients refractory 
A
B
C
D
Figure 13-11 
Endoscopic features of (A) eosinophilic esophagitis 
(EoE), (B) Candida esophagitis, (C) giant ulcer associated 
with HIV, and (D) a Schatzki’s ring.
Figure 13-12 
Histopathology of eosinophilic esophagitis (EoE) show-
ing dense infiltration of the esophageal squamous epi-
thelium with eosinophils. Eosinophilic inflammation can 
also be seen with gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD); 
the optimal discriminatory threshold for EoE is greater than 
15 eosinophils per high-power field.
 
CHAPTER 13
Diseases of the Esophagus
125
to fluconazole may respond to itraconazole. Alterna-
tively, poorly responsive patients or those who cannot 
swallow medications can be treated with an intravenous 
echinocandin (caspofungin 50 mg daily for 7–21 days). 
Amphotericin B (10–15 mg IV infusion for 6 h daily to 
a total dose of 300–500 mg) is used in severe cases.
Herpetic Esophagitis
Herpes simplex virus type 1 or 2 may cause esophagitis. 
Vesicles on the nose and lips may coexist and are sug-
gestive of a herpetic etiology. Varicella-zoster virus can 
also cause esophagitis in children with chickenpox or 
adults with zoster. The characteristic endoscopic find-
ings are vesicles and small, punched-out ulcerations. 
Because herpes simplex infections are limited to squa-
mous epithelium, biopsies from the ulcer margins are 
most likely to reveal the characteristic ground glass 
nuclei, eosinophilic Cowdry’s type A inclusion bodies, 
and giant cells. Culture or polymerase chain reaction 
(PCR) assays are helpful to identify acyclovir-resistant 
strains. The infection is often self-limited after a 1–2 week 
period. Acyclovir (400 mg orally 5 times a day for 
14–21 days) or valacyclovir (1 g orally tid for 7 days) 
reduces this morbidity. In patients with severe odyno-
phagia, intravenous acyclovir (5 mg/kg every 8 h for 
7–14 days), foscarnet (90 mg/kg intravenously bid for 
2–4 weeks), or oral famciclovir is used.
Cytomegalovirus
CMV esophagitis occurs only in immunocompromised 
patients, particularly transplant recipients. CMV is usu-
ally activated from a latent stage or may be acquired from 
transfusions. Endoscopically, CMV lesions appear as ser-
piginous ulcers in an otherwise normal mucosa, particu-
larly in the distal esophagus. Biopsies of the ulcer bases 
have the highest diagnostic yield for finding the pathog-
nomonic large nuclear or cytoplasmic inclusion bodies. 
Immunohistology with monoclonal antibodies to CMV 
and in situ hybridization tests are useful for early diagnosis. 
Ganciclovir, 5 mg/kg every 12 h intravenously, is the 
treatment of choice. Valganciclovir (900 mg bid), an oral 
formulation of ganciclovir, or foscarnet (90 mg/kg every 
12 h intravenously) can also be used. Therapy is contin-
ued until healing, which may take 3–6 weeks.
Mechanical Trauma and 
Iatrogenic Injury
Esophageal Perforation
Most cases of esophageal perforation are from instru-
mentation of the esophagus or trauma. Alternatively, 
forceful vomiting or retching can lead to spontaneous 
rupture at the gastroesophageal junction (Boerhaave’s 
syndrome). More rarely, corrosive esophagitis or neo-
plasms lead to perforation. Instrumental perforation 
from endoscopy or nasogastric tube placement typically 
occurs in the hypopharynx or at the gastroesophageal 
junction. Perforation may also result at the site of stric-
ture in the setting of endoscopic food disimpaction or 
esophageal dilation. Esophageal perforation causes pleu-
ritic retrosternal pain that can be associated with pneumo-
mediastinum and subcutaneous emphysema. Mediastinitis 
is a major complication of esophageal perforation, and 
prompt recognition is key to optimizing outcome. CT 
of the chest is most sensitive in detecting mediastinal 
air. Esophageal perforation is confirmed by a contrast 
swallow; usually Gastrografin followed by thin barium. 
Treatment includes nasogastric suction and parenteral 
broad-spectrum antibiotics with prompt surgical drain-
age and repair in noncontained leaks. Conservative 
therapy with NPO status and antibiotics without sur-
gery may be appropriate in cases of minor instrumental 
perforation that are detected early. Endoscopic clipping 
or stent placement may be indicated in nonoperable 
cases such as perforated tumors.
Mallory-Weiss Tear
Vomiting, retching, or vigorous coughing can cause a 
nontransmural tear at the gastroesophageal junction that 
is a common cause of upper gastrointestinal bleeding. 
Most patients present with hematemesis. Antecedent 
vomiting is anticipated but not always evident. Bleeding 
usually abates spontaneously, but protracted bleeding 
may respond to local epinephrine or cauterization ther-
apy, endoscopic clipping, or angiographic embolization. 
Surgery is rarely needed.
Radiation Esophagitis
Radiation esophagitis can complicate treatment for tho-
racic cancers, especially breast and lung, with the risk 
proportional to radiation dosage. Radiosensitizing drugs 
such as doxorubicin, bleomycin, cyclophosphamide, and 
cisplatin also increase the risk. Dysphagia and odynopha-
gia may last weeks to months after therapy. The esopha-
geal mucosa becomes erythematous, edematous, and fri-
able. Submucosal fibrosis and degenerative tissue changes 
and stricturing may occur years after the radiation expo-
sure. Radiation exposure in excess of 5000 cGy has been 
associated with increased risk of esophageal stricture. 
Treatment for acute radiation esophagitis is supportive. 
Chronic strictures are managed with esophageal dilation.
Corrosive Esophagitis
Caustic esophageal injury from ingestion of alkali 
or, less commonly, acid can be accidental or from 
SECTION III
Disorders of the Alimentary Tract
126
attempted suicide. Absence of oral injury does not 
exclude possible esophageal involvement. Thus, early 
endoscopic evaluation is recommended to assess and 
grade the injury to the esophageal mucosa. Severe cor-
rosive injury may lead to esophageal perforation, bleed-
ing, stricture, and death. Glucocorticoids have not been 
shown to improve the clinical outcome of acute cor-
rosive esophagitis and are not recommended. Healing of 
more severe grades of caustic injury is commonly asso-
ciated with severe stricture formation and often requires 
repeated dilatation.
Pill Esophagitis
Pill-induced esophagitis occurs when a swallowed pill 
fails to traverses the entire esophagus and lodges within 
the lumen. Generally, this is attributed to poor “pill 
taking habits”: inadequate liquid with the pill, or lying 
down immediately after taking a pill. The most common 
location for the pill to lodge is in the mid-esophagus 
near the crossing of the aorta or carina. Extrinsic com-
pression from these structures halts the movement of the 
pill or capsule. Since initially reported in 1970, more 
than 1000 cases of pill esophagitis have been reported, 
suggesting that this is not an unusual occurrence. A wide 
variety of medications are implicated with the most 
common being doxycycline, tetracycline, quinidine, 
phenytoin, potassium chloride, ferrous sulfate, nonste-
roidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), and bisphos-
phonates. However, virtually any pill can result in pill 
esophagitis if taken carelessly.
Typical symptoms of pill esophagitis are the sudden 
onset of chest pain and odynophagia. Characteristi-
cally, the pain will develop over a period of hours or 
will awaken the individual from sleep. A classic history 
in the setting of ingestion of recognized pill offenders 
obviates the need for diagnostic testing in most patients. 
When endoscopy is performed, localized ulceration or 
inflammation is evident. Histologically, acute inflam-
mation is typical. Chest CT imaging will sometimes 
reveal esophageal thickening consistent with trans-
mural inflammation. Although the condition usually 
resolves within days to weeks, symptoms may persist for 
months and stricture can develop in severe cases. No 
specific therapy is known to hasten the healing process, 
but antisecretory medications are frequently prescribed 
to remove concomitant reflux as an aggravating factor. 
When healing results in stricture formation, dilatation is 
indicated.
Foreign Bodies and Food Impaction
Food or foreign bodies may lodge in the esophagus 
causing complete obstruction, causing an inability to 
handle secretions (foaming at the mouth) and severe 
chest pain. Food impaction may occur due to stric-
ture, carcinoma, Schatzki’s ring, eosinophilic esoph-
agitis, or simply inattentive eating. If it does not 
spontaneously resolve, impacted food is dislodged 
endoscopically. Use of meat tenderizer enzymes to 
facilitate passage of a meat bolus is discouraged because 
of potential esophageal injury. Glucagon (1 mg IV) 
is sometimes tried before endoscopic dislodgement. 
After emergent treatment patients should be evaluated 
for potential causes of the impaction with treatment 
rendered as indicated.
Esophageal Manifestations of 
Systemic Disease
Scleroderma and Collagen 
Vascular Diseases
Scleroderma esophagus (hypotensive LES and absent 
esophageal peristalsis) was initially described as a mani-
festation of scleroderma or other collagen vascular dis-
eases and thought to be specific for these disorders. 
However, this nomenclature subsequently proved 
unfortunate and has been discarded because an esti-
mated half of qualifying patients do not have an iden-
tifiable systemic disease, and reflux disease is often the 
only identifiable association. When scleroderma esopha-
gus occurs as a manifestation of a collagen vascular dis-
ease, the histopathologic findings are of infiltration and 
destruction of the esophageal muscularis propria with 
collagen deposition and fibrosis. The pathogenesis of 
absent peristalsis and LES hypotension in the absence 
of a collagen vascular disease is unknown. Regardless 
of the underlying cause, the manometric abnormalities 
predispose patients to severe GERD due to inadequate 
LES barrier function combined with poor esopha-
geal clearance of refluxed acid. Dysphagia may also be 
manifest but is generally mild and alleviated by eating 
in an upright position and using liquids to facilitate solid 
emptying.
Dermatologic Diseases
A host of dermatologic disorders (pemphigus vulgaris, 
bullous pemphigoid, cicatricial pemphigoid, Behçet’s 
syndrome, epidermolysis bullosa) can affect the orophar-
ynx and esophagus, particularly the proximal esophagus, 
with blisters, bullae, webs, and strictures. Glucocorti-
coid treatment is usually effective. Erosive lichen planus, 
Stevens-Johnson syndrome, and graft-versus-host disease 
can also involve the esophagus. Esophageal dilatation 
may be necessary to treat strictures.
 John Del Valle 
127
 PePtiC UlCeR disease 
 Burning epigastric pain exacerbated by fasting and 
improved with meals is a symptom complex associated 
with peptic ulcer disease (PUD). An  ulcer is defi ned as 
disruption of the mucosal integrity of the stomach and/
or duodenum leading to a local defect or excavation 
due to active infl ammation. Ulcers occur within the 
stomach and/or duodenum and are often chronic in 
nature. Acid peptic disorders are very common in the 
United States, with 4 million individuals (new cases 
and recurrences) affected per year. Lifetime prevalence 
of PUD in the United States is ∼12% in men and 10% 
in women. Moreover, an estimated 15,000 deaths per 
year occur as a consequence of complicated PUD. The 
fi nancial impact of these common disorders has been 
substantial, with an estimated burden on direct and 
indirect health care costs of ∼$10 billion per year in the 
United States. 
 GaStrIC PhySIoloGy 
 Despite the constant attack on the gastroduodenal mucosa 
by a host of noxious agents (acid, pepsin, bile acids, pan-
creatic enzymes, drugs, and bacteria), integrity is main-
tained by an intricate system that provides mucosal 
defense and repair. 
 Gastric anatomy 
 The gastric epithelial lining consists of rugae that con-
tain microscopic gastric pits, each branching into four 
or fi ve gastric glands made up of highly specialized epi-
thelial cells. The makeup of gastric glands varies with 
their anatomic location. Glands within the gastric car-
dia comprise <5% of the gastric gland area and contain 
mucous and endocrine cells. The 75% of gastric glands 
 PEPTIC ULCER DISEASE AND RELATED 
DISORDERS 
 CHaPteR 14 
are found within the oxyntic mucosa and contain mucous 
neck, parietal, chief, endocrine, enterochromaffi n, and 
enterochromaffi n-like (ECL) cells  ( Fig. 14-1 ) . Pyloric 
glands contain mucous and endocrine cells (including 
gastrin cells) and are found in the antrum. 
 The parietal cell, also known as the oxyntic cell, is 
usually found in the neck, or isthmus, or in the oxyntic 
gland. The resting, or unstimulated, parietal cell has 
Gastric pit
  (foveolus)
Isthmus
Neck
Oxyntic Gland
Base
  (fundus)
Surface mucous cells
Mucous neck cells
Parietal cells
Endocrine cell
Chief cells
 Figure 14-1 
Diagrammatic representation of the oxyntic gastric 
gland.  (Adapted from S Ito, RJ Winchester: Cell Biol 16:541, 
1963. © The Rockefeller University Press.) 
SECTION III
Disorders of the Alimentary Tract
128
prominent cytoplasmic tubulovesicles and intracellu-
lar canaliculi containing short microvilli along its apical 
surface (Fig. 14-2). H+,K+-adenosine triphosphatase 
(ATPase) is expressed in the tubulovesicle membrane; 
upon cell stimulation, this membrane, along with apical 
membranes, transforms into a dense network of apical 
intracellular canaliculi containing long microvilli. Acid 
secretion, a process requiring high energy, occurs at the 
apical canalicular surface. Numerous mitochondria (30–40% 
of total cell volume) generate the energy required for 
secretion.
Gastroduodenal mucosal defense
The gastric epithelium is under constant assault by a 
series of endogenous noxious factors, including hydro-
chloric acid (HCl), pepsinogen/pepsin, and bile salts. In 
addition, a steady flow of exogenous substances such as 
medications, alcohol, and bacteria encounter the gastric 
mucosa. A highly intricate biologic system is in place to 
provide defense from mucosal injury and to repair any 
injury that may occur.
The mucosal defense system can be envisioned as a 
three-level barrier, composed of preepithelial, epithelial, 
and subepithelial elements (Fig. 14-3). The first line 
of defense is a mucus-bicarbonate-phospholipid layer, 
which serves as a physicochemical barrier to multiple 
molecules, including hydrogen ions. Mucus is secreted 
in a regulated fashion by gastroduodenal surface epi-
thelial cells. It consists primarily of water (95%) and a 
mixture of phospholipids and glycoproteins (mucin). 
The mucous gel functions as a nonstirred water layer 
impeding diffusion of ions and molecules such as pepsin. 
Bicarbonate, secreted in a regulated manner by surface 
epithelial cells of the gastroduodenal mucosa into the 
mucous gel, forms a pH gradient ranging from 1 to 2 at 
the gastric luminal surface and reaching 6 to 7 along the 
epithelial cell surface.
Surface epithelial cells provide the next line of 
defense through several factors, including mucus pro-
duction, epithelial cell ionic transporters that maintain 
intracellular pH and bicarbonate production, and intra-
cellular tight junctions. Surface epithelial cells generate 
heat shock proteins that prevent protein denaturation 
and protect cells from certain factors such as increased 
temperature, cytotoxic agents, or oxidative stress. 
Epithelial cells also generate trefoil factor family pep-
tides and cathelicidins, which also play a role in surface 
cell protection and regeneration. If the preepithelial 
barrier were breached, gastric epithelial cells border-
ing a site of injury can migrate to restore a damaged 
region (restitution). This process occurs independent of 
cell division and requires uninterrupted blood flow and 
an alkaline pH in the surrounding environment. Sev-
eral growth factors, including epidermal growth fac-
tor (EGF), transforming growth factor (TGF) α, and 
basic fibroblast growth factor (FGF), modulate the 
process of restitution. Larger defects that are not effec-
tively repaired by restitution require cell proliferation. 
Epithelial cell regeneration is regulated by prostaglan-
dins and growth factors such as EGF and TGF-α. In 
tandem with epithelial cell renewal, formation of new 
vessels (angiogenesis) within the injured microvascular 
bed occurs. Both FGF and vascular endothelial growth 
factor (VEGF) are important in regulating angiogenesis 
in the gastric mucosa.
An elaborate microvascular system within the gastric 
submucosal layer is the key component of the subepi-
thelial defense/repair system, providing HCO3
–, which 
neutralizes the acid generated by the parietal cell. More-
over, this microcirculatory bed provides an adequate 
supply of micronutrients and oxygen while removing 
toxic metabolic by-products.
Prostaglandins play a central role in gastric epithe-
lial defense/repair (Fig. 14-4). The gastric mucosa 
contains abundant levels of prostaglandins that regulate 
the release of mucosal bicarbonate and mucus, inhibit 
parietal cell secretion, and are important in maintain-
ing mucosal blood flow and epithelial cell restitution. 
Prostaglandins are derived from esterified arachidonic 
acid, which is formed from phospholipids (cell mem-
brane) by the action of phospholipase A2. A key enzyme 
that controls the rate-limiting step in prostaglandin 
synthesis is cyclooxygenase (COX), which is present 
in two isoforms (COX-1, COX-2), each having dis-
tinct characteristics regarding structure, tissue distribu-
tion, and expression. COX-1 is expressed in a host of 
tissues, including the stomach, platelets, kidneys, and 
endothelial cells. This isoform is expressed in a consti-
tutive manner and plays an important role in maintain-
ing the integrity of renal function, platelet aggregation, 
and gastrointestinal (GI) mucosal integrity. In contrast, 
the expression of COX-2 is inducible by inflammatory 
stimuli, and it is expressed in macrophages, leukocytes, 
Resting
Stimulated
Canaliculus
HCl
H3O+
Ca
–
cAMP
KCl
KCl
H+,K+–ATPase
Gastrin
Active
pump
Tubulovesicles
ACh
Histamine
Active
pump
Figure 14-2 
Gastric parietal cell undergoing transformation after 
­secretagogue-mediated stimulation. cAMP, cyclic adenos-
ine monophosphate. (Adapted from SJ Hersey, G Sachs: 
Physiol Rev 75:155, 1995.)
 
CHAPTER 14
Peptic Ulcer Disease and Related Disorders
129
fibroblasts, and synovial cells. The beneficial effects 
of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) on 
tissue inflammation are due to inhibition of COX-2; 
the toxicity of these drugs (e.g., GI mucosal ulceration 
and renal dysfunction) is related to inhibition of the 
COX-1 isoform. The highly COX-2–selective NSAIDs 
have the potential to provide the beneficial effect of 
decreasing tissue inflammation while minimizing toxic-
ity in the GI tract. Selective COX-2 inhibitors have had 
adverse effects on the cardiovascular system, leading to 
Figure 14-3 
Components 
involved 
in 
providing 
gastroduodenal 
mucosal defense and repair. CCK, cholecystokinin; CRF, 
corticotropin-releasing factor; EGF, epidermal growth factor; 
HCl, hydrochloride; IGF, insulin-like growth factor; TGFα, 
transforming growth factor α; TRF, thyrotropin releasing 
factor. (Modified and updated from Tarnawski A. Cellular and 
molecular mechanisms of mucosal defense and repair. In: 
Yoshikawa T, Arakawa T. Bioregulation and Its Disorders in 
the Gastrointestinal Tract. Tokyo, Japan: Blackwell Science, 
1998:3–17.)
SECTION III
Disorders of the Alimentary Tract
130
increased risk of myocardial infarction. Therefore, the 
FDA has removed two of these agents (valdecoxib and 
rofecoxib) from the market (discussed later).
Nitric oxide (NO) is important in the maintenance of 
gastric mucosal integrity. The key enzyme NO synthase 
is constitutively expressed in the mucosa and contributes 
to cytoprotection by stimulating gastric mucus, increas-
ing mucosal blood flow and maintaining epithelial cell 
barrier function. The central nervous system (CNS) and 
hormonal factors also play a role in regulating mucosal 
defense through multiple pathways (Fig. 14-3).
Physiology of gastric secretion
Hydrochloric acid and pepsinogen are the two principal 
gastric secretory products capable of inducing mucosal 
injury. Gastric acid and pepsinogen play a physiologic 
role in protein digestion, absorption of iron and vitamin 
B12 as well as killing ingested bacteria. Acid secretion 
should be viewed as occurring under basal and stimu-
lated conditions. Basal acid production occurs in a cir-
cadian pattern, with highest levels occurring during 
the night and lowest levels during the morning hours. 
Cholinergic input via the vagus nerve and histamin-
ergic input from local gastric sources are the principal 
contributors to basal acid secretion. Stimulated gas-
tric acid secretion occurs primarily in three phases based 
on the site where the signal originates (cephalic, gastric, 
and intestinal). Sight, smell, and taste of food are the 
components of the cephalic phase, which stimu-
lates gastric secretion via the vagus nerve. The gastric 
phase is activated once food enters the stomach. This 
component of secretion is driven by nutrients (amino 
acids and amines) that directly stimulate the G cell to 
release gastrin, which in turn activates the parietal 
cell via direct and indirect mechanisms. Distention of 
the stomach wall also leads to gastrin release and acid 
production. The last phase of gastric acid secretion is 
initiated as food enters the intestine and is mediated by 
luminal distention and nutrient assimilation. A series of 
pathways that inhibit gastric acid production are also 
set into motion during these phases. The GI hormone 
somatostatin is released from endocrine cells found in the 
gastric mucosa (D cells) in response to HCl. Somatostatin 
can inhibit acid production by both direct (parietal cell) 
and indirect mechanisms (decreased histamine release 
from ECL cells and gastrin release from G cells). 
Additional neural (central and peripheral) and humoral 
[amylin, atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP), cholecystokinin, 
ghrelin, obestatin, secretin, and serotonin] factors play a 
role in counterbalancing acid secretion. Under physi-
ologic circumstances, these phases occur simultaneously. 
Ghrelin, the appetite-regulating hormone expressed in 
stomach, may stimulate gastric acid secretion through 
a vagal-mediated mechanism, but this remains to be 
confirmed.
The acid-secreting parietal cell is located in the 
oxyntic gland, adjacent to other cellular elements (ECL 
cell, D cell) important in the gastric secretory process 
(Fig. 14-5). This unique cell also secretes intrinsic fac-
tor (IF). The parietal cell expresses receptors for several 
stimulants of acid secretion, including histamine (H2), 
gastrin (cholecystokinin B/gastrin receptor), and acetyl-
choline (muscarinic, M3). Binding of histamine to the 
H2 receptor leads to activation of adenylate cyclase and 
an increase in cyclic adenosine monophosphate (AMP). 
Activation of the gastrin and muscarinic receptors results 
in activation of the protein kinase C/phosphoinositide 
signaling pathway. Each of these signaling pathways in 
turn regulates a series of downstream kinase cascades 
that control the acid-secreting pump, H+,K+-ATPase. 
The discovery that different ligands and their corre-
sponding receptors lead to activation of different signal-
ing pathways explains the potentiation of acid secretion 
that occurs when histamine and gastrin or acetylcho-
line are combined. More importantly, this observation 
explains why blocking one receptor type (H2) decreases 
acid secretion stimulated by agents that activate a dif-
ferent pathway (gastrin, acetylcholine). Parietal cells also 
express receptors for ligands that inhibit acid production 
(prostaglandins, somatostatin, and EGF). Histamine also 
stimulates gastric acid secretion indirectly by activating 
the histamine H3 receptor on D cells, which inhibits 
somatostatin release.
The enzyme H+,K+-ATPase is responsible for gener-
ating the large concentration of H+. It is a membrane-
bound protein that consists of two subunits, α and β. 
The active catalytic site is found within the α subunit; 
the function of the β subunit is unclear. This enzyme 
uses the chemical energy of adenosine triphosphate 
Membrane phospholipids
Arachidonic acid
Phospholipase A2
Stomach
Kidney
Platelets
Endothelium
TXA2, PGI2, PGE2
  Gastrointestinal mucosal integrity
  Platelet aggregation
  Renal function
PGI2, PGE2
  Inflammation
  Mitogenesis
  Bone formation
  Other functions?
Macrophages
Leukocytes
Fibroblasts
Endothelium
COX-1
housekeeping
COX-2
inflammation
Figure 14-4 
Schematic representation of the steps involved in syn-
thesis of prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) and prostacyclin (PGI2). 
Characteristics and distribution of the cyclooxygenase (COX) 
enzymes 1 and 2 are also shown. TXA2, thromboxane A2.
 
CHAPTER 14
Peptic Ulcer Disease and Related Disorders
131
(ATP) to transfer H+ ions from parietal cell cytoplasm 
to the secretory canaliculi in exchange for K+. The 
H+,K+-ATPase is located within the secretory canalicu-
lus and in nonsecretory cytoplasmic tubulovesicles. The 
tubulovesicles are impermeable to K+, which leads to 
an inactive pump in this location. The distribution of 
pumps between the nonsecretory vesicles and the secre-
tory canaliculus varies according to parietal cell activity 
(Fig. 14-2). Proton pumps are recycled back to the 
inactive state in cytoplasmic vesicles once parietal cell 
activation ceases.
The chief cell, found primarily in the gastric fun-
dus, synthesizes and secretes pepsinogen, the inactive 
precursor of the proteolytic enzyme pepsin. The acid 
environment within the stomach leads to cleavage of 
the inactive precursor to pepsin and provides the low 
pH (<2) required for pepsin activity. Pepsin activity is 
significantly diminished at a pH of 4 and irreversibly 
inactivated and denatured at a pH of ≥7. Many of the 
secretagogues that stimulate acid secretion also stimulate 
pepsinogen release. The precise role of pepsin in the 
pathogenesis of PUD remains to be established.
Pathophysiologic Basis of Peptic 
Ulcer Disease
PUD encompasses both gastric and duodenal ulcers. 
Ulcers are defined as breaks in the mucosal surface >5 mm 
in size, with depth to the submucosa. Duodenal ulcers 
(DUs) and gastric ulcers (GUs) share many common 
features in terms of pathogenesis, diagnosis, and treat-
ment, but several factors distinguish them from one 
another.
Epidemiology
Duodenal ulcers
DUs are estimated to occur in 6–15% of the Western 
population. The incidence of DUs declined steadily from 
1960 to 1980 and has remained stable since then. The 
death rates, need for surgery, and physician visits have 
decreased by >50% over the past 30 years. The reason for 
the reduction in the frequency of DUs is likely related to 
the decreasing frequency of Helicobacter pylori. Before the 
discovery of H. pylori, the natural history of DUs was 
typified by frequent recurrences after initial therapy. 
Eradication of H. pylori has greatly reduced these recur-
rence rates.
Gastric ulcers
GUs tend to occur later in life than duodenal lesions, 
with a peak incidence reported in the sixth decade. 
More than one-half of GUs occur in males and are less 
common than DUs, perhaps due to the higher likeli-
hood of GUs being silent and presenting only after a 
complication develops. Autopsy studies suggest a similar 
incidence of DUs and GUs.
Pathology
Duodenal ulcers
DUs occur most often in the first portion of the duo-
denum (>95%), with ∼90% located within 3 cm of 
the pylorus. They are usually ≤1 cm in diameter but 
can occasionally reach 3–6 cm (giant ulcer). Ulcers are 
sharply demarcated, with depth at times reaching the 
muscularis propria. The base of the ulcer often con-
sists of a zone of eosinophilic necrosis with surrounding 
fibrosis. Malignant DUs are extremely rare.
Figure 14-5 
Regulation of gastric acid secretion at the cellular level. 
ACh, acetylcholine; ANP, atrial natriuretic peptide; CGRP, 
calcitonin gene-related peptide; EC, enterochromaffin; ECL, 
enterochromaffin-like; GRP, gastrin-releasing peptide; PACAP, 
pituitary adenylate-cyclase activating peptide; SST, soma-
tostatin; VIP, vasoactive intestinal peptide.
SECTION III
Disorders of the Alimentary Tract
132
Gastric ulcers
In contrast to DUs, GUs can represent a malignancy 
and should be biopsied upon discovery. Benign GUs 
are most often found distal to the junction between 
the antrum and the acid secretory mucosa. Benign 
GUs are quite rare in the gastric fundus and are histo-
logically similar to DUs. Benign GUs associated with 
H. pylori are also associated with antral gastritis. In con-
trast, NSAID-related GUs are not accompanied by 
chronic active gastritis but may instead have evidence of 
a chemical gastropathy, typified by foveolar hyperplasia, 
edema of the lamina propria, and epithelial regeneration 
in the absence of H. pylori. Extension of smooth-muscle 
fibers into the upper portions of the mucosa, where 
they are not typically found, may also occur.
Pathophysiology
Duodenal ulcers
H. pylori and NSAID-induced injury account for the 
majority of DUs. Many acid secretory abnormalities 
have been described in DU patients. Of these, average 
basal and nocturnal gastric acid secretion appears to be 
increased in DU patients as compared to controls; how-
ever, the level of overlap between DU patients and 
control subjects is substantial. The reason for this altered 
secretory process is unclear, but H. pylori infection may 
contribute. Accelerated gastric emptying of liquids has 
been noted in some DU patients, but its role in DU 
formation, if any, is unclear. Bicarbonate secretion is 
significantly decreased in the duodenal bulb of patients 
with an active DU as compared to control subjects. 
H. pylori infection may also play a role in this process 
(discussed later).
Gastric ulcers
As in DUs, the majority of GUs can be attributed to 
either H. pylori or NSAID-induced mucosal damage. 
GUs that occur in the prepyloric area or those in the 
body associated with a DU or a duodenal scar are sim-
ilar in pathogenesis to DUs. Gastric acid output (basal 
and stimulated) tends to be normal or decreased in GU 
patients. When GUs develop in the presence of minimal 
acid levels, impairment of mucosal defense factors may 
be present. Gastric ulcers have been classified based on 
their location: Type I occur in the gastric body and 
tend to be associated with low gastric acid production; 
type II occur in the antrum and gastric acid can vary 
from low to normal; type III occur within 3 cm of the 
pylorus and are commonly accompanied by duodenal 
ulcers and normal or high gastric acid production; and 
type IV are found in the cardia and are associated with 
low gastric acid production.
Abnormalities in resting and stimulated pyloric 
sphincter pressure with a concomitant increase in 
duodenal gastric reflux have been implicated in 
some GU patients. Although bile acids, lysolecithin, 
and pancreatic enzymes may injure gastric mucosa, 
a definite role for these in GU pathogenesis has not 
been established. Delayed gastric emptying of solids 
has been described in GU patients but has not been 
reported consistently
H. pylori and acid peptic disorders
Gastric infection with the bacterium H. pylori accounts 
for the majority of PUD (Chap. 26). This organism 
also plays a role in the development of gastric mucosa-
associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) lymphoma and 
gastric adenocarcinoma. Although the entire genome of 
H. pylori has been sequenced, it is still not clear how this 
organism, which resides in the stomach, causes ulcer-
ation in the duodenum, or whether its eradication will 
lead to a decrease in gastric cancer.
The bacterium
The bacterium, initially named Campylobacter pyloridis, is 
a gram-negative microaerophilic rod found most com-
monly in the deeper portions of the mucous gel coating 
the gastric mucosa or between the mucous layer and the 
gastric epithelium. It may attach to gastric epithelium 
but under normal circumstances does not appear to 
invade cells. It is strategically designed to live within the 
aggressive environment of the stomach. It is S-shaped 
(∼0.5–3 μm in size) and contains multiple sheathed fla-
gella. Initially, H. pylori resides in the antrum but, over 
time, migrates toward the more proximal segments of 
the stomach. The organism is capable of transforming 
into a coccoid form, which represents a dormant state 
that may facilitate survival in adverse conditions. The 
genome of H. pylori (1.65 million base pairs) encodes 
∼1500 proteins. Among this multitude of proteins there 
are factors that are essential determinants of H. pylori–
mediated pathogenesis and colonization such as the 
outer membrane protein (Hop proteins), urease, and the 
vacuolating cytotoxin (Vac A). Moreover, the major-
ity of H. pylori strains contain a genomic fragment that 
encodes the cag pathogenicity island (cag-PAI). Several 
of the genes that make up cag-PAI encode components 
of a type IV secretion island that translocates Cag A into 
host cells. Once in the cell, Cag A activates a series of 
cellular events important in cell growth and cytokine 
production. H. pylori also has extensive genetic diver-
sity that in turn enhances its ability to promote disease. 
The first step in infection by H. pylori is dependent on 
the bacteria’s motility and its ability to produce urease. 
Urease produces ammonia from urea, an essential step 
in alkalinizing the surrounding pH. Additional bacterial 
factors include catalase, lipase, adhesins, platelet-­
activating factor, and pic B (induces cytokines). Mul-
tiple strains of H. pylori exist and are characterized by 
their ability to express several of these factors (Cag A, 
Vac A, etc.). It is possible that the different diseases 
 
CHAPTER 14
Peptic Ulcer Disease and Related Disorders
133
related to H. pylori infection can be attributed to different 
strains of the organism with distinct pathogenic features.
Epidemiology
The prevalence of H. pylori varies throughout the 
world and depends largely on the overall standard of 
living in the region. In developing parts of the world, 
80% of the population may be infected by the age of 
20, whereas the prevalence is 20–50% in industrial-
ized countries. In contrast, in the United States this 
organism is rare in childhood. The overall prevalence 
of H. pylori in the United States is ∼30%, with indi-
viduals born before 1950 having a higher rate of infec-
tion than those born later. About 10% of Americans 
<30 years of age are colonized with the bacteria. The 
rate of infection with H. pylori in industrialized coun-
tries has decreased substantially in recent decades. The 
steady increase in the prevalence of H. pylori noted 
with increasing age is due primarily to a cohort effect, 
reflecting higher transmission during a period in which 
the earlier cohorts were children. It has been calculated 
through mathematical models that improved sanitation 
during the latter half of the nineteenth century dramat-
ically decreased transmission of H. pylori. Moreover, 
with the present rate of intervention, the organism 
will be ultimately eliminated from the United States. 
Two factors that predispose to higher colonization rates 
include poor socioeconomic status and less education. 
These factors, not race, are responsible for the rate of 
H. pylori infection in blacks and Hispanic Americans 
being double the rate seen in whites of comparable age. 
Other risk factors for H. pylori infection are (1) birth or 
residence in a developing country, (2) domestic crowd-
ing, (3) unsanitary living conditions, (4) unclean food 
or water, and (5) exposure to gastric contents of an 
infected individual.
Transmission of H. pylori occurs from person to per-
son, following an oral-oral or fecal-oral route. The risk 
of H. pylori infection is declining in developing coun-
tries. The rate of infection in the United States has 
fallen by >50% when compared to 30 years ago.
Pathophysiology
H. pylori infection is virtually always associated with a 
chronic active gastritis, but only 10–15% of infected 
individuals develop frank peptic ulceration. The basis 
for this difference is unknown, but is likely due to a 
combination of host and bacterial factors some of which 
are outlined here. Initial studies suggested that >90% 
of all DUs were associated with H. pylori, but H. pylori 
is present in only 30–60% of individuals with GUs and 
50–70% of patients with DUs. The pathophysiology of 
ulcers not associated with H. pylori or NSAID ingestion [or 
the rare Zollinger-Ellison syndrome (ZES)] is becoming 
more relevant as the incidence of H. pylori is dropping, 
particularly in the Western world (discussed later).
The particular end result of H. pylori infection (gas-
tritis, PUD, gastric MALT lymphoma, gastric cancer) 
is determined by a complex interplay between bacterial 
and host factors (Fig. 14-6).
1.	 Bacterial factors: H. pylori is able to facilitate gastric 
residence, induce mucosal injury, and avoid host 
defense. Different strains of H. pylori produce differ-
ent virulence factors. A specific region of the bacte-
rial genome, the pathogenicity island (cag-PAI), 
encodes the virulence factors Cag A and pic B. Vac A 
also contributes to pathogenicity, although it is not 
encoded within the pathogenicity island. These viru-
lence factors, in conjunction with additional bacte-
rial constituents, can cause mucosal damage, in part 
through their ability to target the host immune cells. 
For example, Vac A targets human CD4 T cells, 
inhibiting their proliferation, and in addition can 
disrupt normal function of B cells, CD8 T cells, 
macrophages, and mast cells. Multiple studies have 
demonstrated that H. pylori strains that are cag-PAI 
positive are associated with a higher risk of peptic 
ulcer disease, premalignant gastric lesions, and gastric 
cancer than are strains that lack the cag-PAI. Urease, 
which allows the bacteria to reside in the acidic stom-
ach, generates NH3, which can damage epithelial cells. 
The bacteria produce surface factors that are chemo-
tactic for neutrophils and monocytes, which in turn 
contribute to epithelial cell injury (discussed later). 
H. pylori makes proteases and phospholipases that 
break down the glycoprotein lipid complex of the 
mucous gel, thus reducing the efficacy of this first line 
of mucosal defense. H. pylori expresses adhesins (OMPs 
like BabA), which facilitate attachment of the bac-
teria to gastric epithelial cells. Although lipopolysac-
charide (LPS) of gram-negative bacteria often plays an 
important role in the infection, H. pylori LPS has low 
Bacterial factors
    Structure
    Adhesins
    Porins
    Enzymes
      (urease, vac A, cag A, etc.)
Host factors
    Duration
    Location
    Inflammatory response
    Genetics??
Chronic gastritis
Peptic ulcer disease
Gastric MALT lymphoma
Gastric cancer
Figure 14-6
Outline of the bacterial and host factors important in 
determining H. pylori–induced gastrointestinal disease. 
MALT, mucosal-associated lymphoid tissue.
SECTION III
Disorders of the Alimentary Tract
134
­immunologic activity compared to that of other organ-
isms. It may promote a smoldering chronic inflammation.
2.	 Host factors: Studies in twins suggest that there may 
be genetic predisposition to acquire H. pylori. The 
inflammatory response to H. pylori includes recruit-
ment of neutrophils, lymphocytes (T and B), macro-
phages, and plasma cells. The pathogen leads to local 
injury by binding to class II major histocompatabil-
ity complex (MHC) molecules expressed on gastric 
epithelial cells, leading to cell death (apoptosis). More-
over, bacterial strains that encode cag-PAI can intro-
duce Cag A into the host cells, leading to further cell 
injury and activation of cellular pathways involved 
in cytokine production. Elevated concentrations of 
multiple cytokines are found in the gastric epithelium 
of H. pylori–infected individuals, including inter-
leukin (IL) 1α/β, IL-2, IL-6, IL-8, tumor necrosis 
factor (TNF) α, and interferon (IFN-γ). H. pylori 
infection also leads to both a mucosal and a systemic 
humoral response, which does not lead to eradication 
of the bacteria but further compounds epithelial cell 
injury. Additional mechanisms by which H. pylori 
may cause epithelial cell injury include (1) activated 
neutrophil-mediated production of reactive oxy-
gen or nitrogen species and enhanced epithelial cell 
turnover and (2) apoptosis related to interaction with 
T cells (T helper 1, or TH1, cells) and IFN-γ.
The reason for H. pylori–mediated duodenal ulcer-
ation remains unclear. Studies suggest that H. pylori 
associated with duodenal ulceration may be more viru-
lent. In addition, certain specific bacterial factors such 
as the duodenal ulcer-promoting gene A (dupA), may 
be associated with the development of duodenal ulcers. 
Another potential contributing factor is that gastric 
metaplasia in the duodenum of DU patients, which may 
be due to high acid exposure (discussed later), permits 
H. pylori to bind to it and produce local injury secondary 
to the host response. Another hypothesis is that H. pylori 
antral infection could lead to increased acid production, 
increased duodenal acid, and mucosal injury. Basal and 
stimulated [meal, gastrin-releasing peptide (GRP)] gas-
trin release are increased in H. pylori–infected individu-
als, and somatostatin-secreting D cells may be decreased. 
H. pylori infection might induce increased acid secretion 
through both direct and indirect actions of H. pylori and 
proinflammatory cytokines (IL-8, TNF, and IL-1) on 
G, D, and parietal cells (Fig. 14-7). Gastric ulcers, in 
contrast, are associated with H. pylori induced pangas-
tritis and normal or low gastric acid secretion. H. pylori 
infection has also been associated with decreased duo-
denal mucosal bicarbonate production. Data supporting 
and contradicting each of these interesting theories have 
been demonstrated. Thus, the mechanism by which 
H. pylori infection of the stomach leads to duodenal 
ulceration remains to be established.
In summary, the final effect of H. pylori on the GI 
tract is variable and determined by microbial and host 
factors. The type and distribution of gastritis corre-
late with the ultimate gastric and duodenal pathology 
observed. Specifically, the presence of antral-predominant 
gastritis is associated with DU formation; gastritis 
involving primarily the corpus predisposes to the devel-
opment of GUs, gastric atrophy, and ultimately gastric 
carcinoma (Fig. 14-8).
Parietal cell
FUNDUS
Vagus
Acetylcholine
Histamine
Histamine
H, K ATPase
Tubulovesicles
Somatostatin
Somatostatin
ECL cell
Gastrin
ECL cell
D cell
Canaliculus
Blood vessel
Gastrin
D cell
G cell
ANTRUM
Somatostatin
+
+
–
–
+
+
+
–
Figure 14-7 
Summary of potential mechanisms by which H. pylori may 
lead to gastric secretory abnormalities. D, somatostatin 
cell; ECL, enterochromaffin-like cell; G, G cell. (Adapted from 
J Calam et al: Gastroenterology 113:543, 1997.)
High level of acid production
Low level of acid production
Childhood
Advanced age
Normal gastric
mucosa
Acute
H. pylori
infection
Chronic
H. pylori
infection
Antral-
predominant
gastritis
Nonatrophic
pangastritis
Corpus-
predominant
atrophic
gastritis
Gastric ulcer
Gastric
cancer
Intestinal metaplasia
Dysplasia
Duodenal ulcer
MALT
lymphoma
Asymptomatic
H. pylori
infection
Figure 14-8 
Natural history of H. pylori infection. (Used with permission 
from S Suerbaum, P Michetti: N Engl J Med 347:1175, 2002.)
 
CHAPTER 14
Peptic Ulcer Disease and Related Disorders
135
Nsaid-induced disease
Epidemiology
NSAIDs represent a group of the most commonly used 
medications in the United States. More than 30 billion 
over-the-counter tablets and over 100 million prescrip-
tions are sold yearly in the United States alone. In fact, 
after the introduction of COX-2 inhibitors in the year 
2000, the number of prescriptions written for NSAIDs 
was >111 million at a cost of $4.8 billion. Side effects 
and complications due to NSAIDs are considered the 
most common drug-related toxicities in the United 
States. The spectrum of NSAID-induced morbidity 
ranges from nausea and dyspepsia (prevalence reported 
as high as 50–60%) to a serious GI complication such 
as endoscopy-documented peptic ulceration (15–30% 
of individuals taking NSAIDs regularly) complicated 
by bleeding or perforation in as many as 1.5% of users 
per year. It is estimated that NSAID-induced GI bleed-
ing accounts for 60,000 to 120,000 hospital admissions 
per year, and deaths related to NSAID-induced tox-
icity may be as high as 16,000 per year in the United 
States. Approximately 4–5% of patients develop symp-
tomatic ulcers within 1 year. Unfortunately, dyspep-
tic symptoms do not correlate with NSAID-induced 
pathology. Over 80% of patients with serious NSAID-
related complications did not have preceding dyspepsia. 
In view of the lack of warning signs, it is important to 
identify patients who are at increased risk for morbidity 
and mortality related to NSAID usage. Even 75 mg/d 
of aspirin may lead to serious GI ulceration; thus, no 
dose of NSAID is completely safe. Established risk fac-
tors include advanced age, history of ulcer, concomitant 
use of glucocorticoids, high-dose NSAIDs, multiple 
NSAIDs, concomitant use of anticoagulants, clopidogrel, 
and serious or multisystem disease. Possible risk factors 
include concomitant infection with H. pylori, cigarette 
smoking, and alcohol consumption.
Pathophysiology
Prostaglandins play a critical role in maintaining gas-
troduodenal mucosal integrity and repair. It therefore 
follows that interruption of prostaglandin synthesis 
can impair mucosal defense and repair, thus facilitating 
mucosal injury via a systemic mechanism. Animal studies 
have demonstrated that neutrophil adherence to the 
gastric microcirculation plays an essential role in the 
initiation of NSAID-induced mucosal injury. A sum-
mary of the pathogenetic pathways by which systemi-
cally administered NSAIDs may lead to mucosal injury 
is shown in Fig. 14-9.
Injury to the mucosa also occurs as a result of the 
topical encounter with NSAIDs. Aspirin and many 
NSAIDs are weak acids that remain in a nonionized 
lipophilic form when found within the acid environ-
ment of the stomach. Under these conditions, NSAIDs 
migrate across lipid membranes of epithelial cells, 
leading to cell injury once trapped intracellularly in an 
ionized form. Topical NSAIDs can also alter the sur-
face mucous layer, permitting back diffusion of H+ and 
pepsin, leading to further epithelial cell damage. More-
over, enteric-coated or buffered preparations are also 
associated with risk of peptic ulceration.
The interplay between H. pylori and NSAIDs in the 
pathogenesis of PUD is complex. Meta-analysis sup-
ports the conclusion that each of these aggressive fac-
tors is independent and synergistic risk factors for PUD 
and its complications such as GI bleeding. For example, 
eradication of H. pylori reduces the likelihood of GI 
complications in high-risk individuals to levels observed 
in individuals with average risk of NSAID-induced 
complications.
Pathogenetic factors unrelated to H. pylori and 
NSAID in acid peptic disease
Cigarette smoking has been implicated in the patho-
genesis of PUD. Not only have smokers been found 
to have ulcers more frequently than do nonsmokers, 
but smoking appears to decrease healing rates, impair 
response to therapy, and increase ulcer-related compli-
cations such as perforation. The mechanism responsible 
for increased ulcer diathesis in smokers is unknown. 
Theories have included altered gastric emptying, dec­
reased proximal duodenal bicarbonate production, 
increased risk for H. pylori infection, and cigarette-
induced generation of noxious mucosal free radicals. 
Genetic predisposition may play a role in ulcer devel-
opment. First-degree relatives of DU patients are three 
times as likely to develop an ulcer; however, the poten-
tial role of H. pylori infection in contacts is a major 
consideration. Increased frequency of blood group O and 
Endothelial effects 
  • Stasis         Ischemia
ULCER
EROSIONS
HEALING (spontaneous
  or therapeutic)
Epithelial effects (due to
  prostaglandin depletion)
  • ↑HCl secretion
  • ↓Mucin secretion
  • ↓HCO3
– secretion
  • ↓Surface active
 
phospholipid
 
secretion
  • ↓Epithelial cell
 
proliferation    
  • Direct toxicity
    “ion trapping”
Acid
Figure 14-9 
Mechanisms by which NSAIDs may induce mucosal injury. 
(Adapted from J Scheiman et al: J Clin Outcomes Manage-
ment 3:23, 1996. ghgh 2003 Turner White Communica-
tions, Inc., www.turner-white.com. Used with permission.)
SECTION III
Disorders of the Alimentary Tract
136
of the nonsecretor status have also been implicated as 
genetic risk factors for peptic diathesis. However, 
H. pylori preferentially binds to group O antigens. Psy-
chological stress has been thought to contribute to 
PUD, but studies examining the role of psychological 
factors in its pathogenesis have generated conflicting 
results. Although PUD is associated with certain per-
sonality traits (neuroticism), these same traits are also 
present in individuals with nonulcer dyspepsia (NUD) 
and other functional and organic disorders.
Diet has also been thought to play a role in peptic dis-
eases. Certain foods and beverages can cause dyspepsia, but 
no convincing studies indicate an association between 
ulcer formation and a specific diet. Specific chronic 
disorders have been shown to have a strong association 
with PUD: (1) systemic mastocytosis, (2) chronic pul-
monary disease, (3) chronic renal failure,(4) cirrhosis, 
(5) nephrolithiasis, and (6) α1-antitrypsin deficiency. 
Those with a possible association are (1) hyperparathy-
roidism, (2) coronary artery disease, (3) polycythemia 
vera, and (4) chronic pancreatitis.
Multiple factors play a role in the pathogenesis 
of PUD. The two predominant causes are H. pylori 
infection and NSAID ingestion. PUD not related to 
H. pylori or NSAIDs is increasing. Other less com-
mon causes of PUD are shown in Table 14-1. These 
etiologic agents should be considered as the incidence 
of H. pylori is decreasing. Independent of the inciting 
or injurious agent, peptic ulcers develop as a result of 
an imbalance between mucosal protection/repair and 
aggressive factors. Gastric acid plays an essential role in 
mucosal injury.
Clinical Features
History
Abdominal pain is common to many GI disorders, 
including DU and GU, but has a poor predictive value 
for the presence of either DU or GU. Up to 10% of 
patients with NSAID-induced mucosal disease can pres-
ent with a complication (bleeding, perforation, and 
obstruction) without antecedent symptoms. Despite this 
poor correlation, a careful history and physical exami-
nation are essential components of the approach to a 
patient suspected of having peptic ulcers.
Epigastric pain described as a burning or gnaw-
ing discomfort can be present in both DU and 
GU. The discomfort is also described as an ill-defined, 
aching sensation or as hunger pain. The typical pain 
pattern in DU occurs 90 min to 3 h after a meal and 
is frequently relieved by antacids or food. Pain that 
awakes the patient from sleep (between midnight and 
3 a.m.) is the most discriminating symptom, with two-
thirds of DU patients describing this complaint. Unfor-
tunately, this symptom is also present in one-third of 
patients with NUD. The pain pattern in GU patients 
may be different from that in DU patients, where dis-
comfort may actually be precipitated by food. Nausea 
and weight loss occur more commonly in GU patients. 
Endoscopy detects ulcers in <30% of patients who have 
dyspepsia.
The mechanism for development of abdominal pain 
in ulcer patients is unknown. Several possible explana-
tions include acid-induced activation of chemical recep-
tors in the duodenum, enhanced duodenal sensitivity to 
bile acids and pepsin, or altered gastroduodenal motility.
Variation in the intensity or distribution of the 
abdominal pain, as well as the onset of associated symp-
toms such as nausea and/or vomiting, may be indica-
tive of an ulcer complication. Dyspepsia that becomes 
constant, is no longer relieved by food or antacids, or 
radiates to the back may indicate a penetrating ulcer 
(pancreas). Sudden onset of severe, generalized abdomi-
nal pain may indicate perforation. Pain worsening with 
meals, nausea, and vomiting of undigested food suggest 
gastric outlet obstruction. Tarry stools or coffee-ground 
emesis indicate bleeding.
Physical examination
Epigastric tenderness is the most frequent finding in 
patients with GU or DU. Pain may be found to the 
Table 14-1 
Causes of Ulcers Not Caused by 
Helicobacter pylori and NSAIDs
Pathogenesis of Non-Hp and Non-NSAID Ulcer Disease
Infection
  Cytomegalovirus
Herpes simplex virus
H. heilmannii
Drug/Toxin
Bisphosphonates
Chemotherapy
Clopidogrel
Crack cocaine
Glucocorticoids (when combined with NSAIDs)
Mycophenolate mofetil
Potassium chloride
Miscellaneous
Basophilia in myeloproliferative disease
Duodenal obstruction (e.g., annular pancreas)
Infiltrating disease
Ischemia
Radiation therapy
Sarcoidosis
Crohn’s disease
Idiopathic hypersecretory state
Abbreviations: Hp, H. pylori; NSAIDs, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory 
drugs.
 
CHAPTER 14
Peptic Ulcer Disease and Related Disorders
137
right of the midline in 20% of patients. Unfortunately, 
the predictive value of this finding is rather low. Physi-
cal examination is critically important for discover-
ing evidence of ulcer complication. Tachycardia and 
orthostasis suggest dehydration secondary to vomiting 
or active GI blood loss. A severely tender, board-like 
abdomen suggests a perforation. Presence of a succus-
sion splash indicates retained fluid in the stomach, sug-
gesting gastric outlet obstruction.
Pud-related complications
Gastrointestinal bleeding
GI bleeding is the most common complication observed 
in PUD. It occurs in ∼15% of patients and more often 
in individuals >60 years of age. The mortality rate is as 
high as 5–10%. The higher incidence in the elderly is 
likely due to the increased use of NSAIDs in this group. 
Up to 20% of patients with ulcer-related hemorrhage 
bleed without any preceding warning signs or symptoms.
Perforation
The second most common ulcer-related compli-
cation is perforation, being reported in as many as 
6–7% of PUD patients. As in the case of bleeding, 
the incidence of perforation in the elderly appears to 
be increasing secondary to increased use of NSAIDs. 
Penetration is a form of perforation in which the ulcer 
bed tunnels into an adjacent organ. DUs tend to pen-
etrate posteriorly into the pancreas, leading to pan-
creatitis, whereas GUs tend to penetrate into the left 
hepatic lobe. Gastrocolic fistulas associated with GUs 
have also been described.
Gastric outlet obstruction
Gastric outlet obstruction is the least common ulcer-
related complication, occurring in 1–2% of patients. A 
patient may have relative obstruction secondary to ulcer-
related inflammation and edema in the peripyloric region. 
This process often resolves with ulcer healing. A fixed, 
mechanical obstruction secondary to scar formation in 
the peripyloric areas is also possible. The latter requires 
endoscopic (balloon dilation) or surgical intervention. 
Signs and symptoms relative to mechanical obstruc-
tion may develop insidiously. New onset of early sati-
ety, nausea, vomiting, increase of postprandial abdomi-
nal pain, and weight loss should make gastric outlet 
obstruction a possible diagnosis.
Differential diagnosis
The list of gastrointestinal and nongastrointestinal dis-
orders that can mimic ulceration of the stomach or 
duodenum is quite extensive. The most commonly 
encountered diagnosis among patients seen for upper 
abdominal discomfort is NUD. NUD, also known 
as functional dyspepsia or essential dyspepsia, refers to a 
group of heterogeneous disorders typified by upper 
abdominal pain without the presence of an ulcer. Dys-
pepsia has been reported to occur in up to 30% of 
the U.S. population. Up to 60% of patients seeking 
medical care for dyspepsia have a negative diagnostic 
evaluation. The etiology of NUD is not established, 
and the potential role of H. pylori in NUD remains 
controversial.
Several additional disease processes that may pres-
ent with “ulcer-like” symptoms include proximal GI 
tumors, gastroesophageal reflux, vascular disease, pan-
creaticobiliary disease (biliary colic, chronic pancreatitis), 
and gastroduodenal Crohn’s disease.
Diagnostic evaluation
In view of the poor predictive value of abdominal pain 
for the presence of a gastroduodenal ulcer and the mul-
tiple disease processes that can mimic this disease, the 
clinician is often confronted with having to establish 
the presence of an ulcer. Documentation of an ulcer 
requires either a radiographic (barium study) or an 
endoscopic procedure. However, a large percentage 
of patients with symptoms suggestive of an ulcer have 
NUD; empirical therapy is appropriate for individuals 
who are otherwise healthy and <45 years of age, before 
embarking on a diagnostic evaluation (Chap. 5).
Barium studies of the proximal GI tract are still 
commonly used as a first test for documenting an 
ulcer. The sensitivity of older single-contrast barium 
meals for detecting a DU is as high as 80%, with a 
double-contrast study providing detection rates as 
high as 90%. Sensitivity for detection is decreased 
in small ulcers (<0.5 cm), presence of previous scar-
ring, or in postoperative patients. A DU appears as a 
well-demarcated crater, most often seen in the bulb 
(Fig. 14-10A). A GU may represent benign or malig-
nant disease. Typically, a benign GU also appears as a 
discrete crater with radiating mucosal folds originat-
ing from the ulcer margin (Fig. 14-10B). Ulcers >3 
cm in size or those associated with a mass are more 
often malignant. Unfortunately, up to 8% of GUs 
that appear to be benign by radiographic appearance 
are malignant by endoscopy or surgery. Radiographic 
studies that show a GU must be followed by endos-
copy and biopsy.
Endoscopy provides the most sensitive and specific 
approach for examining the upper GI tract (Fig. 14-11). 
In addition to permitting direct visualization of the 
mucosa, endoscopy facilitates photographic documen-
tation of a mucosal defect and tissue biopsy to rule out 
malignancy (GU) or H. pylori. Endoscopic examination 
is particularly helpful in identifying lesions too small to 
detect by radiographic examination, for evaluation of 
atypical radiographic abnormalities, or to determine if an 
ulcer is a source of blood loss.
SECTION III
Disorders of the Alimentary Tract
138
The methods for diagnosing H. pylori are briefly dis-
cussed here (Table 14-2). Several biopsy urease tests 
have been developed (PyloriTek, CLOtest, Hpfast, 
Pronto Dry) that have a sensitivity and specificity of 
>90–95%. Several noninvasive methods for detect-
ing this organism have been developed. Three types 
of studies routinely used include serologic testing, the 
13C- or 14C-urea breath test, and the fecal H. pylori 
(Hp) antigen test. A urinary Hp antigen test, as well as a 
refined monoclonal antibody stool antigen test, appears 
promising.
Occasionally, specialized testing such as serum gastrin 
and gastric acid analysis or sham feeding may be needed 
in individuals with complicated or refractory PUD [see 
“Zollinger-Ellison”]. Screening for aspirin or NSAIDs 
(blood or urine) may also be necessary in refractory 
H. pylori–negative PUD patients.
Treatment	
Peptic Ulcer Disease
Before the discovery of H. pylori, the therapy of PUD 
was centered on the old dictum by Schwartz of “no 
acid, no ulcer.” Although acid secretion is still important 
in the pathogenesis of PUD, eradication of H. pylori and 
A
B
Figure 14-10 
Barium study demonstrating: A. a benign duodenal ulcer; B. a benign gastric ulcer.
Figure 14-11 
Endoscopy demonstrating: A. a benign duodenal ulcer; B. a benign gastric ulcer.
 
CHAPTER 14
Peptic Ulcer Disease and Related Disorders
139
Table 14-2
Tests for Detection of H. Pylori
Test
Sensitivity/
Specificity, %
Comments
Invasive (Endoscopy/Biopsy Required)
Rapid 
urease
80–95/95–100
Simple, false negative with 
recent use of PPIs,  
antibiotics, or bismuth 
compounds
Histology
80–90/>95
Requires pathology  
processing and staining; 
provides histologic  
information
Culture
—/—
Time-consuming,  
expensive, dependent on 
experience; allows deter-
mination of antibiotic  
susceptibility
Noninvasive
Serology
>80/>90
Inexpensive, convenient; 
not useful for early  
follow-up
Urea 
breath 
test
>90/>90
Simple, rapid; useful  
for early follow-up; false 
negatives with recent 
therapy (see rapid urease 
test); exposure to  
low-dose radiation with 
14C test
Stool 
antigen
>90/>90
Inexpensive, convenient; 
not established for  
eradication but  
promising
Abbreviation: PPIs, proton pump inhibitors.
Table 14-3 
Drugs Used in the Treatment of Peptic  
Ulcer Disease
Drug Type/
Mechanism
Examples
Dose
Acid-suppressing drugs
Antacids
Mylanta, 
Maalox, Tums, 
Gaviscon
100–140 meq/L 
1 and 3 h after 
meals and hs
H2 receptor 
antagonists
Cimetidine
Ranitidine
400 mg bid
300 mg hs
Famotidine
40 mg hs
Nizatidine
300 mg hs
Proton pump 
inhibitors
Omeprazole
Lansoprazole
20 mg/d
30 mg/d
Rabeprazole
20 mg/d
Pantoprazole
40 mg/d
Esomeprazole
20 mg/d
Mucosal protective agents
Sucralfate
Sucralfate
1 g qid
Prostaglandin 
analogue
Misoprostol
200 μg qid
Bismuth- 
containing  
compounds
Bismuth  
subsalicylate 
(BSS)
See anti-H. pylori 
regimens  
(Table 14-4)
Abbreviation: hs, at bedtime (hora somni).
therapy/prevention of NSAID-induced disease is the 
mainstay of treatment. A summary of commonly used 
drugs for treatment of acid peptic disorders is shown in 
Table 14-3.
Acid Neutralizing/Inhibitory Drugs
Antacids  Before we understood the important role 
of histamine in stimulating parietal cell activity, neutral-
ization of secreted acid with antacids constituted the 
main form of therapy for peptic ulcers. They are now 
rarely, if ever, used as the primary therapeutic agent 
but instead are often used by patients for symptomatic 
relief of dyspepsia. The most commonly used agents 
are mixtures of aluminum hydroxide and magnesium 
hydroxide. Aluminum hydroxide can produce constipa-
tion and phosphate depletion; magnesium hydroxide 
may cause loose stools. Many of the commonly used 
antacids (e.g., Maalox, Mylanta) have a combination of 
both aluminum and magnesium hydroxide in order to 
avoid these side effects. The magnesium-containing 
preparation should not be used in chronic renal failure 
patients because of possible hypermagnesemia, and 
aluminum may cause chronic neurotoxicity in these 
patients.
Calcium carbonate and sodium bicarbonate are 
potent antacids with varying levels of potential prob-
lems. The long-term use of calcium carbonate (converts 
to calcium chloride in the stomach) can lead to milk-
alkali syndrome (hypercalcemia, hyperphosphatemia 
with possible renal calcinosis and progression to renal 
insufficiency). Sodium bicarbonate may induce systemic 
alkalosis.
H2 Receptor Antagonists  Four of these agents 
are presently available (cimetidine, ranitidine, famotidine, 
and nizatidine), and their structures share homology 
with histamine. Although each has different potency, all 
will significantly inhibit basal and stimulated acid secre-
tion to comparable levels when used at therapeutic 
doses. Moreover, similar ulcer-healing rates are achieved 
with each drug when used at the correct dosage. Pres-
ently, this class of drug is often used for treatment of 
active ulcers (4–6 weeks) in combination with antibiotics 
directed at eradicating H. pylori (discussed later).
Cimetidine was the first H2 receptor antagonist 
used for the treatment of acid peptic disorders. The ini-
tial recommended dosing profile for cimetidine was  
SECTION III
Disorders of the Alimentary Tract
140
300 mg qid. Subsequent studies have documented the 
efficacy of using 800 mg at bedtime for treatment of  
active ulcer, with healing rates approaching 80% at  
4 weeks. Cimetidine may have weak antiandrogenic side 
effects resulting in reversible gynecomastia and impo-
tence, primarily in patients receiving high doses for pro-
longed periods of time (months to years, as in ZES). In 
view of cimetidine’s ability to inhibit cytochrome P450, 
careful monitoring of drugs such as warfarin, phe-
nytoin, and theophylline is indicated with long-term 
usage. Other rare reversible adverse effects reported 
with cimetidine include confusion and elevated levels 
of serum aminotransferases, creatinine, and serum pro-
lactin. Ranitidine, famotidine, and nizatidine are more 
potent H2 receptor antagonists than cimetidine. Each 
can be used once a day at bedtime for ulcer prevention, 
which was commonly done before the discovery of H. 
pylori and the development of proton pump inhibitors 
(PPIs). Patients may develop tolerance to H2 blockers, a 
rare event with PPIs (discussed later). Comparable night-
time dosing regimens are ranitidine 300 mg, famotidine 
40 mg, and nizatidine 300 mg.
Additional rare, reversible systemic toxicities reported 
with H2 receptor antagonists include pancytopenia, 
neutropenia, anemia, and thrombocytopenia, with a 
prevalence rate varying from 0.01–0.2%. Cimetidine 
and ranitidine (to a lesser extent) can bind to hepatic 
cytochrome P450; famotidine and nizatidine do not.
Proton 
Pump 
(H+,K+-ATPase) 
Inhibitors 
Omeprazole, esomeprazole, lansoprazole, rabepra-
zole, and pantoprazole are substituted benzimidazole 
derivatives that covalently bind and irreversibly inhibit 
H+,K+-ATPase. Esomeprazole, the newest member of this 
drug class, is the S-enantiomer of omeprazole, which 
is a racemic mixture of both S- and R-optical isomers. 
These are the most potent acid inhibitory agents avail-
able. Omeprazole and lansoprazole are the PPIs that 
have been used for the longest time. Both are acid-
labile and are administered as enteric-coated granules 
in a sustained-release capsule that dissolves within the 
small intestine at a pH of 6. Lansoprazole is available in 
an orally disintegrating tablet that can be taken with or 
without water, an advantage for individuals who have 
significant dysphagia. Absorption kinetics are similar 
to the capsule. In addition, a lansoprazole-naproxen 
combination preparation that has been made available 
is targeted at decreasing NSAID-related GI injury (dis-
cussed later). Omeprazole is available as nonenteric-
coated granules mixed with sodium bicarbonate in a 
powder form that can be administered orally or via gas-
tric tube. The sodium bicarbonate has two purposes: 
to protect the omeprazole from acid degradation and 
to promote rapid gastric alkalinization and subsequent 
proton pump activation, which facilitates rapid action 
of the PPI. Pantoprazole and rabeprazole are available  
as enteric-coated tablets. Pantoprazole is also available as  
a parenteral formulation for intravenous use. These 
agents are lipophilic compounds; upon entering the 
parietal cell, they are protonated and trapped within 
the acid environment of the tubulovesicular and cana-
licular system. These agents potently inhibit all phases 
of gastric acid secretion. Onset of action is rapid, with a 
maximum acid inhibitory effect between 2 and 6 hours 
after administration and duration of inhibition lasting 
up to 72–96 hours. With repeated daily dosing, pro-
gressive acid inhibitory effects are observed, with basal 
and secretagogue-stimulated acid production being 
inhibited by >95% after 1 week of therapy. The half-life 
of PPIs is ∼18 hours; thus, it can take between 2 and 
5 days for gastric acid secretion to return to nor-
mal levels once these drugs have been discontinued. 
Because the pumps need to be activated for these 
agents to be effective, their efficacy is maximized if 
they are administered before a meal (except for the 
immediate-release formulation of omeprazole) (e.g., 
in the morning before breakfast). Mild to moderate 
hypergastrinemia has been observed in patients tak-
ing these drugs. Carcinoid tumors developed in some 
animals given the drugs preclinically; however, exten-
sive experience has failed to demonstrate gastric car-
cinoid tumor development in humans. Serum gastrin 
levels return to normal levels within 1–2 weeks after 
drug cessation. Rebound gastric acid hypersecretion 
has been described in H. pylori-negative individuals 
after discontinuation of PPIs. It occurs even after rela-
tively short-term usage (2 months) and may last for 
up to 2 months after the PPI has been discontinued. 
The mechanism involves gastrin-induced hyperplasia 
and hypertrophy of histamine-secreting ECL cells. The 
clinical relevance of this observation is that individuals 
may have worsening symptoms of gastroesophageal 
reflux disease (GERD) or dyspepsia upon stopping the 
PPI. Gradual tapering of the PPI and switching to an 
H2 receptor antagonist may prevent this from occur-
ring. H. pylori–induced inflammation and concomi-
tant decrease in acid production may explain why  
this does not occur in H. pylori–positive patients. IF 
production is also inhibited, but vitamin B12-deficiency 
anemia is uncommon, probably because of the large 
stores of the vitamin. As with any agent that leads to sig-
nificant hypochlorhydria, PPIs may interfere with absorp-
tion of drugs such as ketoconazole, ampicillin, iron, and 
digoxin. Hepatic cytochrome P450 can be inhibited by 
the earlier PPIs (omeprazole, lansoprazole). Rabeprazole, 
pantoprazole, and esomeprazole do not appear to inter-
act significantly with drugs metabolized by the cyto-
chrome P450 system. The overall clinical significance of 
this observation is not definitely established. Caution 
should be taken when using theophylline, warfarin, 
 
CHAPTER 14
Peptic Ulcer Disease and Related Disorders
141
diazepam, atazanavir, and phenytoin concomitantly 
with PPIs. Long-term acid suppression, especially with 
PPIs, has been associated with a higher incidence of 
community-acquired pneumonia as well as community- 
and hospital-acquired Clostridium difficile–associated 
disease. These observations require confirmation but 
should alert the practitioner to take caution when rec-
ommending these agents for long-term use, especially 
in elderly patients at risk for developing pneumonia or 
C. difficile infection. A population-based study revealed 
that long-term use of PPIs was associated with the 
development of hip fractures in older women. The abso-
lute risk of fracture remained low despite an observed 
increase associated with the dose and duration of acid 
suppression. The mechanism for this observation is not 
clear and this finding must be confirmed before making 
broad recommendations regarding the discontinuation 
of these agents in patients who benefit from them. PPIs 
may exert a negative effect on the anti-platelet effect of 
clopidogrel. Although the evidence is mixed and incon-
clusive, a small increase in mortality and readmission 
rate for coronary events is seen in patients receiving a 
PPI while on clopidogrel. The mechanism involves the 
competition of the PPI and clopidogrel with the same 
cytochrome P450 (CYP2C19). Whether this is a class 
effect of PPIs is unclear; there appears to be at least a 
theoretical advantage of pantoprazole over the other 
PPIs, but this has not been confirmed. This drug interac-
tion is particularly relevant in light of the common use 
of aspirin and clopidogrel for prevention of coronary 
events and the efficacy of PPIs in preventing GI bleeding 
in these patients. The FDA has made several recommen-
dations while awaiting further evidence to clarify the 
impact of PPI therapy on clopidogrel use. Health care 
providers should continue to prescribe clopidogrel to 
patients who require it and should reevaluate the need 
for starting or continuing treatment with a PPI. From a 
practical standpoint additional recommendations to 
consider include: Patients taking clopidogrel with aspirin,  
especially with other GI risk factors for bleeding, should 
receive GI protective therapy. Although high-dose  
H2 blockers have been considered an option, these 
do not appear to be as effective as PPIs. If PPIs are to 
be given, there should be a 12-h separation between 
administration of the PPI and clopidogrel to minimize 
competition of the two agents with the involved cyto-
chrome P450. One option is to give the PPI 30 min 
before breakfast and the clopidogrel at bedtime. Insuf-
ficient data are available to firmly recommend one PPI 
over another.
Two new formulations of acid inhibitory agents are 
being developed. Tenatoprazole is a PPI containing an 
imidazopyridine ring instead of a benzimidazole ring, 
which promotes irreversible proton pump inhibition. 
This agent has a longer half-life than the other PPIs and 
may be beneficial for inhibiting nocturnal acid secre-
tion, which has significant relevance in GERD. A second 
new class of agents is the potassium-competitive acid 
pump antagonists (P-CABs). These compounds inhibit 
gastric acid secretion via potassium competitive bind-
ing of the H+,K+-ATPase.
Cytoprotective Agents
Sucralfate  Sucralfate is a complex sucrose salt in 
which the hydroxyl groups have been substituted by 
aluminum hydroxide and sulfate. This compound is 
insoluble in water and becomes a viscous paste within 
the stomach and duodenum, binding primarily to sites 
of active ulceration. Sucralfate may act by several mech-
anisms: serving as a physicochemical barrier, promoting 
a trophic action by binding growth factors such as EGF, 
enhancing prostaglandin synthesis, stimulating mucus 
and bicarbonate secretion, and enhancing mucosal 
defense and repair. Toxicity from this drug is rare, with 
constipation being most common (2–3%). It should be 
avoided in patients with chronic renal insufficiency to 
prevent aluminum-induced neurotoxicity. Hypophos-
phatemia and gastric bezoar formation have also been 
reported rarely. Standard dosing of sucralfate is 1 g qid.
Bismuth-Containing Preparations  Sir William 
Osler 
considered 
bismuth-containing 
compounds 
the drug of choice for treating PUD. The resurgence in 
the use of these agents is due to their effect against  
H. pylori. Colloidal bismuth subcitrate (CBS) and bismuth 
subsalicylate (BSS, Pepto-Bismol) are the most widely 
used preparations. The mechanism by which these 
agents induce ulcer healing is unclear. Adverse effects 
with short-term usage include black stools, constipa-
tion, and darkening of the tongue. Long-term usage 
with high doses, especially with the avidly absorbed 
CBS, may lead to neurotoxicity. These compounds are 
commonly used as one of the agents in an anti-H. pylori 
regimen (discussed later).
Prostaglandin Analogues  In view of their cen-
tral role in maintaining mucosal integrity and repair, 
stable prostaglandin analogues were developed for the 
treatment of PUD. The mechanism by which this rapidly 
absorbed drug provides its therapeutic effect is through 
enhancement of mucosal defense and repair. The most 
common toxicity noted with this drug is diarrhea (10–
30% incidence). Other major toxicities include uterine 
bleeding and contractions; misoprostol is contraindi-
cated in women who may be pregnant, and women of 
childbearing age must be made clearly aware of this 
potential drug toxicity. The standard therapeutic dose is 
200 mg qid.
Miscellaneous Drugs  A number of drugs includ-
ing anticholinergic agents and tricyclic anti­depressants 
SECTION III
Disorders of the Alimentary Tract
142
were used for treating acid peptic disorders but in light 
of their toxicity and the development of potent antise-
cretory agents, these are rarely, if ever, used today.
Therapy of H. Pylori  Extensive effort has 
been made in determining who of the many individu-
als with H. pylori infection should be treated. The com-
mon conclusion arrived at by multiple consensus  
conferences around the world is that H. pylori should be 
eradicated in patients with documented PUD. This holds 
true independent of time of presentation (first episode 
or not), severity of symptoms, presence of confound-
ing factors such as ingestion of NSAIDs, or whether 
the ulcer is in remission. Some have advocated treat-
ing patients with a history of documented PUD who 
are found to be H. pylori–positive by serology or breath 
testing. Over one-half of patients with gastric MALT lym-
phoma experience complete remission of the tumor 
in response to H. pylori eradication. Treating patients 
with NUD, to prevent gastric cancer or patients with 
GERD requiring long-term acid suppression, remains 
controversial. Guidelines from the American College 
of Gastroenterology suggest eradication of H. pylori in 
patients who have undergone resection of early gas-
tric cancer. The role of H. pylori eradication as a means 
to prevent gastric cancer is still controversial although 
data suggest a benefit of early eradication of H. pylori for 
prevention of gastric cancer in patients with peptic ulcer 
disease.
Multiple drugs have been evaluated in the therapy 
of H. pylori. No single agent is effective in eradicat-
ing the organism. Combination therapy for 14 days  
provides the greatest efficacy. A shorter course admin-
istration (7–10 days), although attractive, has not 
proved as successful as the 14-day regimens. The 
agents used with the greatest frequency include amoxi-
cillin, metronidazole, tetracycline, clarithromycin, and 
bismuth compounds.
The physician’s goal in treating PUD is to provide 
relief of symptoms (pain or dyspepsia), promote ulcer 
healing, and ultimately prevent ulcer recurrence and 
complications. The greatest impact of understand-
ing the role of H. pylori in peptic disease has been the 
ability to prevent recurrence. Documented eradication 
of H. pylori in patients with PUD is associated with a dra-
matic decrease in ulcer recurrence to <10–20% as com-
pared to 59% in GU patients and 67% in DU patients 
when the organism is not eliminated. Eradication of the 
organism may lead to diminished recurrent ulcer bleed-
ing. The impact of its eradication on ulcer perforation is 
unclear.
Suggested treatment regimens for H. pylori are out-
lined in Table 14-4. Choice of a particular regimen will 
be influenced by several factors, including efficacy, 
patient tolerance, existing antibiotic resistance, and cost 
of the drugs. The aim for initial eradication rates should 
be 85–90%. Dual therapy [PPI plus amoxicillin, PPI plus 
clarithromycin, ranitidine bismuth citrate (Tritec) plus 
clarithromycin] is not recommended in view of studies 
demonstrating eradication rates of <80–85%. The com-
bination of bismuth, metronidazole, and tetracycline 
was the first triple regimen found effective against H. 
pylori. The combination of two antibiotics plus either a 
PPI, H2 blocker, or bismuth compound has comparable 
success rates. Addition of acid suppression assists in 
providing early symptom relief and may enhance bacte-
rial eradication.
Triple therapy, although effective, has several 
drawbacks, including the potential for poor patient 
compliance and drug-induced side effects. Compli-
ance is being addressed by simplifying the regimens 
so that patients can take the medications twice a day. 
Simpler (dual therapy) and shorter regimens (7 and  
10 days) are not as effective as triple therapy for 14 days. 
Two anti-H. pylori regimens are available in prepack-
aged formulation: Prevpac (lansoprazole, clarithro-
mycin, and amoxicillin) and Helidac (BSS, tetracycline, 
and metronidazole). The contents of the Prevpac are 
to be taken twice per day for 14 days, whereas Helidac 
constituents are taken four times per day with an anti-
secretory agent (PPI or H2 blocker), also for at least 
14 days.
Table 14-4 
Regimens Recommended for Eradication of 
H. Pylori Infection
Drug
Dose
Triple Therapy
1.  Bismuth subsalicylate plus
Metronidazole plus
Tetracyclinea
2 tablets qid
250 mg qid
500 mg qid
2.  Ranitidine bismuth citrate plus
Tetracycline plus
Clarithromycin or  
metronidazole
400 mg bid
500 mg bid
500 mg bid
3.  Omeprazole (lansoprazole) plus
Clarithromycin plus
Metronidazoleb or
Amoxicillinc
20 mg bid (30 mg bid)
250 or 500 mg bid
500 mg bid
1 g bid
Quadruple Therapy
Omeprazole (lansoprazole)
20 mg (30 mg) daily
Bismuth subsalicylate
2 tablets qid
Metronidazole
250 mg qid
Tetracycline
500 mg qid
aAlternative: use prepacked Helidac (see text).
bAlternative: use prepacked Prevpac (see text).
cUse either metronidazole or amoxicillin, not both.
 
CHAPTER 14
Peptic Ulcer Disease and Related Disorders
143
Side effects have been reported in up to 20–30% 
of patients on triple therapy. Bismuth may cause black 
stools, constipation, or darkening of the tongue. The 
most feared complication with amoxicillin is pseu-
domembranous colitis, but this occurs in <1–2% of 
patients. Amoxicillin can also lead to antibiotic-associ-
ated diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, skin rash, and allergic 
reaction. Tetracycline has been reported to cause rashes 
and, very rarely, hepatotoxicity and anaphylaxis.
One important concern with treating patients who 
may not need therapy is the potential for develop-
ment of antibiotic-resistant strains. The incidence and 
type of antibiotic-resistant H. pylori strains vary world-
wide. Strains resistant to metronidazole, clarithromycin, 
amoxicillin, and tetracycline have been described, with 
the latter two being uncommon. Antibiotic-resistant 
strains are the most common cause for treatment failure 
in compliant patients. Unfortunately, in vitro resistance 
does not predict outcome in patients. Culture and sen-
sitivity testing of H. pylori is not performed routinely. 
Although resistance to metronidazole has been found in 
as many as 30% of isolates in North America and 80% in 
developing countries, triple therapy is effective in eradi-
cating the organism in >50% of patients infected with a 
resistant strain. Clarithromycin resistance is seen in 13% 
of individuals in the United States, with resistance to 
amoxicillin being <1% and resistance to both metroni-
dazole and clarithromycin in the 5% range.
Failure of H. pylori eradication with triple therapy in a 
compliant patient is usually due to infection with a resis-
tant organism. Quadruple therapy (Table 14-4), where 
clarithromycin is substituted for metronidazole (or vice 
versa), should be the next step. The combination of 
pantoprazole, amoxicillin, and rifabutin for 10 days has 
also been used successfully (86% cure rate) in patients  
infected with resistant strains. Additional regimens con-
sidered for second-line therapy include levofloxacin-
based triple therapy (levofloxacin, amoxicillin, PPI) for 10 
days and furazolidone-based triple therapy (furazolidone, 
amoxicillin, PPI) for 14 days. Unfortunately, there is no 
universally accepted treatment regimen recommended 
for patients who have failed two courses of antibiotics. 
If eradication is still not achieved in a compliant patient, 
then culture and sensitivity of the organism should be 
considered. Additional factors that may lower eradica-
tion rates include the patient’s country of origin (higher 
in Northeast Asia than other parts of Asia or Europe) 
and cigarette smoking. In addition, meta-analysis sug-
gests that even the most effective regimens (quadruple 
therapy including PPI, bismuth, tetracycline, and metro-
nidazole and triple therapy including PPI, clarithromycin, 
and amoxicillin) may have suboptimal eradication rates 
(<80%), thus demonstrating the need for the develop-
ment of more efficacious treatments.
In view of the observation that 15–25% of patients 
treated with first-line therapy may still remain infected 
with the organism, new approaches to treatment have 
been explored. One promising approach is sequential 
therapy. This regimen consists of 5 days of amoxicillin 
and a PPI, followed by an additional 5 days of PPI plus 
tinidazole and clarithromycin. Initial studies have dem-
onstrated eradication rates of >90% with good patient 
tolerance. Confirmation of these findings and applicabil-
ity of this approach in the United States are needed.
Reinfection after successful eradication of H. pylori 
is rare in the United States (<1% per year). If recurrent 
infection occurs within the first 6 months after com-
pleting therapy, the most likely explanation is recrudes-
cence as opposed to reinfection.
Therapy of NSAID-Related Gastric 
or Duodenal Injury  Medical intervention 
for NSAID-related mucosal injury includes treatment 
of an active ulcer and primary prevention of future 
injury. Recommendations for the treatment and pri-
mary prevention of NSAID-related mucosal injury are 
listed in Table 14-5. Ideally, the injurious agent should 
be stopped as the first step in the therapy of an active 
NSAID-induced ulcer. If that is possible, then treatment 
with one of the acid inhibitory agents (H2 blockers, PPIs) 
is indicated. Cessation of NSAIDs is not always possible 
because of the patient’s severe underlying disease. 
Only PPIs can heal GUs or DUs, independent of whether 
NSAIDs are discontinued.
The approach to primary prevention has included 
avoiding the agent, using NSAIDs that are theoretically 
less injurious, and/or the use of concomitant medical 
therapy to prevent NSAID-induced injury. Several non-
selective NSAIDs that are associated with a lower likeli-
hood of GI toxicity include diclofenac, aceclofenac, and 
Table 14-5 
Recommendations for Treatment of NSAID-
Related Mucosal Injury
Clinical Setting
Recommendation
Active ulcer
NSAID discontinued
H2 receptor antagonist or PPI
NSAID continued
PPI
Prophylactic therapy
Misoprostol
PPI
Selective COX-2 inhibitor
H. pylori infection
Eradication if active ulcer present 
or there is a past history of  
peptic ulcer disease
Abbreviations: COX-2, isoenzyme of cyclooxygenase; PPI, proton 
pump inhibitor.
SECTION III
Disorders of the Alimentary Tract
144
ibuprofen, although the beneficial effect may be elimi-
nated if higher dosages of the agents are used. Primary 
prevention of NSAID-induced ulceration can be accom-
plished by misoprostol (200 μg qid) or a PPI. High-dose 
H2 blockers (famotidine, 40 mg bid) have also shown 
some promise in preventing endoscopically docu-
mented ulcers, although PPIs are superior. The highly 
selective COX-2 inhibitors, celecoxib and rofecoxib, are 
100 times more selective inhibitors of COX-2 than stan-
dard NSAIDs, leading to gastric or duodenal mucosal 
injury that is comparable to placebo; their utilization led 
to an increase in cardiovascular events and withdrawal 
from the market. Additional caution was engendered 
when the CLASS study demonstrated that the advan-
tage of celecoxib in preventing GI complications was 
offset when low-dose aspirin was used simultaneously. 
Therefore, gastric protection therapy is required in 
individuals taking COX-2 inhibitors and aspirin prophy-
laxis. Finally, much of the work demonstrating the ben-
efit of COX-2 inhibitors and PPIs on GI injury has been 
performed in individuals of average risk; it is unclear if 
the same level of benefit will be achieved in high-risk 
patients. For example, concomitant use of warfarin and 
a COX-2 inhibitor was associated with rates of GI bleed-
ing similar to those observed in patients taking non-
selective NSAIDs. A combination of factors, including 
withdrawal of the majority of COX-2 inhibitors from the 
market, the observation that low-dose aspirin appears 
to diminish the beneficial effect of COX-2 selective 
inhibitors, and the growing use of aspirin for prophy-
laxis of cardiovascular events, have significantly altered 
the approach to gastric protective therapy during the 
use of NSAIDs. A set of guidelines for the approach to 
the use of NSAIDs was published by the American Col-
lege of Gastroenterology and is shown in Table 14-6. 
Individuals who are not at risk for cardiovascular events, 
do not use aspirin, and are without risk for GI complica-
tions can receive nonselective NSAIDs without gastric 
protection. In those without cardiovascular risk fac-
tors but with a high potential risk (prior GI bleeding or  
multiple GI risk factors) for NSAID-induced GI toxicity, 
cautious use of a selective COX-2 inhibitor and co-ther-
apy with misoprostol or high-dose PPI is recommended. 
Individuals at moderate GI risk without cardiac risk fac-
tors can be treated with a COX-2 inhibitor alone or with 
a nonselective NSAID with misoprostol or a PPI. Indi-
viduals with cardiovascular risk factors, who require low-
dose aspirin and have low potential for NSAID-induced 
toxicity, should be considered for a non-NSAID agent 
or use of a traditional NSAID in combination with gas-
tric protection, if warranted. Finally, individuals with 
cardiovascular and GI risks who require aspirin must be 
considered for non-NSAID therapy, but if that is not an 
option, then gastric protection with any type of NSAID 
must be considered. Any patient, regardless of risk  
status, who is being considered for long-term traditional 
NSAID therapy, should also be considered for H. pylori 
testing and treatment if positive.
Approach 
and 
Therapy: 
Summary  
Controversy continues regarding the best approach 
to the patient who presents with dyspepsia (Chap. 5). 
The discovery of H. pylori and its role in pathogenesis 
of ulcers has added a new variable to the equation. 
Previously, if a patient <50 years of age presented with 
dyspepsia and without alarming signs or symptoms 
suggestive of an ulcer complication or malignancy, an 
empirical therapeutic trial with acid suppression was 
commonly recommended. Although this approach is 
practiced by some today, an approach presently gaining 
approval for the treatment of patients with dyspepsia 
is outlined in Fig. 14-12. The referral to a gastroenter-
ologist is for the potential need of endoscopy and sub-
sequent evaluation and treatment if the endoscopy is 
negative.
Once an ulcer (GU or DU) is documented, the 
main issue at stake is whether H. pylori or an NSAID 
is involved. With H. pylori present, independent of 
the NSAID status, triple therapy is recommended for  
14 days, followed by continued acid-suppressing drugs 
(H2 receptor antagonist or PPIs) for a total of 4–6 weeks. 
Selection of patients for documentation of H. pylori 
eradication (organisms gone at least 4 weeks after com-
pleting antibiotics) is an area of some debate. The test 
of choice for documenting eradication is the urea breath 
Table 14-6 
Guide to NSAID Therapy
No/Low NSAID  
GI Risk
NSAID GI Risk
No CV risk  
(no aspirin)
Traditional NSAID
Coxib or
Traditional NSAID + 
PPI or misoprostol
Consider non-NSAID 
therapy
CV risk  
(consider 
aspirin)
Traditional  
NSAID + PPI or 
misoprostol if  
GI risk warrants  
gastroprotection
A gastroprotective 
agent must be 
added if a traditional 
NSAID is prescribed
Consider  
non-NSAID 
therapy
Consider non-NSAID 
therapy
Abbreviations: CV, cardiovascular; GI, gastrointestinal; NSAID, 
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug; PPI, proton pump inhibitor.
Source: Adapted from AM Fendrick: Am J Manag Care 10:740, 
2004. Reproduced with permission of INTELLISPHERE, LLC via 
ghgh Clearance Center.
 
CHAPTER 14
Peptic Ulcer Disease and Related Disorders
145
test (UBT). The stool antigen assay may also hold prom-
ise for this purpose, but the data have not been as clear 
cut as in the case of using the stool antigen test for pri-
mary diagnosis, especially if one considers patients who 
live in areas of low H. pylori prevalence. Further stud-
ies are warranted, but if the UBT is not available, a stool 
antigen should be considered to document eradication. 
The patient must be off antisecretory agents when being 
tested for eradication of H. pylori with UBT or stool anti-
gen. Serologic testing is not useful for the purpose of 
documenting eradication since antibody titers fall slowly 
and often do not become undetectable. Two approaches 
toward documentation of eradication exist: (1) Test 
for eradication only in individuals with a complicated 
course or in individuals who are frail or with multisys-
tem disease who would do poorly with an ulcer recur-
rence, and (2) test all patients for successful eradica-
tion. Some recommend that patients with complicated 
ulcer disease, or who are frail, should be treated with 
long-term acid suppression, thus making documenta-
tion of H. pylori eradication a moot point. In view of this 
discrepancy in practice, it would be best to discuss with 
the patient the different options available.
Several issues differentiate the approach to a GU versus  
a DU. GUs, especially of the body and fundus, have the 
potential of being malignant. Multiple biopsies of a GU 
should be taken initially; even if these are negative for 
neoplasm, repeat endoscopy to document healing at 
8–12 weeks should be performed, with biopsy if the 
ulcer is still present. About 70% of GUs eventually found 
to be malignant undergo significant (usually incomplete) 
healing.
The majority (>90%) of GUs and DUs heal with the con-
ventional therapy outlined earlier. A GU that fails to heal 
after 12 weeks and a DU that does not heal after 8 weeks 
of therapy should be considered refractory. Once poor 
compliance and persistent H. pylori infection have been 
excluded, NSAID use, either inadvertent or surreptitious, 
must be excluded. In addition, cigarette smoking must be 
eliminated. For a GU, malignancy must be meticulously 
excluded. Next, consideration should be given to a gas-
tric acid hypersecretory state such as ZES (see “Zollinger- 
Ellison Syndrome,”) or the idiopathic form, which can be 
excluded with gastric acid analysis. Although a subset 
of patients have gastric acid hypersecretion of unclear 
etiology as a contributing factor to refractory ulcers, 
ZES should be excluded with a fasting gastrin or secre-
tin stimulation test (discussed later). More than 90% of 
refractory ulcers (either DUs or GUs) heal after 8 weeks 
of treatment with higher doses of PPI (omeprazole,  
40 mg/d; lansoprazole 30–60 mg/d). This higher dose is 
also effective in maintaining remission. Surgical interven-
tion may be a consideration at this point; however, other 
rare causes of refractory ulcers must be excluded before 
recommending surgery. Rare etiologies of refractory 
ulcers that may be diagnosed by gastric or duodenal biop-
sies include ischemia, Crohn’s disease, amyloidosis, sar-
coidosis, lymphoma, eosinophilic gastroenteritis, or infec-
tion [cytomegalovirus (CMV), tuberculosis, or syphilis].
Surgical Therapy  Surgical intervention in PUD 
can be viewed as being either elective, for treatment 
of medically refractory disease, or as urgent/emergent, 
for the treatment of an ulcer-related complication. 
The development of pharmacologic and endoscopic 
approaches for the treatment of peptic disease and its 
complications has led to a substantial decrease in the 
number of operations needed for this disorder. Refrac-
tory ulcers are an exceedingly rare occurrence. Surgery 
is more often required for treatment of an ulcer-related 
complication.
Hemorrhage is the most common ulcer-related com-
plication, occurring in ∼15–25% of patients. Bleeding 
may occur in any age group but is most often seen in 
older patients (sixth decade or beyond). The major-
ity of patients stop bleeding spontaneously, but 
endoscopic therapy (Chap. 12) is necessary in some.  
Parenterally and orally administered PPIs also decrease 
ulcer rebleeding in patients who have undergone endo-
scopic therapy. Patients unresponsive or refractory to 
endoscopic intervention will require surgery (∼5% of 
transfusion-requiring patients).
>40 y/o
Alarm Symptoms
New-Onset Dyspepsia
−
Noninvasive Hp testing
Confirm eradication UBT
+
Anti-Hp
therapy
Empiric trial
H2 blocker
4 weeks
after therapy
or
−
Refer to
gastroenterologist
+
Symptoms remain or recur
Exclude by history GERD, biliary
 pain, IBS, aerophagia,
 medication-related
Figure 14-12 
Overview of new-onset dyspepsia. Hp, Helicobacter 
pylori; UBT, urea breath test; IBS, irritable bowel syndrome. 
(Adapted from BS Anand and DY Graham: Endoscopy 
31:215, 1999.)
SECTION III
Disorders of the Alimentary Tract
146
Free peritoneal perforation occurs in ∼2–3% of DU 
patients. As in the case of bleeding, up to 10% of these 
patients will not have antecedent ulcer symptoms. Con-
comitant bleeding may occur in up to 10% of patients  
with perforation, with mortality being increased sub-
stantially. Peptic ulcer can also penetrate into adjacent 
organs, especially with a posterior DU, which can pen-
etrate into the pancreas, colon, liver, or biliary tree.
Pyloric channel ulcers or DUs can lead to gastric out-
let obstruction in ∼2–3% of patients. This can result 
from chronic scarring or from impaired motility due to 
inflammation and/or edema with pylorospasm. Patients 
may present with early satiety, nausea, vomiting of undi-
gested food, and weight loss. Conservative management 
with nasogastric suction, intravenous hydration/nutri-
tion, and antisecretory agents is indicated for 7–10 days 
with the hope that a functional obstruction will reverse. 
If a mechanical obstruction persists, endoscopic inter-
vention with balloon dilation may be effective. Surgery 
should be considered if all else fails.
Specific Operations for Duodenal 
Ulcers  Surgical treatment is designed to decrease 
gastric acid secretion. Operations most commonly per-
formed include (1) vagotomy and drainage (by pyloro-
plasty, gastroduodenostomy, or gastrojejunostomy),  
(2) highly selective vagotomy (which does not require a 
drainage procedure), and (3) vagotomy with antrec-
tomy. The specific procedure performed is dictated by 
the underlying circumstances: elective vs. emergency, 
the degree and extent of duodenal ulceration, and the 
expertise of the surgeon. Moreover, the trend has been 
toward minimally invasive and anatomy-preserving 
operations.
Vagotomy is a component of each of these proce-
dures and is aimed at decreasing acid secretion through 
ablating cholinergic input to the stomach. Unfortu-
nately, both truncal and selective vagotomy (preserves 
the celiac and hepatic branches) result in gastric atony 
despite successful reduction of both basal acid output 
(BAO, decreased by 85%) and maximal acid output (MAO, 
decreased by 50%). Drainage through pyloroplasty or 
gastroduodenostomy is required in an effort to com-
pensate for the vagotomy-induced gastric motility dis-
order. This procedure has an intermediate complication 
rate and a 10% ulcer recurrence rate. To minimize gastric 
dysmotility, highly selective vagotomy (also known as 
parietal cell, super-selective, or proximal vagotomy) was 
developed. Only the vagal fibers innervating the portion 
of the stomach that contains parietal cells is transected, 
thus leaving fibers important for regulating gastric motil-
ity intact. Although this procedure leads to an immediate 
decrease in both BAO and stimulated acid output, acid 
secretion recovers over time. By the end of the first post-
operative year, basal and stimulated acid output are ∼30 
and 50%, respectively, of preoperative levels. Ulcer recur-
rence rates are higher with highly selective vagotomy 
(≥10%), although the overall complication rates are the 
lowest of the three procedures.
The procedure that provides the lowest rates of ulcer 
recurrence (1%) but has the highest complication rate 
is vagotomy (truncal or selective) in combination with 
antrectomy. Antrectomy is aimed at eliminating an addi-
tional stimulant of gastric acid secretion, gastrin. Two 
principal types of reanastomoses are used after antrec-
tomy: gastroduodenostomy (Billroth I) or gastrojeju-
nostomy (Billroth II) (Fig. 14-13). Although Billroth I is 
often preferred over II, severe duodenal inflammation 
or scarring may preclude its performance. Prospective, 
randomized studies confirm that partial gastrectomy 
followed by Roux-en-Y reconstruction leads to a signifi-
cantly better clinical, endoscopic, and histologic out-
come than Billroth II reconstruction.
Of these procedures, highly selective vagotomy 
may be the one of choice in the elective setting, except 
in situations where ulcer recurrence rates are high  
(prepyloric ulcers and those refractory to medical ther-
apy). Selection of vagotomy and antrectomy may be 
more appropriate in these circumstances.
Antrum
Fundus
Billroth I
Billroth II
Duodenum
Figure 14-13 
Schematic representation of Billroth I and II procedures.
 
CHAPTER 14
Peptic Ulcer Disease and Related Disorders
147
These procedures have been traditionally performed 
by standard laparotomy. The advent of laparoscopic 
surgery has led several surgical teams to successfully 
perform highly selective vagotomy, truncal vagotomy/
pyloroplasty, and truncal vagotomy/antrectomy through 
this approach. An increase in the number of laparoscopic 
procedures for treatment of PUD has occurred. Lapa-
roscopic repair of perforated peptic ulcers is safe, fea-
sible for the experienced surgeon and is associated with 
decreased postoperative pain, although it does take 
longer than an open approach. Moreover, no difference 
between the two approaches is noted in post­operative 
complications or length of hospital stay.
Specific Operations for Gastric Ulcers  The 
location and the presence of a concomitant DU dictate 
the operative procedure performed for a GU. Antrec-
tomy (including the ulcer) with a Billroth I anastomosis 
is the treatment of choice for an antral ulcer. Vagotomy 
is performed only if a DU is present. Although ulcer exci-
sion with vagotomy and drainage procedure has been 
proposed, the higher incidence of ulcer recurrence 
makes this a less desirable approach. Ulcers located 
near the esophagogastric junction may require a more 
radical approach, a subtotal gastrectomy with a Roux-
en-Y esophagogastrojejunostomy (Csende’s procedure). 
A less aggressive approach, including antrectomy, intra-
operative ulcer biopsy, and vagotomy (Kelling-Madlener 
procedure), may be indicated in fragile patients with a 
high GU. Ulcer recurrence approaches 30% with this 
procedure.
Surgery-Related Complications  Complications 
seen after surgery for PUD are related primarily to the 
extent of the anatomic modification performed. Mini-
mal alteration (highly selective vagotomy) is associated 
with higher rates of ulcer recurrence and less GI dis-
turbance. More aggressive surgical procedures have a 
lower rate of ulcer recurrence but a greater incidence of 
GI dysfunction. Overall, morbidity and mortality related 
to these procedures are quite low. Morbidity associ-
ated with vagotomy and antrectomy or pyloroplasty 
is ≤5%, with mortality ∼1%. Highly selective vagotomy 
has lower morbidity and mortality rates of 1 and 0.3%, 
respectively.
In addition to the potential early consequences of 
any intraabdominal procedure (bleeding, infection, 
thromboembolism), gastroparesis, duodenal stump 
leak, and efferent loop obstruction can be observed.
Recurrent ulceration  The risk of ulcer recurrence 
is directly related to the procedure performed. Ulcers 
that recur after partial gastric resection tend to develop 
at the anastomosis (stomal or marginal ulcer). Epigas-
tric abdominal pain is the most frequent presenting 
complaint (>90%). Severity and duration of pain tend 
to be more progressive than observed with DUs before  
surgery.
Ulcers may recur for several reasons, including incom-
plete vagotomy, inadequate drainage, retained antrum, 
and, less likely, persistent or recurrent H. pylori infec-
tion. ZES should have been excluded preoperatively. 
Surreptitious use of NSAIDs is an important reason for 
recurrent ulcers after surgery, especially if the initial pro-
cedure was done for an NSAID-induced ulcer. Once H. 
pylori and NSAIDs have been excluded as etiologic fac-
tors, the question of incomplete vagotomy or retained 
gastric antrum should be explored. For the latter, fasting 
plasma gastrin levels should be determined. If elevated, 
retained antrum or ZES (discussed later) should be con-
sidered. Incomplete vagotomy can be ruled out by 
gastric acid analysis coupled with sham feeding. In this 
test, gastric acid output is measured while the patient 
sees, smells, and chews a meal (without ­swallowing). 
The cephalic phase of gastric secretion, which is medi-
ated by the vagus, is being assessed with this study. 
An increase in gastric acid output in response to sham 
feeding is evidence that the vagus nerve is intact. A rise 
in serum pancreatic polypeptide >50% within 30 min of 
sham feeding is also suggestive of an intact vagus nerve.
Medical therapy with H2 blockers will heal postop-
erative ulceration in 70–90% of patients. The efficacy 
of PPIs has not been fully assessed in this group, but 
one may anticipate greater rates of ulcer healing com-
pared to those obtained with H2 blockers. Repeat opera-
tion (complete vagotomy, partial gastrectomy) may be 
required in a small subgroup of patients who have not 
responded to aggressive medical management.
Afferent loop syndromes  Two types of affer-
ent loop syndrome can occur in patients who have 
undergone partial gastric resection with Billroth II 
anastomosis. The more common of the two is bacte-
rial overgrowth in the afferent limb secondary to stasis. 
Patients may experience postprandial abdominal pain, 
bloating, and diarrhea with concomitant malabsorption 
of fats and vitamin B12. Cases refractory to antibiotics 
may require surgical revision of the loop. The less com-
mon afferent loop syndrome can present with severe 
abdominal pain and bloating that occur 20–60 min after 
meals. Pain is often followed by nausea and vomiting 
of bile-containing material. The pain and bloating may 
improve after emesis. The cause of this clinical picture 
is theorized to be incomplete drainage of bile and pan-
creatic secretions from an afferent loop that is partially 
obstructed. Cases refractory to dietary measures may 
need surgical revision.
Dumping syndrome  Dumping syndrome consists 
of a series of vasomotor and GI signs and symptoms and 
occurs in patients who have undergone vagotomy and 
SECTION III
Disorders of the Alimentary Tract
148
drainage (especially Billroth procedures). Two phases of 
dumping, early and late, can occur. Early dumping takes 
place 15–30 min after meals and consists of crampy 
abdominal discomfort, nausea, diarrhea, belching, tachy-
cardia, palpitations, diaphoresis, light-headedness, and, 
rarely, syncope. These signs and symptoms arise from the 
rapid emptying of hyperosmolar gastric contents into the 
small intestine, resulting in a fluid shift into the gut lumen 
with plasma volume contraction and acute intestinal dis-
tention. Release of vasoactive GI hormones (vasoactive 
intestinal polypeptide, neurotensin, motilin) is also theo-
rized to play a role in early dumping.
The late phase of dumping typically occurs 90 min to 
3 h after meals. Vasomotor symptoms (light-­headedness, 
diaphoresis, palpitations, tachycardia, and syncope) pre-
dominate during this phase. This component of dump-
ing is thought to be secondary to hypoglycemia from 
excessive insulin release.
Dumping syndrome is most noticeable after meals 
rich in simple carbohydrates (especially sucrose) and 
high osmolarity. Ingestion of large amounts of fluids 
may also contribute. Up to 50% of postvagotomy and 
drainage patients will experience dumping syndrome to 
some degree. Signs and symptoms often improve with 
time, but a severe protracted picture can occur in up to 
1% of patients.
Dietary modification is the cornerstone of therapy for 
patients with dumping syndrome. Small, multiple (six) 
meals devoid of simple carbohydrates coupled with elimi-
nation of liquids during meals is important. Antidiarrheals 
and anticholinergic agents are complementary to diet. 
Guar and pectin, which increase the viscosity of intralu-
minal contents, may be beneficial in more symptomatic 
individuals. Acarbose, an α-glucosidase inhibitor that 
delays digestion of ingested carbohydrates, has also been 
shown to be beneficial in the treatment of the late phases 
of dumping. The somatostatin analogue octreotide has 
been successful in diet-refractory cases. This drug is 
administered subcutaneously (50 μg tid), titrated accord-
ing to clinical response. A long-acting depot formulation 
of octreotide can be administered once every 28 days and 
provides symptom relief comparable to the short-acting 
agent. In addition, patient weight gain and quality of life 
appear to be superior with the long-acting form.
Postvagotomy diarrhea  Up to 10% of patients 
may seek medical attention for the treatment of post­
vagotomy diarrhea. This complication is most commonly 
observed after truncal vagotomy. Patients may com-
plain of intermittent diarrhea that occurs typically 1–2 h 
after meals. Occasionally the symptoms may be severe 
and relentless. This is due to a motility disorder from 
interruption of the vagal fibers supplying the luminal 
gut. Other contributing factors may include decreased 
absorption of nutrients (discussed later), increased 
excretion of bile acids, and release of luminal factors 
that promote secretion. Diphenoxylate or loperamide is 
often useful in symptom control. The bile salt–binding 
agent cholestyramine may be helpful in severe cases. 
Surgical reversal of a 10-cm segment of jejunum may 
yield a substantial improvement in bowel frequency in a 
subset of patients.
Bile reflux gastropathy  A subset of postpartial 
gastrectomy patients who present with abdominal pain, 
early satiety, nausea, and vomiting will have mucosal 
erythema of the gastric remnant as the only finding. 
Histologic examination of the gastric mucosa reveals 
minimal inflammation but the presence of epithelial cell  
injury. This clinical picture is categorized as bile or alka-
line reflux gastropathy/gastritis. Although reflux of bile 
is implicated as the reason for this disorder, the mecha-
nism is unknown. Prokinetic agents, cholestyramine, and 
sucralfate have been somewhat effective treatments. 
Severe refractory symptoms may require using either 
nuclear scanning with 99mTc-HIDA to document reflux or 
an alkaline challenge test, where 0.1 N NaOH is infused 
into the stomach in an effort to reproduce the patient’s 
symptoms. Surgical diversion of pancreaticobiliary secre-
tions away from the gastric remnant with a Roux-en-Y 
gastrojejunostomy consisting of a long (50–60 cm) Roux 
limb has been used in severe cases. Bilious vomiting 
improves, but early satiety and bloating may persist in 
up to 50% of patients.
Maldigestion and malabsorption  Weight loss 
can be observed in up to 60% of patients after partial 
gastric resection. A significant component of this weight 
reduction is due to decreased oral intake. However, mild 
steatorrhea can also develop. Reasons for maldigestion/
malabsorption include decreased gastric acid produc-
tion, rapid gastric emptying, decreased food dispersion 
in the stomach, reduced luminal bile concentration, 
reduced pancreatic secretory response to feeding, and 
rapid intestinal transit.
Decreased serum vitamin B12 levels can be observed 
after partial gastrectomy. This is usually not due to defi-
ciency of IF, since a minimal amount of parietal cells 
(source of IF) are removed during antrectomy. Reduced 
vitamin B12 may be due to competition for the vitamin 
by bacterial overgrowth or inability to split the vitamin 
from its protein-bound source due to hypochlorhydria.
Iron-deficiency anemia may be a consequence of 
impaired absorption of dietary iron in patients with a 
Billroth II gastrojejunostomy. Absorption of iron salts is 
normal in these individuals; thus, a favorable response 
to oral iron supplementation can be anticipated. Folate 
deficiency with concomitant anemia can also develop 
in these patients. This deficiency may be secondary to 
decreased absorption or diminished oral intake.
 
CHAPTER 14
Peptic Ulcer Disease and Related Disorders
149
Malabsorption of vitamin D and calcium resulting in 
osteoporosis and osteomalacia is common after partial 
gastrectomy and gastrojejunostomy (Billroth II). Osteo-
malacia can occur as a late complication in up to 25% of 
postpartial gastrectomy patients. Bone fractures occur 
twice as commonly in men after gastric surgery as in  
a control population. It may take years before x-ray  
findings demonstrate diminished bone density. Ele-
vated alkaline phosphatase, reduced serum calcium, 
bone pain, and pathologic fractures may be seen in 
patients with osteomalacia. The high incidence of these 
abnormalities in this subgroup of patients justifies treat-
ing them with vitamin D and calcium supplementation 
indefinitely. Therapy is especially important in females.
Gastric adenocarcinoma  The incidence of ade-
nocarcinoma in the gastric stump is increased 15 years 
after resection. Some have reported a four- to fivefold 
increase in gastric cancer 20–25 years after resection. The 
pathogenesis is unclear but may involve alkaline reflux, 
bacterial proliferation, or hypochlorhydria. The role of 
endoscopic screening is not clear, and most guidelines 
do not support its use.
Related Conditions
Zollinger–Ellison Syndrome
Severe peptic ulcer diathesis secondary to gastric acid 
hypersecretion due to unregulated gastrin release from 
a non-β cell endocrine tumor (gastrinoma) defines 
the components of ZES. Initially, ZES was typified 
by aggressive and refractory ulceration in which total 
gastrectomy provided the only chance for enhancing 
survival. Today it can be cured by surgical resection in 
up to 30% of patients.
Epidemiology
The incidence of ZES varies from 0.1–1% of individu-
als presenting with PUD. Males are more commonly 
affected than females, and the majority of patients are 
diagnosed between ages 30 and 50. Gastrinomas are 
classified into sporadic tumors (more common) and 
those associated with multiple endocrine neoplasia 
(MEN) type I (discussed later). The widespread avail-
ability and use of PPIs has led to a decreased patient 
referral for gastrinoma evaluation, delay in diagnosis, 
and an increase in false-positive diagnoses of ZES.
Pathophysiology
Hypergastrinemia originating from an autonomous neo-
plasm is the driving force responsible for the clinical 
manifestations in ZES. Gastrin stimulates acid secretion 
through gastrin receptors on parietal cells and by induc-
ing histamine release from ECL cells. Gastrin also has a 
trophic action on gastric epithelial cells. Long-standing 
hypergastrinemia leads to markedly increased gastric 
acid secretion through both parietal cell stimulation and 
increased parietal cell mass. The increased gastric acid 
output leads to peptic ulcer diathesis, erosive esophagi-
tis, and diarrhea.
Tumor distribution
Although early studies suggested that the vast majority 
of gastrinomas occurred within the pancreas, a signifi-
cant number of these lesions are extrapancreatic. Over 
80% of these tumors are found within the hypothetical 
gastrinoma triangle (confluence of the cystic and com-
mon bile ducts superiorly, junction of the second and 
third portions of the duodenum inferiorly, and junction 
of the neck and body of the pancreas medially). Duode-
nal tumors constitute the most common nonpancreatic 
lesion; between 50 and 75% of gastrinomas are found 
here. Duodenal tumors are smaller, slower growing, and 
less likely to metastasize than pancreatic lesions. Less-
common extrapancreatic sites include stomach, bones, 
ovaries, heart, liver, and lymph nodes. More than 60% 
of tumors are considered malignant, with up to 30–50% 
of patients having multiple lesions or metastatic disease 
at presentation. Histologically, gastrin-producing cells 
appear well-differentiated, expressing markers typically 
found in endocrine neoplasms (chromogranin, neuron-
specific enolase).
Clinical manifestations
Gastric acid hypersecretion is responsible for the signs 
and symptoms observed in patients with ZES. Pep-
tic ulcer is the most common clinical manifestation, 
occurring in >90% of gastrinoma patients. Initial pre-
sentation and ulcer location (duodenal bulb) may be 
indistinguishable from common PUD. Clinical situ-
ations that should create suspicion of gastrinoma are 
ulcers in unusual locations (second part of the duode-
num and beyond), ulcers refractory to standard medical 
therapy, ulcer recurrence after acid-reducing surgery, 
ulcers presenting with frank complications (bleeding, 
obstruction, and perforation), or ulcers in the absence of 
H. pylori or NSAID ingestion. Symptoms of esophageal 
origin are present in up to two-thirds of patients with 
ZES, with a spectrum ranging from mild esophagitis to 
frank ulceration with stricture and Barrett’s mucosa.
Diarrhea, the next most common clinical mani-
festation, is found in up to 50% of patients. Although 
diarrhea often occurs concomitantly with acid pep-
tic disease, it may also occur independent of an ulcer. 
Etiology of the diarrhea is multifactorial, resulting from 
marked volume overload to the small bowel, pancreatic 
SECTION III
Disorders of the Alimentary Tract
150
enzyme inactivation by acid, and damage of the intesti-
nal epithelial surface by acid. The epithelial damage can 
lead to a mild degree of maldigestion and malabsorp-
tion of nutrients. The diarrhea may also have a secre-
tory component due to the direct stimulatory effect of 
gastrin on enterocytes or the co-secretion of additional 
hormones from the tumor such as vasoactive intestinal 
peptide.
Gastrinomas can develop in the presence of MEN I 
syndrome (Chap. 52) in ∼25% of patients. This auto-
somal dominant disorder involves primarily three 
organ sites: the parathyroid glands (80–90%), pancreas 
(40–80%), and pituitary gland (30–60%). The genetic 
defect in MEN I is in the long arm of chromosome 
11 (11q11-q13). In view of the stimulatory effect of 
calcium on gastric secretion, the hyperparathyroidism 
and hypercalcemia seen in MEN I patients may have a 
direct effect on ulcer disease. Resolution of hypercal-
cemia by parathyroidectomy reduces gastrin and gas-
tric acid output in gastrinoma patients. An additional 
distinguishing feature in ZES patients with MEN I is 
the higher incidence of gastric carcinoid tumor devel-
opment (as compared to patients with sporadic gastri-
nomas). Gastrinomas tend to be smaller, multiple, and 
located in the duodenal wall more often than is seen in 
patients with sporadic ZES. Establishing the diagnosis of 
MEN I is critical not only from the standpoint of pro-
viding genetic counseling to the patient and his or her 
family but also to the surgical approach recommended.
Diagnosis
The first step in the evaluation of a patient suspected of 
having ZES is to obtain a fasting gastrin level. A list of 
clinical scenarios that should arouse suspicion regard-
ing this diagnosis is shown in Table 14-7. Fasting 
gastrin levels are usually <150 pg/mL. Virtually all 
gastrinoma patients will have a gastrin level >150–
200 pg/mL. Measurement of fasting gastrin should be 
repeated to confirm the clinical suspicion.
Multiple processes can lead to an elevated fast-
ing gastrin level: gastric hypochlorhydria or achlorhy-
dria (the most frequent), with or without pernicious 
anemia; retained gastric antrum; G cell hyperplasia; 
gastric outlet obstruction; renal insufficiency; massive 
small-bowel obstruction; and conditions such as rheu-
matoid arthritis, vitiligo, diabetes mellitus, and pheo-
chromocytoma. Gastric acid induces feedback inhibition 
of gastrin release. A decrease in acid production will 
subsequently lead to failure of the feedback inhibitory 
pathway, resulting in net hypergastrinemia. Gastrin 
levels will thus be high in patients using antisecretory 
agents for the treatment of acid peptic disorders and 
dyspepsia. H. pylori infection can also cause hypergas-
trinemia. Although a fasting gastrin >10 times normal 
is highly suggestive of ZES, two-thirds of patients will 
have fasting gastrin levels that overlap with levels found 
in the more common disorders outlined earlier.
The next step in establishing a biochemical diagnosis 
of gastrinoma is to assess acid secretion. Nothing further 
needs to be done if decreased acid output is observed. 
In contrast, normal or elevated gastric acid output sug-
gests a need for additional tests. Up to 12% of patients 
with common PUD may have comparable levels of acid 
secretion. A BAO/MAO ratio >0.6 is highly suggestive 
of ZES, but a ratio <0.6 does not exclude the diagnosis. 
Pentagastrin is no longer available in the United States, 
making measurement of MAO virtually impossible. 
An endoscopic method for measuring gastric acid out-
put has been developed but requires further validation. 
If the technology for measuring gastric acid secretion is 
not available, a basal gastric pH ≥3 virtually excludes a 
gastrinoma.
Gastrin provocative tests have been developed in 
an effort to differentiate between the causes of hyper-
gastrinemia and are especially helpful in patients with 
indeterminate acid secretory studies. The tests are the 
secretin stimulation test and the calcium infusion study. 
The most sensitive and specific gastrin provocative test 
for the diagnosis of gastrinoma is the secretin study. An 
increase in gastrin of ≥120 pg within 15 min of secre-
tin injection has a sensitivity and specificity of >90% 
for ZES. PPI–induced hypochlorhydria or achlorhydria 
may lead to a false-positive secretin test, thus this agent 
must be stopped for 1 week before testing.
The calcium infusion study is less sensitive and spe-
cific than the secretin test, which coupled with it 
being a more cumbersome study with greater poten-
tial for adverse effects, relegates it to rare utilization in 
the cases where the patient’s clinical characteristics are 
highly suggestive of ZES, but the secretin stimulation is 
inconclusive.
Table 14-7 
When to Obtain a Fasting Serum Gastrin 
Level
Multiple ulcers
Ulcers in unusual locations; associated with severe  
esophagitis; resistant to therapy with frequent recur-
rences; in the absence of NSAID ingestion or H. pylori 
infection
Ulcer patients awaiting surgery
Extensive family history for peptic ulcer disease
Postoperative ulcer recurrence
Basal hyperchlorhydria
Unexplained diarrhea or steatorrhea
Hypercalcemia
Family history of pancreatic islet, pituitary, or parathyroid 
tumor
Prominent gastric or duodenal folds
 
CHAPTER 14
Peptic Ulcer Disease and Related Disorders
151
Tumor localization
Once the biochemical diagnosis of gastrinoma has 
been confirmed, the tumor must be located. Multi-
ple imaging studies have been utilized in an effort to 
enhance tumor localization (Table 14-8). The broad 
range of sensitivity is due to the variable success rates 
achieved by the different investigative groups. Endo-
scopic ultrasound (EUS) permits imaging of the pan-
creas with a high degree of resolution (<5 mm). This 
modality is particularly helpful in excluding small 
neoplasms within the pancreas and in assessing the 
presence of surrounding lymph nodes and vascular 
involvement, but it is not very sensitive for finding 
duodenal lesions. Several types of endocrine tumors 
express cell-surface receptors for somatostatin. This 
permits the localization of gastrinomas by measur-
ing the uptake of the stable somatostatin analogue 
111In-pentreotide (OctreoScan) with sensitivity and 
specificity rates of >85%.
Up to 50% of patients have metastatic disease at 
diagnosis. Success in controlling gastric acid hypersecre-
tion has shifted the emphasis of therapy toward provid-
ing a surgical cure. Detecting the primary tumor and 
excluding metastatic disease are critical in view of this 
paradigm shift. Once a biochemical diagnosis has been 
confirmed, the patient should first undergo an abdom-
inal CT scan, MRI, or OctreoScan (depending on 
availability) to exclude metastatic disease. Once meta-
static disease has been excluded, an experienced endo-
crine surgeon may opt for exploratory laparotomy with 
intraoperative ultrasound or transillumination. In other 
centers, careful examination of the peripancreatic area 
with EUS, accompanied by endoscopic exploration of 
the duodenum for primary tumors, will be performed 
before surgery. Selective arterial secretin injection may 
be a useful adjuvant for localizing tumors in a subset of 
patients.
Treatment	
Zollinger-Ellison Syndrome
Treatment of functional endocrine tumors is directed 
at ameliorating the signs and symptoms related to  
hormone overproduction, curative resection of the 
neoplasm, and attempts to control tumor growth in  
metastatic disease.
PPIs are the treatment of choice and have decreased 
the need for total gastrectomy. Initial PPI doses tend 
to be higher than those used for treatment of GERD 
or PUD. The initial dose of omeprazole, lansopra-
zole, rabeprazole or esomeprazole should be in the 
range of 60 mg in divided doses in a 24-h period. Dos-
ing can be adjusted to achieve a BAO <10 meq/h  
(at the drug trough) in surgery-naive patients and to  
<5 meq/h in individuals who have previously under-
gone an acid-reducing operation. Although the soma-
tostatin analogue has inhibitory effects on gastrin 
release from receptor-bearing tumors and inhibits 
gastric acid secretion to some extent, PPIs have the 
advantage of reducing parietal cell activity to a greater 
degree. Despite this, octreotide may be considered as 
adjunctive therapy to the PPI in patients with tumors 
that express somatostatin receptors and have peptic 
symptoms that are difficult to control with high-dose 
PPI.
The ultimate goal of surgery would be to provide 
a definitive cure. Improved understanding of tumor 
distribution has led to immediate cure rates as high 
as 60% with 10-year disease-free intervals as high as 
34% in sporadic gastrinoma patients undergoing sur-
gery. A positive outcome is highly dependent on the 
experience of the surgical team treating these rare 
tumors. Surgical therapy of gastrinoma patients with 
MEN I remains controversial because of the difficulty 
in rendering these patients disease-free with surgery. 
In contrast to the encouraging postoperative results 
observed in patients with sporadic disease, only 6% of 
MEN I patients are disease free 5 years after an opera-
tion. Some groups suggest surgery only if a clearly 
identifiable, nonmetastatic lesion is documented by 
structural studies. Others advocate a more aggressive 
approach, where all patients free of hepatic metastasis 
are explored and all detected tumors in the duodenum 
are resected; this is followed by enucleation of lesions 
in the pancreatic head, with a distal pancreatectomy to  
follow. The outcome of the two approaches has not 
been clearly defined. Laparoscopic surgical interven-
tions may provide attractive approaches in the future.
Therapy of metastatic endocrine tumors in general 
remains suboptimal; gastrinomas are no exception.  
Table 14-8 
Sensitivity of Imaging Studies in  
Zollinger-Ellison Syndrome
Sensitivity, %
Study
Primary 
Gastrinoma
Metastatic 
Gastrinoma
Ultrasound
21–28
14
CT scan
55–70
>85
Selective angiography
35–68
33–86
Portal venous sampling
70–90
N/A
SASI
55–78
41
MRI
55–70
>85
OctreoScan
67–86
80–100
EUS
80–100
N/A
Abbreviations: CT, computed tomography; EUS, endoscopic ultra-
sonography; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; OctreoScan, imaging 
with 111In-pentreotide; SASI, selective arterial secretin injection.
SECTION III
Disorders of the Alimentary Tract
152
In light of the observation that in many instances tumor 
growth is indolent and that many individuals with met-
astatic disease remain relatively stable for significant 
periods of time, many advocate not instituting systemic 
tumor targeted therapy until evidence of tumor pro-
gression or refractory symptoms not controlled with 
PPIs are noted. Medical approaches including biologi-
cal therapy (IFN-α, long-acting somatostatin analogues, 
peptide receptor radionuclides), systemic chemother-
apy (streptozotocin, 5-fluorouracil, and doxorubicin), 
and hepatic artery embolization may lead to significant  
toxicity without a substantial improvement in overall sur-
vival. 111In-pentetreotide has been used in the therapy 
of metastatic neuroendocrine tumors; further studies 
are needed. Several novel therapies are being explored, 
including radiofrequency or cryoablation of liver lesions 
and use of agents that block the vascular endothelial 
growth receptor pathway (bevacizumab, sunitinib) or the 
mammalian target of rapamycin (Chap. 52).
Surgical approaches including debulking surgery and 
liver transplantation for hepatic metastasis have also 
produced limited benefit.
The overall 5- and 10-year survival rates for gastrinoma 
patients are 62–75% and 47–53%, respectively. Individu-
als with the entire tumor resected or those with a nega-
tive laparotomy have 5- and 10-year survival rates >90%. 
Patients with incompletely resected tumors have 5- and 
10-year survival rates of 43% and 25%, respectively. 
Patients with hepatic metastasis have <20% survival at 
5 years. Favorable prognostic indicators include primary 
duodenal wall tumors, isolated lymph node tumor, and 
undetectable tumor upon surgical exploration. Poor out-
come is seen in patients with shorter disease duration; 
higher gastrin levels (>10,000 pg/mL); large pancreatic 
primary tumors (>3 cm); metastatic disease to lymph 
nodes, liver, and bone; and Cushing’s syndrome. Rapid 
growth of hepatic metastases is also predictive of poor 
outcome.
Stress-Related Mucosal Injury
Patients suffering from shock, sepsis, massive burns, 
severe trauma, or head injury can develop acute erosive 
gastric mucosal changes or frank ulceration with bleed-
ing. Classified as stress-induced gastritis or ulcers, injury 
is most commonly observed in the acid-producing 
(fundus and body) portions of the stomach. The most 
common presentation is GI bleeding, which is usually 
minimal but can occasionally be life threatening. Respira-
tory failure requiring mechanical ventilation and underly-
ing coagulopathy are risk factors for bleeding, which tends 
to occur 48–72 h after the acute injury or insult.
Histologically, stress injury does not contain inflam-
mation or H. pylori; thus, “gastritis” is a misnomer. 
Although elevated gastric acid secretion may be noted 
in patients with stress ulceration after head trauma 
(Cushing’s ulcer) and severe burns (Curling’s ulcer), 
mucosal ischemia and breakdown of the normal protec-
tive barriers of the stomach also play an important role 
in the pathogenesis. Acid must contribute to injury in 
view of the significant drop in bleeding noted when 
acid inhibitors are used as prophylaxis for stress gastritis.
Improvement in the general management of inten-
sive care unit patients has led to a significant decrease 
in the incidence of GI bleeding due to stress ulceration. 
The estimated decrease in bleeding is from 20–30% to 
<5%. This improvement has led to some debate regard-
ing the need for prophylactic therapy. The limited 
benefit of medical (endoscopic, angiographic) and sur-
gical therapy in a patient with hemodynamically com-
promising bleeding associated with stress ulcer/gastritis 
supports the use of preventive measures in high-risk 
patients (mechanically ventilated, coagulopathy, mul-
tiorgan failure, or severe burns). Maintenance of gastric 
pH >3.5 with continuous infusion of H2 blockers 
or liquid antacids administered every 2–3 h are via-
ble options. Tolerance to the H2 blocker is likely to 
develop; thus, careful monitoring of the gastric pH and 
dose adjustment is important if H2 blockers are used. 
Sucralfate slurry (1 g every 4–6 h) has also been some-
what successful but requires a gastric tube and may 
lead to constipation and aluminum toxicity. Sucralfate 
use in endotracheal intubated patients has also been 
associated with aspiration pneumonia. PPIs are the 
treatment of choice for stress prophylaxis. Oral PPI 
is the best option if the patient can tolerate enteral 
administration. Pantoprazole is available as an intra-
venous formulation for individuals in whom enteral 
administration is not possible. If bleeding occurs despite 
these measures, endoscopy, intraarterial vasopressin, or 
embolization are options. If all else fails, then surgery 
should be considered. Although vagotomy and antrec-
tomy may be used, the better approach would be a total 
gastrectomy, which has an exceedingly high mortality 
rate in this setting.
Gastritis
The term gastritis should be reserved for histologically 
documented inflammation of the gastric mucosa. Gastritis 
is not the mucosal erythema seen during endoscopy and 
is not interchangeable with “dyspepsia.” The etiologic 
factors leading to gastritis are broad and heterogeneous. 
Gastritis has been classified based on time course (acute 
versus chronic), histologic features, and anatomic distribu-
tion or proposed pathogenic mechanism (Table 14-9).
The correlation between the histologic find-
ings of gastritis, the clinical picture of abdominal pain 
or dyspepsia, and endoscopic findings noted on gross 
 
CHAPTER 14
Peptic Ulcer Disease and Related Disorders
153
inspection of the gastric mucosa is poor. Therefore, 
there is no typical clinical manifestation of gastritis.
Acute gastritis
The most common causes of acute gastritis are infec-
tious. Acute infection with H. pylori induces gastritis. 
However, H. pylori acute gastritis has not been exten-
sively studied. It is reported as presenting with sud-
den onset of epigastric pain, nausea, and vomiting, and 
limited mucosal histologic studies demonstrate a marked 
infiltrate of neutrophils with edema and hyperemia. If 
not treated, this picture will evolve into one of chronic 
gastritis. Hypochlorhydria lasting for up to 1 year may 
follow acute H. pylori infection.
Bacterial infection of the stomach or phlegmonous 
gastritis is a rare, potentially life-threatening disorder 
characterized by marked and diffuse acute inflamma-
tory infiltrates of the entire gastric wall, at times accom-
panied by necrosis. Elderly individuals, alcoholics, and 
AIDS patients may be affected. Potential iatrogenic 
causes include polypectomy and mucosal injection with 
India ink. Organisms associated with this entity include 
streptococci, staphylococci, Escherichia coli, Proteus, and 
Haemophilus species. Failure of supportive measures and 
antibiotics may result in gastrectomy.
Other types of infectious gastritis may occur in 
immunocompromised individuals such as AIDS patients. 
Examples include herpetic (herpes simplex) or CMV 
gastritis. The histologic finding of intranuclear inclu-
sions would be observed in the latter.
Chronic gastritis
Chronic gastritis is identified histologically by an inflam-
matory cell infiltrate consisting primarily of lymphocytes 
and plasma cells, with very scant neutrophil involve-
ment. Distribution of the inflammation may be patchy, 
initially involving superficial and glandular portions of 
the gastric mucosa. This picture may progress to more 
severe glandular destruction, with atrophy and metapla-
sia. Chronic gastritis has been classified according to his-
tologic characteristics. These include superficial atrophic 
changes and gastric atrophy.
The early phase of chronic gastritis is superficial gastritis. 
The inflammatory changes are limited to the lamina 
propria of the surface mucosa, with edema and cellular 
infiltrates separating intact gastric glands. The next stage 
is atrophic gastritis. The inflammatory infiltrate extends 
deeper into the mucosa, with progressive distortion and 
destruction of the glands. The final stage of chronic gas-
tritis is gastric atrophy. Glandular structures are lost, and 
there is a paucity of inflammatory infiltrates. Endoscopi-
cally, the mucosa may be substantially thin, permitting 
clear visualization of the underlying blood vessels.
Gastric glands may undergo morphologic transfor-
mation in chronic gastritis. Intestinal metaplasia denotes 
the conversion of gastric glands to a small intestinal 
phenotype with small-bowel mucosal glands containing 
goblet cells. The metaplastic changes may vary in distri-
bution from patchy to fairly extensive gastric involve-
ment. Intestinal metaplasia is an important predisposing 
factor for gastric cancer (Chap. 49).
Chronic gastritis is also classified according to the 
predominant site of involvement. Type A refers to the 
body-predominant form (autoimmune) and type B is 
the antral-predominant form (H. pylori–related). This 
classification is artificial in view of the difficulty in dis-
tinguishing between these two entities. The term AB 
gastritis has been used to refer to a mixed antral/body 
picture.
Type A gastritis
The less common of the two forms involves primarily 
the fundus and body, with antral sparing. Traditionally, 
this form of gastritis has been associated with pernicious 
anemia in the presence of circulating antibodies against 
parietal cells and IF; thus, it is also called autoimmune gas-
tritis. H. pylori infection can lead to a similar distribution 
of gastritis. The characteristics of an autoimmune pic-
ture are not always present.
Antibodies to parietal cells have been detected in 
>90% of patients with pernicious anemia and in up to 
50% of patients with type A gastritis. The parietal cell 
antibody is directed against H+,K+-ATPase. T cells 
are also implicated in the injury pattern of this form 
of gastritis. A subset of patients infected with H. pylori 
develop antibodies against H+,K+-ATPase, potentially 
leading to the atrophic gastritis pattern seen in some 
patients infected with this organism. The mechanism 
is thought to involve molecular mimicry between 
H. pylori LPS and H+,K+-ATPase.
Parietal cell antibodies and atrophic gastritis are 
observed in family members of patients with pernicious 
Table 14-9
Classification of Gastritis
I. Acute gastritis
A. Acute H. pylori infection
B. Other acute infectious 
gastritides
1. Bacterial (other than 
H. pylori)
2. H. heilmannii
3. Phlegmonous
4. Mycobacterial
5. Syphilitic
6. Viral
7. Parasitic
8. Fungal
II. Chronic atrophic gastritis
A. Type A: Autoimmune, 
body-predominant
B. Type B: H. pylori–
related, antral- 
predominant
C. Indeterminant
III. Uncommon forms of 
gastritis
A. Lymphocytic
B. Eosinophilic
C. Crohn’s disease
D. Sarcoidosis
E. Isolated  
granulomatous gastritis
SECTION III
Disorders of the Alimentary Tract
154
anemia. These antibodies are observed in up to 20% of 
individuals over age 60 and in ∼20% of patients with 
vitiligo and Addison’s disease. About one-half of patients 
with pernicious anemia have antibodies to thyroid anti-
gens, and about 30% of patients with thyroid disease 
have circulating antiparietal cell antibodies. Anti-IF anti-
bodies are more specific than parietal cell antibodies for 
type A gastritis, being present in ∼40% of patients with 
pernicious anemia. Another parameter consistent with 
this form of gastritis being autoimmune in origin is the 
higher incidence of specific familial histocompatibility 
haplotypes such as HLA-B8 and HLA-DR3.
The parietal cell–containing gastric gland is preferen-
tially targeted in this form of gastritis, and achlorhydria 
results. Parietal cells are the source of IF, the lack of 
which will lead to vitamin B12 deficiency and its sequelae 
(megaloblastic anemia, neurologic dysfunction).
Gastric acid plays an important role in feedback inhi-
bition of gastrin release from G cells. Achlorhydria, 
coupled with relative sparing of the antral mucosa (site 
of G cells), leads to hypergastrinemia. Gastrin levels 
can be markedly elevated (>500 pg/mL) in patients 
with pernicious anemia. ECL cell hyperplasia with 
frank development of gastric carcinoid tumors may 
result from gastrin trophic effects. Hypergastrinemia and 
achlorhydria may also be seen in nonpernicious anemia–
associated type A gastritis.
Type B gastritis
Type B, or antral-predominant, gastritis is the more 
common form of chronic gastritis. H. pylori infec-
tion is the cause of this entity. Although described as 
“antral-predominant,” this is likely a misnomer in view 
of studies documenting the progression of the inflam-
matory process toward the body and fundus of infected 
individuals. The conversion to a pangastritis is time-
dependent, estimated to require 15–20 years. This form 
of gastritis increases with age, being present in up to 
100% of persons over age 70. Histology improves after 
H. pylori eradication. The number of H. pylori organisms 
decreases dramatically with progression to gastric atrophy, 
and the degree of inflammation correlates with the level 
of these organisms. Early on, with antral-predominant 
findings, the quantity of H. pylori is highest and a dense 
chronic inflammatory infiltrate of the lamina propria is 
noted, accompanied by epithelial cell infiltration with 
polymorphonuclear leukocytes (Fig. 14-14).
Multifocal atrophic gastritis, gastric atrophy with 
subsequent metaplasia, has been observed in chronic 
H. pylori–induced gastritis. This may ultimately lead 
to development of gastric adenocarcinoma (Fig. 14-8; 
Chap. 49). H. pylori infection is now considered an 
independent risk factor for gastric cancer. Worldwide 
epidemiologic studies have documented a higher inci-
dence of H. pylori infection in patients with adenocar-
cinoma of the stomach as compared to control subjects. 
Seropositivity for H. pylori is associated with a three- to 
sixfold increased risk of gastric cancer. This risk may 
be as high as ninefold after adjusting for the inaccuracy 
of serologic testing in the elderly. The mechanism by 
which H. pylori infection leads to cancer is unknown, 
but it appears to be related to the chronic inflammation 
induced by the organism. Eradication of H. pylori as a 
general preventative measure for gastric cancer is being 
evaluated but is not yet recommended.
Infection with H. pylori is also associated with devel-
opment of a low-grade B cell lymphoma, gastric MALT 
lymphoma. The chronic T cell stimulation caused by 
the infection leads to production of cytokines that pro-
mote the B cell tumor. The tumor should be initially 
staged with a CT scan of the abdomen and EUS. Tumor 
growth remains dependent on the presence of H. pylori, 
and its eradication is often associated with complete 
regression of the tumor. The tumor may take more than 
a year to regress after treating the infection. Such patients 
should be followed by EUS every 2–3 months. If the 
tumor is stable or decreasing in size, no other therapy 
is necessary. If the tumor grows, it may have become a 
high-grade B cell lymphoma. When the tumor becomes 
a high-grade aggressive lymphoma histologically, it loses 
responsiveness to H. pylori eradication.
Treatment	
Chronic Gastritis
Treatment in chronic gastritis is aimed at the sequelae 
and not the underlying inflammation. Patients with 
pernicious anemia will require parenteral vitamin B12 
supplementation on a long-term basis. Eradication of 
H. pylori is not routinely recommended unless PUD or a 
low-grade MALT lymphoma is present.
Figure 14-14 
Chronic gastritis and H. pylori organisms. Steiner silver 
stain of superficial gastric mucosa, showing abundant darkly 
stained microorganisms layered over the apical portion of the 
surface epithelium. Note that there is no tissue invasion.
 
CHAPTER 14
Peptic Ulcer Disease and Related Disorders
155
Miscellaneous forms of gastritis
Lymphocytic gastritis is characterized histologically by 
intense infiltration of the surface epithelium with lym-
phocytes. The infiltrative process is primarily in the 
body of the stomach and consists of mature T cells and 
plasmacytes. The etiology of this form of chronic gas-
tritis is unknown. It has been described in patients with 
celiac sprue, but whether there is a common factor 
associating these two entities is unknown. No specific 
symptoms suggest lymphocytic gastritis. A subgroup 
of patients have thickened folds noted on endoscopy. 
These folds are often capped by small nodules that con-
tain a central depression or erosion; this form of the 
disease is called varioliform gastritis. H. pylori probably 
plays no significant role in lymphocytic gastritis. Ther-
apy with glucocorticoids or sodium cromoglycate has 
obtained unclear results.
Marked eosinophilic infiltration involving any layer 
of the stomach (mucosa, muscularis propria, and serosa) 
is characteristic of eosinophilic gastritis. Affected individuals 
will often have circulating eosinophilia with clinical 
manifestation of systemic allergy. Involvement may range 
from isolated gastric disease to diffuse eosinophilic gastroen-
teritis. Antral involvement predominates, with prominent 
edematous folds being observed on endoscopy. These 
prominent antral folds can lead to outlet obstruction. 
Patients can present with epigastric discomfort, nausea, 
and vomiting. Treatment with glucocorticoids has been 
successful.
Several systemic disorders may be associated with 
granulomatous gastritis. Gastric involvement has been 
observed in Crohn’s disease. Involvement may range 
from granulomatous infiltrates noted only on gastric 
biopsies to frank ulceration and stricture formation. 
Gastric Crohn’s disease usually occurs in the presence 
of small-intestinal disease. Several rare infectious pro-
cesses can lead to granulomatous gastritis, including his-
toplasmosis, candidiasis, syphilis, and tuberculosis. Other 
unusual causes of this form of gastritis include sarcoid-
osis, idiopathic granulomatous gastritis, and eosino-
philic granulomas involving the stomach. Establishing 
the specific etiologic agent in this form of gastritis can 
be difficult, at times requiring repeat endoscopy with 
biopsy and cytology. Occasionally, a surgically obtained 
full-thickness biopsy of the stomach may be required to 
exclude malignancy.
Ménétrier’s Disease
Ménétrier’s disease is a rare entity characterized by large, 
tortuous gastric mucosal folds. The differential diagnosis 
of large gastric folds includes ZES, ­malignancy, infec-
tious etiologies (CMV, histoplasmosis, syphilis), and 
infiltrative disorders such as sarcoidosis. The muco-
sal folds in Ménétrier’s disease are often most promi-
nent in the body and fundus. Histologically, massive 
foveolar hyperplasia (hyperplasia of surface and glan-
dular mucous cells) is noted, which replaces most of 
the chief and parietal cells. This hyperplasia produces 
the prominent folds observed. The pits of the gastric 
glands elongate and may become extremely tortu-
ous. Although the lamina propria may contain a mild 
chronic inflammatory infiltrate, Ménétrier’s disease is 
not considered a form of gastritis. The etiology of this 
unusual clinical picture is unknown. Overexpression 
of growth factors such as TGF-α may be involved in 
the process.
Epigastric pain, at times accompanied by nausea, vom-
iting, anorexia, and weight loss, are signs and symptoms 
in patients with Ménétrier’s disease. Occult GI bleed-
ing may occur, but overt bleeding is unusual and, when 
present, is due to superficial mucosal erosions. Twenty 
to 100% of patients (depending on time of presentation) 
develop a protein-losing gastropathy accompanied by 
hypoalbuminemia and edema. Gastric acid secretion is 
usually reduced or absent because of the replacement of 
parietal cells. Large gastric folds are readily detectable by 
either radiographic (barium meal) or endoscopic methods. 
Endoscopy with deep mucosal biopsy (and cytology) is 
required to establish the diagnosis and exclude other enti-
ties that may present similarly. A nondiagnostic biopsy 
may lead to a surgically obtained full-thickness biopsy to 
exclude malignancy.
Treatment	
Ménétrier’s Disease
Medical therapy with anticholinergic agents, prosta-
glandins, PPIs, prednisone, and H2 receptor antagonists 
yields varying results. Anticholinergics decrease protein 
loss. A high-protein diet should be recommended to 
replace protein loss in patients with hypoalbuminemia. 
Ulcers should be treated with a standard approach. 
Severe disease with persistent and substantial protein 
loss may require total gastrectomy. Subtotal gastrec-
tomy is performed by some; it may be associated with 
higher morbidity and mortality secondary to the diffi-
culty in obtaining a patent and long-lasting anastomo-
sis between normal and hyperplastic tissues.
Acknowledgments
The author acknowledges the contribution of material to this 
chapter by Dr. Lawrence Friedman and Dr. Walter Peterson 
from their chapter on this subject in the 14th edition of 
Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine.
 Henry J. Binder 
156
 Disorders of absorption constitute a broad spectrum of 
conditions with multiple etiologies and varied clinical 
manifestations. Almost all of these clinical problems are 
associated with  diminished intestinal absorption of one or 
more dietary nutrients and are often referred to as the 
 malabsorption syndrome. This term is not ideal as it repre-
sents a pathophysiologic state, does  not provide an etio-
logic explanation for the underlying problem, and should 
not be considered an adequate fi nal diagnosis. The only 
clinical situations in which absorption is  increased are 
hemochromatosis and Wilson’s disease, in which absorp-
tion of iron and copper, respectively, are increased. 
 Most, but not all, malabsorption syndromes are associ-
ated with  steatorrhea, an increase in stool fat excretion of 
>6% of dietary fat intake. Some malabsorption disorders 
are not associated with steatorrhea: primary lactase defi -
ciency, a congenital absence of the small intestinal brush 
border disaccharidase enzyme lactase, is associated with 
lactose “malabsorption,” and pernicious anemia is asso-
ciated with a marked decrease in intestinal absorption 
of cobalamin (vitamin B 12 ) due to an absence of gas-
tric parietal cell intrinsic factor required for cobalamin 
absorption. 
 Disorders of absorption must be included in the dif-
ferential diagnosis of diarrhea  ( Chap. 6 ) . First, diarrhea 
is frequently associated with and/or is a consequence of 
the diminished absorption of one or more dietary nutri-
ents. The diarrhea may be secondary either to the intes-
tinal process that is responsible for the steatorrhea or to 
steatorrhea per se. Thus, celiac disease (discussed later) 
is associated with both extensive morphologic changes 
in the small intestinal mucosa and reduced absorption 
of several dietary nutrients; in contrast, the diarrhea of 
steatorrhea is the result of the effect of nonabsorbed 
dietary fatty acids on intestinal, usually colonic, ion 
transport. For example, oleic acid and ricinoleic acid (a 
bacterially hydroxylated fatty acid that is also the active 
ingredient in castor oil, a widely used laxative) induce 
active colonic Cl ion secretion, most likely secondary 
to increasing intracellular Ca. In addition, diarrhea per 
se may result in mild steatorrhea (<11 g fat excretion 
while on a 100-g fat diet). Second, most patients will 
indicate that they have diarrhea, not that they have fat 
malabsorption. Third, many intestinal disorders that 
have diarrhea as a prominent symptom (e.g., ulcerative 
colitis, traveler’s diarrhea secondary to an enterotoxin 
produced by  Escherichia coli ) do not necessarily have 
diminished absorption of any dietary nutrient. 
 Diarrhea as a  symptom (i.e., when used by patients 
to describe their bowel movement pattern) may be a 
decrease in stool consistency, an increase in stool vol-
ume, an increase in number of bowel movements, or 
any combination of these three changes. In contrast, 
diarrhea as a  sign is a quantitative increase in stool water 
or weight of >200–225 mL or gram per 24 h, when a 
Western-type diet is consumed. Individuals consuming a 
diet with higher fi ber content may normally have a stool 
weight of up to 400 g/24 h. Thus, the clinician must 
clarify what an individual patient means by diarrhea. 
Some 10% of patients referred to gastroenterologists for 
further evaluation of unexplained diarrhea do not have 
an increase in stool water when it is determined quanti-
tatively. Such patients may have small, frequent, some-
what loose bowel movements with stool urgency that 
is indicative of proctitis but do not have an increase in 
stool weight or volume. 
 It is also critical to establish whether a patient’s diar-
rhea is secondary to diminished absorption of one or 
more dietary nutrients, in contrast to diarrhea that is 
due to small- and/or large-intestinal fl uid and electro-
lyte secretion. The former has often been termed  osmotic 
diarrhea, while the latter has been referred to as  secre-
tory diarrhea. Unfortunately, both secretory and osmotic 
elements can be present simultaneously in the same 
disorder; thus, this separation is not always precise. 
Nonetheless, two studies—determination of stool elec-
trolytes and observation of the effect of a fast on stool 
output—can help make this distinction. 
 DISORDERS OF ABSORPTION 
 cHapter 15 
 
CHAPTER 15
Disorders of Absorption
157
The demonstration of the effect of prolonged (>24 h) 
fasting on stool output can be very effective in sug-
gesting that a dietary nutrient is responsible for the indi-
vidual’s diarrhea. A secretory diarrhea associated with 
enterotoxin-induced traveler’s diarrhea would not be 
affected by prolonged fasting, as enterotoxin-induced 
stimulation of intestinal fluid and electrolyte secretion 
is not altered by eating. In contrast, diarrhea second-
ary to lactose malabsorption in primary lactase defi-
ciency would undoubtedly cease during a prolonged 
fast. Thus, a substantial decrease in stool output while 
fasting during a quantitative stool collection of at least 
24 h is presumptive evidence that the diarrhea is related 
to malabsorption of a dietary nutrient. The persistence 
of stool output while fasting indicates that the diar-
rhea is likely secretory and that the cause of diarrhea 
is not a dietary nutrient. Either a luminal (e.g., E. coli 
enterotoxin) or circulating (e.g., vasoactive intesti-
nal peptide) secretagogue could be responsible for 
the patient’s diarrhea persisting unaltered during a 
prolonged fast. The observed effects of fasting can be 
compared and correlated with stool electrolyte and 
osmolality determinations.
Measurement of stool electrolytes and osmolality 
requires the comparison of stool Na+ and K+ concen-
trations determined in liquid stool to the stool osmolal-
ity to determine the presence or absence of a so-called 
stool osmotic gap. The following formula is used:
2 × (stool [Na+] + stool [K+]) ≤ stool osmolality
The cation concentrations are doubled to estimate 
stool anion concentrations. The presence of a significant 
osmotic gap suggests the presence in stool water of a 
substance (or substances) other than Na/K anions that is 
presumably responsible for the patient’s diarrhea. Origi-
nally, stool osmolality was measured, but it is almost 
invariably greater than the required 290–300 mosmol/kg 
H2O, reflecting bacterial degradation of nonabsorbed 
carbohydrate either immediately before defecation or 
in the stool jar while awaiting chemical analysis, even 
when the stool is refrigerated. As a result, the stool 
osmolality should be assumed to be 300 mosmol/kg 
H2O. A low stool osmolality (<290 mosmol/kg H2O) 
reflects the addition of either dilute urine or water indi-
cating either collection of urine and stool together or 
so-called factitious diarrhea, a form of Münchausen’s 
syndrome. When the calculated difference is >50, an 
osmotic gap is present, suggesting that the diarrhea is 
due to a nonabsorbed dietary nutrient, e.g., a fatty acid 
and/or carbohydrate. When this difference is <25, it 
is presumed that a dietary nutrient is not responsible 
for the diarrhea. Since elements of both osmotic (i.e., 
malabsorption of a dietary nutrient) and secretory diar-
rhea may be present, this separation at times is less 
clear-cut at the bedside than when used as a teaching 
example. Ideally, the presence of an osmotic gap will be 
associated with a marked decrease in stool output dur-
ing a prolonged fast, while the absence of an osmotic 
gap will likely be present in an individual whose stool 
output had not been reduced substantially during a 
period of fasting.
Nutrient Digestion and 
Absorption
The lengths of the small intestine and colon are ∼300 cm 
and ∼80 cm, respectively. However, the effective func-
tional surface area is approximately 600-fold greater 
than that of a hollow tube as a result of the presence of 
folds, villi (in the small intestine), and microvilli. The 
functional surface area of the small intestine is somewhat 
greater than that of a doubles tennis court. In addi-
tion to nutrient digestion and absorption, the intestinal 
epithelia have several other functions:
1.	 Barrier and immune defense. The intestine is exposed 
to a large number of potential antigens and enteric 
and invasive microorganisms, and it is extremely 
effective preventing the entry of almost all these 
agents. The intestinal mucosa also synthesizes and 
secretes secretory IgA.
2.	 Fluid and electrolyte absorption and secretion. The intes-
tine absorbs ∼7–8 L of fluid daily, comprising dietary 
fluid intake (1–2 L/d) and salivary, gastric, pancre-
atic, biliary, and intestinal fluid (6–7 L/d). Several 
stimuli, especially bacteria and bacterial enterotoxins, 
induce fluid and electrolyte secretion that may lead 
to diarrhea (Chap. 23).
3.	 Synthesis and secretion of several proteins. The intestinal 
mucosa is a major site for the production of proteins, 
including apolipoproteins.
4.	 Production of several bioactive amines and peptides. 
The intestine is one of the largest endocrine organs 
in the body and produces several amines (e.g., 
5-hydro­xytryptophan) and peptides that serve as para-
crine and hormonal mediators of intestinal function.
The small and large intestines are distinct anatomi-
cally (villi are present in the small intestine but are 
absent in the colon) and functionally (nutrient digestion 
and absorption take place in the small intestine but not 
in the colon). No precise anatomic characteristics sepa-
rate duodenum, jejunum, and ileum, although certain 
nutrients are absorbed exclusively in specific areas of the 
small intestine. However, villous cells in the small intes-
tine (and surface epithelial cells in the colon) and crypt 
cells have distinct anatomic and functional characteristics. 
Intestinal epithelial cells are continuously renewed, with 
new proliferating epithelial cells at the base of the crypt 
migrating over 48–72 h to the tip of the villus (or surface 
SECTION III
Disorders of the Alimentary Tract
158
of the colon), where they are well-developed epithelial 
cells with digestive and absorptive function. This high 
rate of cell turnover explains the relatively rapid resolu-
tion of diarrhea and other digestive tract side effects dur-
ing chemotherapy as new cells not exposed to these toxic 
agents are produced. Equally important is the paradigm 
of separation of villous/surface cell and crypt cell func-
tion: Digestive hydrolytic enzymes are present primarily 
in the brush border of villous epithelial cells. Absorptive 
and secretory functions are also separated, with villous/
surface cells primarily, but not exclusively, being the site 
for absorptive function, while secretory function is pres-
ent in crypts of both the small and large intestine.
Nutrients, minerals, and vitamins are absorbed by 
one or more active transport mechanisms. Active trans-
port mechanisms are energy-dependent and mediated by 
membrane transport proteins. These processes will result 
in the net movement of a substance against or in the 
absence of an electrochemical concentration gradient. 
Intestinal absorption of amino acids and monosaccha-
rides, e.g., glucose, is also a specialized form of active 
transport—secondary active transport. The movement of 
these actively transported nutrients against a concen-
tration gradient is Na+-dependent and is due to a Na+ 
gradient across the apical membrane. The Na+ gradi-
ent is maintained by Na+, K+-adenosine triphosphatase 
(ATPase), the so-called Na+ pump located on the baso-
lateral membrane, which extrudes Na+ and maintains 
low intracellular [Na] as well as the Na+ gradient across 
the apical membrane. As a result, active glucose absorp-
tion and glucose-stimulated Na+ absorption require both 
the apical membrane transport protein, SGLT1, and 
the basolateral Na+, K+-ATPase. In addition to glucose 
absorption being Na+-dependent, glucose also stimulates 
Na+ and fluid absorption, which is the physiologic basis 
of oral rehydration therapy for the treatment of diarrhea 
(Chap. 6).
The mechanisms of intestinal fluid and electrolyte 
absorption and secretion are discussed in Chap. 6.
Although the intestinal epithelial cells are crucial 
mediators of absorption and ion and water flow, the 
several cell types in the lamina propria (e.g., mast cells, 
macrophages, myofibroblasts) and the enteric nervous 
system interact with the epithelium to regulate mucosal 
cell function. The function of the intestine is the result 
of the integrated responses of and interactions between 
both intestinal epithelial cells and intestinal muscle.
Enterohepatic Circulation of  
Bile Acids
Bile acids are not present in the diet but are synthe-
sized in the liver by a series of enzymatic steps that also 
include cholesterol catabolism. Indeed, interruption of 
the enterohepatic circulation of bile acids can reduce 
serum cholesterol levels by 10% before a new steady state 
is established. Bile acids are either primary or secondary: 
Primary bile acids are synthesized in the liver from cho-
lesterol, and secondary bile acids are synthesized from 
primary bile acids in the intestine by colonic bacte-
rial enzymes. The two primary bile acids in humans are 
cholic acid and chenodeoxycholic acid; the two most 
abundant secondary bile acids are deoxycholic acid and 
lithocholic acid. Approximately 500 mg of bile acids are 
synthesized in the liver daily, conjugated to either taurine 
or glycine to form tauroconjugated or glycoconjugated 
bile acids, respectively, and secreted into the duodenum 
in bile. The primary functions of bile acids are (1) to pro-
mote bile flow, (2) to solubilize cholesterol and phospho-
lipid in the gallbladder by mixed micelle formation, and 
(3) to enhance dietary lipid digestion and absorption by 
forming mixed micelles in the proximal small intestine.
Bile acids are primarily absorbed by an active, Na+-
dependent process that is located exclusively in the 
ileum, though bile acids can also be absorbed to a lesser 
extent by non-carrier-mediated transport processes in the 
jejunum, ileum, and colon. Conjugated bile acids that 
enter the colon are deconjugated by colonic bacte-
rial enzymes to unconjugated bile acids and are rapidly 
absorbed by nonionic diffusion. Colonic bacterial enzymes 
also dehydroxylate bile acids to secondary bile acids.
Bile acids absorbed from the intestine return to the 
liver via the portal vein where they are re-secreted 
(Fig. 15-1). Bile acid synthesis is largely autoregu-
lated by 7α-hydroxylase, the initial enzyme in cho-
lesterol degradation. A decrease in the amount of bile 
acids returning to the liver from the intestine is associ-
ated with an increase in bile acid synthesis/cholesterol 
catabolism, which helps keep the bile acid pool size 
relatively constant. However, the capacity to increase 
bile acid synthesis is limited to about two to two and 
a half-fold (discussed later). The bile acid pool size is 
approximately 4 g and is circulated via the enterohe-
patic circulation about twice during each meal, or six 
to eight times during a 24-h period. A relatively small 
quantity of bile acids is not absorbed and is excreted in 
stool daily; this fecal loss is matched by hepatic bile acid 
synthesis.
Defects in any of the steps of the enterohepatic cir-
culation of bile acids can result in a decrease in duo-
denal concentration of conjugated bile acids and, as a 
result, steatorrhea. Thus, steatorrhea can be caused by 
abnormalities in bile acid synthesis and excretion, their 
physical state in the intestinal lumen, and reabsorption 
(Table 15-1).
Synthesis
Decreased bile acid synthesis and steatorrhea have been 
demonstrated in chronic liver disease, but steatorrhea is 
often not a major component of the illness of these patients.
 
CHAPTER 15
Disorders of Absorption
159
Secretion
Although bile acid secretion may be reduced or absent 
in biliary obstruction, steatorrhea is rarely a significant 
medical problem in these patients. In contrast, pri-
mary biliary cirrhosis represents a defect in canalicu-
lar excretion of organic anions, including bile acids, 
and not infrequently is associated with steatorrhea and 
its consequences, e.g., chronic bone disease. Thus, the 
osteopenia/osteomalacia and other chronic bone abnor-
malities often present in patients with primary biliary 
cirrhosis and other cholestatic syndromes are second-
ary to steatorrhea that then leads to calcium and vitamin 
D malabsorption as well as to the effects of cholestasis 
(e.g., bile acids and inflammatory cytokines).
Maintenance of conjugated bile acids
In bacterial overgrowth syndromes associated with 
diarrhea, steatorrhea, and macrocytic anemia, a colonic 
type of bacterial flora is increased in the small intestine. 
The steatorrhea is primarily a result of the decrease in 
conjugated bile acids secondary to their deconjugation by 
colonic-type bacteria. Two complementary explanations 
account for the resulting impairment of micelle forma-
tion: (1) unconjugated bile acids are rapidly absorbed in 
the jejunum by nonionic diffusion, resulting in a reduced 
concentration of duodenal bile acids; and (2) the critical 
micellar concentration (CMC) of unconjugated bile acids 
is higher than that of conjugated bile acids, and therefore 
unconjugated bile acids are less effective than conjugated 
bile acids in micelle formation.
Reabsorption
Ileal dysfunction caused by either Crohn’s disease or 
surgical resection results in a decrease in bile acid reab-
sorption in the ileum and an increase in the delivery of 
bile acids to the large intestine. The resulting clinical 
consequences—diarrhea with or without steatorrhea—
are determined by the degree of ileal dysfunction and 
the response of the enterohepatic circulation to bile acid 
losses (Table 15-2). Patients with limited ileal disease 
Cholesterol
Bile acids
  0.5 g synthesized
  per day
NORMAL
Bile acid
  pool size
  4.0 g
[Bile acids]
  4 mM
Jejunum
Ileum
Na
0.5 g
Bile acids
  excreted per day
COLON
Figure 15-1 
Schematic representation of the enterohepatic circula-
tion of bile acids. Bile acid synthesis is cholesterol catab-
olism and occurs in the liver. Bile acids are secreted in 
bile and are stored in the gallbladder between meals and 
at night. Food in the duodenum induces the release of 
cholecystokinin, a potent stimulus for gallbladder contrac-
tion resulting in bile acid entry into the duodenum. Bile acids 
are primarily absorbed via a Na-dependent transport process 
that is located only in the ileum. A relatively small quantity of 
bile acids (∼500 mg) is not absorbed in a 24-h period and is 
lost in stool. Fecal bile acid losses are matched by bile acid 
synthesis. The bile acid pool (the total amount of bile acids in 
the body) is ∼4 g and is circulated twice during each meal or 
six to eight times in a 24-h period.
Table 15-1 
Defects in Enterohepatic Circulation  
of Bile Acids
Process
Pathophysiologic 
Defect
Disease Example
Synthesis
Decreased hepatic 
function
Cirrhosis
Biliary  
secretion
Altered canalicular 
function
Primary biliary  
cirrhosis
Maintenance  
of conjugated 
bile acids
Bacterial  
overgrowth
Jejunal  
diverticulosis
Reabsorption
Abnormal ileal  
function
Crohn’s disease
Table 15-2 
Comparison of Bile Acid and Fatty  
Acid Diarrhea
Bile Acid 
Diarrhea
Fatty Acid 
Diarrhea
Extent of ileal disease
Limited
Extensive
Ileal bile acid absorption
Reduced
Reduced
Fecal bile acid excretion
Increased
Increased
Fecal bile acid loss com-
pensated by hepatic 
synthesis
Yes
No
Bile acid pool size
Normal
Reduced
Intraduodenal [bile acid]
Normal
Reduced
Steatorrhea
None or mild
>20 g
Response to  
cholestyramine
Yes
No
Response to low-fat diet
No
Yes
SECTION III
Disorders of the Alimentary Tract
160
or resection will often have diarrhea but not steatorrhea. 
The diarrhea, a result of bile acids in the colon stimulat-
ing active Cl secretion, has been called bile acid diarrhea, 
or choleretic enteropathy, and responds promptly to 
cholestyramine, an anion-binding resin. Such patients 
do not develop steatorrhea because hepatic synthe-
sis of bile acids increases to compensate for the rate of 
fecal bile acid losses, resulting in maintenance of both 
the bile acid pool size and the intraduodenal concen-
trations of bile acids. In contrast, patients with greater 
degrees of ileal disease and/or resection will often 
have diarrhea and steatorrhea that do not respond to 
cholestyramine. In this situation, ileal disease is also 
associated with increased amounts of bile acids enter-
ing the colon; however, hepatic synthesis can no longer 
increase sufficiently to maintain the bile acid pool size. 
As a consequence, the intraduodenal concentration of 
bile acids is also reduced to less than the CMC, result-
ing in impaired micelle formation and steatorrhea. This 
second situation is often called fatty acid diarrhea. Chole-
styramine may not be effective (and may even increase 
the diarrhea by further depleting the intraduodenal bile 
acid concentration); however, a low-fat diet to reduce 
fatty acids entering the colon can be effective. Two 
clinical features, the length of ileum removed and the 
degree of steatorrhea, can predict whether an individual 
patient will respond to cholestyramine. Unfortunately, 
these predictors are imperfect, and a therapeutic trial of 
cholestyramine is often necessary to establish whether 
an individual patient will benefit from cholestyramine. 
Table 15-2 contrasts the characteristics of bile acid diar-
rhea (small ileal dysfunction) and fatty acid diarrhea 
(large ileal dysfunction).
Lipids
Steatorrhea is caused by one or more defects in the diges-
tion and absorption of dietary fat. Average intake of dietary 
fat in the United States is approximately 120–150 g/d, 
and fat absorption is linear to dietary fat intake. The total 
load of fat presented to the small intestine is considerably 
greater, as substantial amounts of lipid are secreted in bile 
each day. (Enterohepatic circulation of bile acids is dis-
cussed earlier.) Three types of fatty acids compose fats: 
long-chain fatty acids (LCFAs), medium-chain fatty acids 
(MCFAs), and short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) (Table 
15-3). Dietary fat is exclusively composed of long-chain 
triglycerides (LCTs), i.e., glycerol that is bound via ester-
linkages to three LCFAs. While the majority of dietary 
LCFAs have carbon chain lengths of 16 or 18, fatty acids 
of carbon chain length >12 are metabolized in the same 
manner; saturated and unsaturated fatty acids are handled 
identically.
Assimilation of dietary lipid requires three integrated 
processes: (1) an intraluminal, or digestive, phase; (2) 
a mucosal, or absorptive, phase; and (3) a delivery, or 
postabsorptive, phase. An abnormality at any site of this 
process can cause steatorrhea (Table 15-4). Therefore, 
Table 15-3 
Comparison of Different Types of Fatty Acids
Long-Chain
Medium-Chain
Short-Chain
Carbon chain length
>12
8–12
<8
Present in diet
In large amounts
In small amounts
No
Origin
In diet as triglycerides
Only in small amounts  
in diet as triglycerides
Bacterial degradation in colon of  
nonabsorbed carbohydrate to fatty acids
Primary site of absorption
Small intestine
Small intestine
Colon
Requires pancreatic lipolysis
Yes
No
No
Requires micelle formation
Yes
No
No
Presence in stool
Minimal
No
Substantial
Table 15-4 
Defects in Lipid Digestion and Absorption in 
Steatorrhea
Phase: 
Process
Pathophysiologic 
Defect
Disease  
Example
Digestive
Lipolysis  
formation
Decreased lipase 
secretion
Chronic pancreatitis
Micelle  
formation
Decreased  
intraduodenal  
bile acids
See Table 15-1
Absorptive
Mucosal  
uptake and  
reesterifica-
tion
Mucosal  
dysfunction
Celiac disease
Postabsorptive
Chylomicron 
formation
Absent  
betalipoproteins
Abetalipoproteinemia
Delivery from 
intestine
Abnormal  
lymphatics
Intestinal  
lymphangiectasia
 
CHAPTER 15
Disorders of Absorption
161
it is essential that any patient with steatorrhea be evalu-
ated to identify the specific physiologic defect in over-
all lipid digestion-absorption, as therapy will be deter-
mined by the specific cause of the steatorrhea.
The digestive phase has two components, lipolysis and 
micellar formation. Although dietary lipid is in the form 
of LCTs, the intestinal mucosa does not absorb triglyc-
erides; they must first be hydrolyzed (Fig. 15-2). The 
initial step in lipid digestion is the formation of emul-
sions of finely dispersed lipid, which is accomplished 
by mastication and gastric contractions. Lipolysis, the 
hydrolysis of triglycerides to free fatty acids, monoglyc-
erides, and glycerol by lipase, is initiated in the stomach 
by lingual and gastric lipases that have a pH optimum 
of 4.5–6.0. About 20–30% of total lipolysis occurs in 
the stomach. Lipolysis is completed in the duodenum 
and jejunum by pancreatic lipase, which is inactivated 
by a pH <7.0. Pancreatic lipolysis is greatly enhanced 
by the presence of a second pancreatic enzyme, 
colipase, which facilitates the movement of lipase to the 
triglyceride.
Impaired lipolysis can lead to steatorrhea and can 
occur in the presence of pancreatic insufficiency due 
to chronic pancreatitis in adults or cystic fibrosis in 
children and adolescents. Normal lipolysis can be 
maintained by approximately 5% of maximal pancre-
atic lipase secretion; thus, steatorrhea is a late manifes-
tation of these disorders. A reduction in intraduodenal 
pH can also result in altered lipolysis as pancreatic lipase 
is inactivated at pH <7. Thus, ∼15% of patients with 
gastrinoma (Chap. 14) with substantial increases in 
gastric acid secretion from ectopic production of gastrin 
(usually from an islet cell adenoma) have diarrhea, and 
some will have steatorrhea believed secondary to acid-
inactivation of pancreatic lipase. Similarly, patients with 
chronic pancreatitis (who have reduced lipase secretion) 
often have a decrease in pancreatic bicarbonate secre-
tion, which will also result in a decrease in intraduode-
nal pH and inactivation of endogenous pancreatic lipase 
or of therapeutically administered lipase.
Overlying the microvillus membrane of the small 
intestine is the so-called unstirred water layer, a relatively 
stagnant aqueous phase that must be traversed by the 
products of lipolysis that are primarily water-insol­uble. 
Water-soluble mixed micelles provide a mechanism for 
the water-insoluble products of lipolysis to reach the 
luminal plasma membrane of villous epithelial cells, the 
site for lipid absorption. Mixed micelles are molecular 
aggregates composed of fatty acids, monoglycerides, 
phospholipids, cholesterol, and conjugated bile acids. 
Mixed micelles are formed when the concentration of 
conjugated bile acids is greater than its CMC, which 
differs among the several bile acids present in the small 
intestinal lumen. Conjugated bile acids, synthesized in 
the liver and excreted into the duodenum in bile, are 
regulated by the enterohepatic circulation (see above). 
Steatorrhea can result from impaired movement of fatty 
acids across the unstirred aqueous fluid layer in two sit-
uations: (1) an increase in the relative thickness of the 
unstirred water layer that occurs in bacterial overgrowth 
syndromes (discussed later) secondary to functional 
stasis (e.g., scleroderma); and (2) a decrease in the 
duodenal concentration of conjugated bile acids below its 
CMC, resulting in impaired micelle formation. Thus, 
steatorrhea can be caused by one or more defects in the 
enterohepatic circulation of bile acids.
Uptake and reesterification constitute the absorptive 
phase of lipid digestion-absorption. Although passive dif-
fusion has been thought responsible, a carrier-mediated 
process may mediate fatty acid and monoglyceride 
Lipolysis
Micellar
Solubilization
with Bile Acid
Absorption
Fatty acids
To tissues
for utilization
of fat
Cholesterol
Phospholipid
β−Lipoprotein
Triglycerides
Triglycerides
β-Monoglyceride
β-Monoglyceride
Fatty acids
Delivery
Pancreas
Liver
Jejunal Mucosa
(1) Esterification
Lymphatics
(2) Chylomicron
      formation 
Figure 15-2 
Schematic representation of lipid digestion and absorption. 
Dietary lipid is in the form of long-chain triglycerides (LCTs). 
The overall process can be divided into (1) a digestive phase 
that includes both lipolysis and micelle formation requiring 
pancreatic lipase and conjugated bile acids, respectively, in 
the duodenum; (2) an absorptive phase for mucosal uptake 
and reesterification; and (3) a postabsorptive phase that 
includes chylomicron formation and exit from the intestinal 
epithelial cell via lymphatics. (Courtesy of John M. Dietschy, 
MD; with permission.)
SECTION III
Disorders of the Alimentary Tract
162
uptake. Regardless of the uptake process, fatty acids and 
monoglycerides are reesterified by a series of enzymatic 
steps in the endoplasmic reticulum to form triglycerides, 
the form in which lipid exits from the intestinal epithelial 
cell. Impaired lipid absorption as a result of either 
mucosal inflammation (e.g., celiac disease) and/or intes-
tinal resection can also lead to steatorrhea.
The reesterified triglycerides require the formation of 
chylomicrons to permit their exit from the small-intesti-
nal epithelial cell and their delivery to the liver via the 
lymphatics. Chylomicrons are composed of β-lipoprotein 
and contain triglycerides, cholesterol, cholesterol esters, 
and phospholipids and enter the lymphatics, not the 
portal vein. Defects in the postabsorptive phase of lipid 
digestion-absorption can also result in steatorrhea, but 
these disorders are uncommon. Abetalipoproteinemia, 
or acanthocytosis, is a rare disorder of impaired synthe-
sis of β-lipoprotein associated with abnormal erythrocytes 
(acanthocytes), neurologic problems, and steatorrhea. 
Lipolysis, micelle formation, and lipid uptake are all 
normal in patients with abetalipoproteinemia, but 
the reesterified triglyceride cannot exit from the epi-
thelial cell because of the failure to produce chylomi-
crons. Small-intestinal biopsies of these rare patients in 
the postprandial state reveal lipid-laden small-intestinal 
epithelial cells that become perfectly normal in appear-
ance following a 72–96 h fast. Similarly, abnormalities 
of intestinal lymphatics (e.g., intestinal lymphangiectasia) 
may also be associated with steatorrhea as well as protein 
loss (discussed later). Steatorrhea can result from defects 
at any of the several steps in lipid digestion-absorption.
The mechanism of lipid digestion-absorption out-
lined earlier is limited to dietary lipid that is almost 
exclusively in the form of LCTs (Table 15-3). Medium-
chain triglycerides (MCTs), composed of fatty acids 
with carbon chain lengths of 8–12, are present in large 
amounts in coconut oil and are used as a nutritional 
supplement. MCTs can be digested and absorbed by 
a different pathway from LCTs and at one time held 
promise as an important treatment of steatorrhea of 
almost all etiologies. Unfortunately, their therapeutic 
effects have been less than expected because their use is 
often not associated with an increase in body weight for 
reasons that are not completely understood.
MCTs, in contrast to LCTs, do not require pancre-
atic lipolysis as the triglyceride can be absorbed intact by 
the intestinal epithelial cell. Further, micelle formation is 
not necessary for the absorption of MCTs or medium-
chain fatty acids, if hydrolyzed by pancreatic lipase. 
MCTs are absorbed more efficiently than LCTs for the 
following reasons: (1) The rate of MCT absorption is 
greater than that of long-chain fatty acids; (2) medium-
chain fatty acids following absorption are not reesteri-
fied; (3) following absorption, MCTs are hydrolyzed 
to medium-chain fatty acids; (4) MCTs do not require 
chylomicron formation for their exit from the intestinal 
epithelial cells; and (5) their route of exit is via the por-
tal vein and not via lymphatics. Thus, the absorption of 
MCTs is greater than that of LCTs in pancreatic insuffi-
ciency, conditions with reduced intraduodenal bile acid 
concentrations, small-intestinal mucosal disease, abetali-
poproteinemia, and intestinal lymphangiectasia.
SCFAs are not dietary lipids but are synthesized by 
colonic bacterial enzymes from nonabsorbed carbo-
hydrate and are the anions in highest concentration in 
stool (between 80 and 130 mM). The SCFAs present 
in stool are primarily acetate, propionate, and butyrate, 
whose carbon chain lengths are 2, 3, and 4, respec-
tively. Butyrate is the primary nutrient for colonic 
epithelial cells, and its deficiency may be associated with 
one or more colitides. SCFAs conserve calories and 
carbohydrate, because carbohydrates not completely 
absorbed in the small intestine will not be absorbed in 
the large intestine due to the absence of both disaccha-
ridases and SGLT1, the transport protein that medi-
ates monosaccharide absorption. In contrast, SCFAs are 
rapidly absorbed and stimulate colonic Na-Cl and fluid 
absorption. Most non–Clostridium difficile antibiotic-
associated diarrhea is due to antibiotic suppression of 
colonic microbiota, with a resulting decrease in SCFA 
production. As C. difficile accounts for about 15–20% of 
all antibiotic-associated diarrhea, a relative decrease in 
colonic production of SCFA is likely the cause of most 
antibiotic-associated diarrhea.
The clinical manifestations of steatorrhea are a conse-
quence of both the underlying disorder responsible for 
the development of steatorrhea and steatorrhea per se. 
Depending on the degree of steatorrhea and the level 
of dietary intake, significant fat malabsorption may lead 
to weight loss. Steatorrhea per se can be responsible for 
diarrhea; if the primary cause of the steatorrhea has not 
been identified, a low-fat diet can often ameliorate the 
diarrhea by decreasing fecal fat excretion. Steatorrhea 
is often associated with fat-soluble vitamin deficiency, 
which will require replacement with water-soluble 
preparations of these vitamins.
Disorders of absorption may also be associated with 
malabsorption of other dietary nutrients, most often 
carbohydrates, with or without a decrease in dietary 
lipid digestion and absorption. Therefore, knowledge of 
the mechanism of the digestion and absorption of car-
bohydrates, proteins, and other minerals and vitamins is 
useful in the evaluation of patients with altered intesti-
nal nutrient absorption.
Carbohydrates
Carbohydrates in the diet are present in the form of 
starch, disaccharides (sucrose and lactose), and glucose. 
Carbohydrates are absorbed only in the small intestine 
and only in the form of monosaccharides. Therefore, 
before their absorption, starch and disaccharides must 
 
CHAPTER 15
Disorders of Absorption
163
first be digested by pancreatic amylase and intestinal 
brush border disaccharidases to monosaccharides. Mono-
saccharide absorption occurs by a Na-dependent process 
mediated by the brush border transport protein SGLT1.
Lactose malabsorption is the only clinically impor-
tant disorder of carbohydrate absorption. Lactose, the 
disaccharide present in milk, requires digestion by brush 
border lactase to its two constituent monosaccharides, 
glucose and galactose. Lactase is present in almost all 
species in the postnatal period but then disappears 
throughout the animal kingdom, except in humans. 
Lactase activity persists in many individuals throughout 
life. Two different types of lactase deficiency exist—
primary and secondary. In primary lactase deficiency, a 
genetically determined decrease or absence of lactase is 
noted, while all other aspects of both intestinal absorp-
tion and brush border enzymes are normal. In a number 
of non-white groups, primary lactase deficiency is com-
mon in adulthood. Table 15-5 presents the incidence 
of primary lactase deficiency in several ethnic groups. 
Northern European and North American whites are the 
only groups to maintain small-intestinal lactase activ-
ity throughout adult life. The persistence of lactase is 
the abnormality due to a defect in the regulation of its 
maturation. In contrast, secondary lactase deficiency occurs 
in association with small-intestinal mucosal disease with 
abnormalities in both structure and function of other 
brush border enzymes and transport processes. Second-
ary lactase deficiency is often seen in celiac disease.
As lactose digestion is rate-limiting compared to 
glucose/galactose absorption, lactase deficiency is associ-
ated with significant lactose malabsorption. Some indi-
viduals with lactose malabsorption develop symptoms 
such as diarrhea, abdominal pain, cramps, and/or flatus. 
Most individuals with primary lactase deficiency do not 
have symptoms. Since lactose intolerance may be associ-
ated with symptoms suggestive of irritable bowel syn-
drome, persistence of such symptoms in an individual 
with lactose intolerance while on a strict lactose-free 
diet would suggest that the individual’s symptoms were 
related to irritable bowel syndrome.
Development of symptoms of lactose intolerance is 
related to several factors:
1.	 Amount of lactose in the diet.
2.	 Rate of gastric emptying. Symptoms are more likely 
when gastric emptying is rapid than when gastric 
emptying is slower. Therefore, it is more likely that 
skim milk will be associated with symptoms of lac-
tose intolerance than will whole milk, as the rate of 
gastric emptying following skim milk intake is more 
rapid. Similarly, the diarrhea observed following 
subtotal gastrectomy is often a result of lactose intol-
erance, as gastric emptying is accelerated in patients 
with a gastrojejunostomy.
3.	 Small-intestinal transit time. Although the small and 
large intestine contribute to the development of 
symptoms, many of the symptoms of lactase defi-
ciency are related to the interaction of colonic bacteria 
and nonabsorbed lactose. More rapid small-intestinal 
transit makes symptoms more likely.
4.	 Colonic compensation by production of SCFAs from non-
absorbed lactose. Reduced levels of colonic micro-
flora, which can occur following antibiotic use, will 
also be associated with increased symptoms follow-
ing lactose ingestion, especially in a lactase-deficient 
individual.
Glucose-galactose or monosaccharide malabsorption 
may also be associated with diarrhea and is due to a 
congenital absence of SGLT1. Diarrhea is present when 
individuals with this disorder ingest carbohydrates that 
contain actively transported monosaccharides (e.g., glucose, 
galactose) but not monosaccharides that are not actively 
transported (e.g., fructose). Fructose is absorbed by 
the brush border transport protein GLUT 5, a facili-
tated diffusion process that is not Na-dependent and 
is distinct from SGLT1. In contrast, some individuals 
develop diarrhea as a result of consuming large quanti-
ties of sorbitol, a sugar used in diabetic candy; sorbitol is 
only minimally absorbed due to the absence of an intes-
tinal absorptive transport mechanism for sorbitol.
Proteins
Protein is present in food almost exclusively as poly-
peptides and requires extensive hydrolysis to di- and 
tripeptides and amino acids before absorption. Prote-
olysis occurs in both the stomach and small intestine; 
it is mediated by pepsin secreted as pepsinogen by gas-
tric chief cells and trypsinogen and other peptidases 
from pancreatic acinar cells. These proenzymes, pep-
sinogen and trypsinogen, must be activated to pepsin 
(by pepsin in the presence of a pH <5) and to trypsin 
(by the intestinal brush border enzyme enterokinase 
Table 15-5 
Primary Lactase Deficiency in Different 
Adult Ethnic Groups
Ethnic Group
Prevalence of Lactase 
Deficiency, %
Northern European
  5–15
Mediterranean
60–85
African black
  85–100
American black
45–80
American white
10–25
Native American
50–95
Mexican American
40–75
Asian
  90–100
Source: From FJ Simons: Am J Dig Dis 23:963, 1978.
SECTION III
Disorders of the Alimentary Tract
164
and subsequently by trypsin), respectively. Proteins are 
absorbed by separate transport systems for di- and 
­tripeptides and for different types of amino acids, 
e.g., neutral and dibasic. Alterations in either pro-
tein or amino acid digestion and absorption are rarely 
observed clinically, even in the presence of extensive 
small-intestinal mucosal inflammation. However, three 
rare genetic disorders involve protein digestion-absor­
ption: (1) Enterokinase deficiency is due to an absence of 
the brush border enzyme that converts the proenzyme 
trypsinogen to trypsin and is associated with diarrhea, 
growth retardation, and hypoproteinemia. (2) Hartnup 
syndrome, a defect in neutral amino acid transport, is 
characterized by a pellagra-like rash and neuropsy-
chiatric symptoms. (3) Cystinuria, a defect in dibasic 
amino acid transport, is associated with renal calculi and 
chronic pancreatitis.
APPROACH TO THE
PATIENT	
Malabsorption
The clues provided by the history, symptoms, and initial 
preliminary observations will serve to limit extensive, ill-
focused, and expensive laboratory and imaging studies.  
For example, a clinician evaluating a patient with symp-
toms suggestive of malabsorption, who recently had 
extensive small-intestinal resection for mesenteric 
ischemia, should direct the initial assessment almost 
exclusively to define whether a short bowel syndrome 
might explain the entire clinical picture. Similarly, the 
development of a pattern of bowel movements sugges-
tive of steatorrhea in a patient with long-standing alco-
hol abuse and chronic pancreatitis should lead toward 
assessing pancreatic exocrine function.
The classic picture of malabsorption is rarely seen 
today in most parts of the United States. As a conse-
quence, diseases with malabsorption must be sus-
pected in individuals with less severe symptoms and 
signs and with subtle evidence of the altered absorption 
of only a single nutrient rather than obvious evidence of 
the malabsorption of multiple nutrients.
Although diarrhea can be caused by changes in fluid 
and electrolyte movement in either the small or the 
large intestine, dietary nutrients are absorbed almost 
exclusively in the small intestine. Therefore, the dem-
onstration of diminished absorption of a dietary nutri-
ent provides unequivocal evidence of small-intestinal  
disease, although colonic dysfunction may also be pres-
ent (e.g., Crohn’s disease may involve both small and 
large intestine). Dietary nutrient absorption may be seg-
mental or diffuse along the small intestine and is site-
specific. Thus, for example, calcium, iron, and folic acid 
are exclusively absorbed by active transport processes in 
the proximal small intestine, especially the duodenum; 
in contrast, the active transport mechanisms for both 
cobalamin and bile acids are present only in the ileum. 
Therefore, in an individual who years previously had 
had an intestinal resection, the details of which are not  
presently available, a presentation with evidence of  
calcium, folic acid, and/or iron malabsorption but with-
out cobalamin deficiency would make it likely that the 
duodenum and proximal jejunum, but not ileum, had 
been resected.
Some nutrients, e.g., glucose, amino acids, and lipids, 
are absorbed throughout the small intestine, though 
their rate of absorption is greater in the proximal than 
in the distal segments. However, following segmental 
resection of the small intestine, the remaining segments 
undergo both morphologic and functional “adaptation” 
to enhance absorption. Such adaptation is secondary to 
the presence of luminal nutrients and hormonal stimuli 
and may not be complete in humans for several months 
following the resection. Adaptation is critical for survival 
in individuals who have undergone massive resection of 
the small intestine and/or colon.
Establishing the presence of steatorrhea and iden-
tifying its specific cause are often quite difficult. The 
“gold standard” still remains a timed, quantitative stool 
fat determination. On a practical basis, stool collections 
are invariably difficult and often incomplete, as nobody 
wants to handle stool. A qualitative test—Sudan III 
stain—has long been available to establish the pres-
ence of an increase in stool fat. This test is rapid and 
inexpensive but, as a qualitative test, does not estab-
lish the degree of fat malabsorption and is best used 
as a preliminary screening study. Many of the blood,  
breath, and isotopic tests that have been developed  
(1) do not directly measure fat absorption; (2) have excel-
lent sensitivity when steatorrhea is obvious and severe 
but have poor sensitivity when steatorrhea is mild (e.g., 
stool chymotrypsin, elastase, that can potentially distin-
guish pancreatic from nonpancreatic etiologies of steat-
orrhea); or (3) have not survived the transition from the 
research laboratory to commercial application.
Despite this situation, the use of routine laboratory 
studies (i.e., complete blood count, prothrombin time, 
serum protein determination, alkaline phosphatase) may 
suggest the presence of dietary nutrient depletion, espe-
cially iron, folate, cobalamin, and vitamins D and K. Addi-
tional studies include measurement of serum carotene, 
cholesterol, albumin, iron, folate, and cobalamin lev-
els. The serum carotene level can also be reduced if the 
patient has poor dietary intake of leafy vegetables.
If steatorrhea and/or altered absorption of other 
nutrients are suspected, the history, clinical observa-
tions, and laboratory testing can help detect deficiency 
of a nutrient, especially the fat-soluble vitamins A, D, 
E, or K. Thus, evidence of metabolic bone disease with 
 
CHAPTER 15
Disorders of Absorption
165
elevated alkaline phosphatase and/or reduced serum  
calcium levels would suggest vitamin D malabsorption.  
A deficiency of vitamin K would be suggested by an 
elevated prothrombin time in an individual without liver 
disease who was not taking anticoagulants. Macrocytic 
anemia would lead to evaluation of whether cobalamin 
or folic acid malabsorption was present. The presence of 
iron-deficiency anemia in the absence of occult bleeding 
from the gastrointestinal tract in either a male or a non-
menstruating female would require evaluation of iron 
malabsorption and the exclusion of celiac disease, as iron 
is absorbed exclusively in the proximal small intestine.
At times, however, a timed (72 h) quantitative 
stool collection, preferably on a defined diet, must be 
obtained to determine stool fat content and establish 
the presence of steatorrhea. The presence of steatorrhea 
then requires further assessment to establish the patho-
physiologic process(es) responsible for the defect in 
dietary lipid digestion-absorption (Table 15-4). Some of 
the other studies include the Schilling test, d-xylose test, 
duodenal mucosal biopsy, small-intestinal radiologic 
examination, and tests of pancreatic exocrine function.
The Schilling Test  This test is performed 
to determine the cause of cobalamin malabsorption. 
Unfortunately, the Schilling test has not been avail-
able commercially in the United States for the past few 
years. Since understanding the physiology and patho-
physiology of cobalamin absorption is very valuable to 
enhance one’s understanding of aspects of gastric, pan-
creatic, and ileal function, discussion of the Schilling test 
is provided in Chap. 16.
Urinary d-Xylose Test  The urinary d-xylose 
test for carbohydrate absorption provides an assess-
ment of proximal small-intestinal mucosal function. 
d-Xylose, a pentose, is absorbed almost exclusively in 
the proximal small intestine. The d-xylose test is usually 
performed by giving 25 g d-xylose and collecting urine 
for 5 h. An abnormal test (<4.5 g excretion) primar-
ily reflects the presence of duodenal/jejunal mucosal  
disease. The d-xylose test can also be abnormal in 
patients with blind loop syndrome (as a consequence 
primarily of abnormal intestinal mucosa) and, as a false-
positive study, in patients with large collections of fluid 
in a third space (i.e., ascites, pleural fluid). The ease of 
obtaining a mucosal biopsy of the small intestine by 
endoscopy and the false-negative rate of the d-xylose 
test have led to its diminished use. When small-intes-
tinal mucosal disease is suspected, a small-intestinal 
mucosal biopsy should be performed.
Radiologic Examination  Radiologic exami-
nation of the small intestine using barium contrast  
(small-bowel series or study) can provide impor-
tant information in the evaluation of the patient with 
­presumed or suspected malabsorption. These stud-
ies are most often performed in conjunction with the 
examination of the esophagus, stomach, and duodenal 
bulb, and insufficient barium is given to the patient to 
permit an adequate examination of the small-intestinal  
mucosa, especially the ileum. As a result, many gastro-
intestinal radiologists alter the procedure of a barium 
contrast examination of the small intestine by perform-
ing either a small-bowel series in which a large amount 
of barium is given by mouth without concurrent exami-
nation of the esophagus and stomach or an enteroclysis 
study in which a large amount of barium is introduced 
into the duodenum via a fluoroscopically placed tube. 
In addition, many of the diagnostic features initially 
described by radiologists to denote the presence of  
small-intestinal disease (e.g., flocculation, segmentation) 
are rarely seen with current barium suspensions. None-
theless, in skilled hands barium contrast examination 
of the small intestine can yield important information. 
For example, with extensive mucosal disease, dilation 
of intestine can be seen, as dilution of barium from 
increased intestinal fluid secretion (Fig. 15-3). A normal 
barium contrast study does not exclude the possibil-
ity of small-intestinal disease. However, a small-bowel 
series remains a useful examination to look for ana-
tomic abnormalities, such as strictures and fistulas (as in 
Crohn’s disease) or blind loop syndrome (e.g., multiple 
jejunal diverticula), and to define the extent of a previ-
ous surgical resection. Other imaging studies to assess 
the integrity of small intestinal morphology are CT 
enteroclysis and magnetic resonance (MR) enteroclysis, 
while capsule endoscopy and double-barrel enteros-
copy are other useful aids in the diagnostic assessment 
of small-intestinal pathology.
Biopsy of Small-Intestinal Mucosa  
A small-intestinal mucosal biopsy is essential in the 
evaluation of a patient with documented steatorrhea or 
chronic diarrhea (lasting >3 weeks) (Chap. 6). The ready 
availability of endoscopic equipment to examine the 
stomach and duodenum has led to its almost uniform 
use as the preferred method to obtain histologic mate-
rial of proximal small-intestinal mucosa. The primary 
indications for a small-intestinal biopsy are (1) evaluation 
of a patient either with documented or suspected steat-
orrhea or with chronic diarrhea, and (2) diffuse or focal 
abnormalities of the small intestine defined on a small-
intestinal series. Lesions seen on small-bowel biopsy can 
be classified into three different categories (Table 15-6):
1.  Diffuse, specific lesions. Relatively few diseases associ-
ated with altered nutrient absorption have specific 
histopathologic abnormalities on small-intestinal 
mucosal biopsy, and they are uncommon. Whipple’s 
disease is characterized by the presence of periodic  
SECTION III
Disorders of the Alimentary Tract
166
acid–Schiff (PAS)–positive macrophages in the lamina 
propria, while the bacilli that are also present may 
require electron-microscopic examination for identi-
fication (Fig. 15-4). Abetalipoproteinemia is character-
ized by a normal mucosal appearance except for the 
presence of mucosal absorptive cells that contain lipid 
postprandially and disappear following a prolonged 
period of either fat-free intake or fasting. Immune 
globulin deficiency is associated with a variety of his-
topathologic findings on small-intestinal mucosal 
biopsy. The characteristic feature is the absence of 
or substantial reduction in the number of plasma 
cells in the lamina propria; the mucosal architecture 
may be either perfectly normal or flat (i.e., villous  
atrophy). As patients with immune globulin defi-
ciency are often infected with Giardia lamblia, 
Giardia trophozoites may also be seen in the biopsy.
2.  Patchy, specific lesions. Several diseases show abnor-
mal small-intestinal mucosa with a patchy distribution.  
As a result, biopsies obtained randomly or in the 
absence of abnormalities visualized endoscopically 
may not reveal the diagnostic features. Intestinal lym-
phoma can at times be diagnosed on mucosal biopsy 
by the identification of malignant lymphoma cells in 
the lamina propria and submucosa. The presence of 
dilated lymphatics in the submucosa and sometimes 
in the lamina propria indicates the presence of lym-
phangiectasia associated with hypoproteinemia sec-
ondary to protein loss into the intestine. Eosinophilic 
gastroenteritis comprises a heterogeneous group 
of disorders with a spectrum of presentations and 
symptoms with an eosinophilic infiltrate of the lam-
ina propria, with or without peripheral eosinophilia. 
The patchy nature of the infiltrate as well as its pres-
ence in the submucosa often leads to an absence of 
histopathologic findings on mucosal biopsy. As the 
involvement of the duodenum in Crohn’s disease is 
also submucosal and not necessarily continuous, 
Figure 15-3 
Barium contrast small-intestinal radiologic examinations. A. Normal individual. B. Celiac sprue. C. Jejunal diverticulosis. 
D. Crohn’s disease. (Courtesy of Morton Burrell, MD, Yale University; with permission.)
 
CHAPTER 15
Disorders of Absorption
167
mucosal biopsies are not the most direct approach to 
the diagnosis of duodenal Crohn’s disease (Chap. 17). 
Amyloid deposition can be identified by Congo Red 
stain in some patients with amyloidosis involving the 
duodenum.
3.  Several microorganisms can be identified on small-
intestinal biopsies, establishing a correct diagnosis. At 
times the small biopsy is performed to establish the 
diagnosis of the infection, e.g., Whipple’s disease or  
Table 15-6 
Disease That Can Be Diagnosed by Small-
Intestinal Mucosal Biopsies
Lesions
Pathologic Findings
Diffuse, Specific
Whipple’s disease
Lamina propria contains 
macrophages containing 
PAS+ material
Agammaglobulinemia
No plasma cells; either  
normal or absent villi  
(“flat mucosa”)
Abetalipoproteinemia
Normal villi; epithelial cells 
vacuolated with fat  
postprandially
Patchy, Specific
Intestinal lymphoma
Malignant cells in lamina 
propria and submucosa
Intestinal  
lymphangiectasia
Dilated lymphatics;  
clubbed villi
Eosinophilic  
gastroenteritis
Eosinophil infiltration of  
lamina propria and mucosa
Amyloidosis
Amyloid deposits
Crohn’s disease
Noncaseating granulomas
Infection by one or  
more microorganisms 
(see text)
Specific organisms
Mastocytosis
Mast cell infiltration of  
lamina propria
Diffuse, Nonspecific
Celiac disease
Short or absent villi; mono-
nuclear infiltrate; epithelial 
cell damage; hypertrophy 
of crypts
Tropical sprue
Similar to celiac disease
Bacterial overgrowth
Patchy damage to villi;  
lymphocyte infiltration
Folate deficiency
Short villi; decreased mitosis 
in crypts; megalocytosis
Vitamin B12 deficiency
Similar to folate deficiency
Radiation enteritis
Similar to folate deficiency
Zollinger-Ellison syn-
drome
Mucosal ulceration and  
erosion from acid
Protein-calorie  
malnutrition
Villous atrophy; secondary 
bacterial overgrowth
Drug-induced enteritis
Variable histology
Abbreviation: PAS+, periodic acid–Schiff positive.
giardiasis. In most other instances the infection is picked 
up incidentally during the workup of diarrhea or other 
abdominal symptoms. Many of these infections occur 
in immunocompromised patients with diarrhea and 
include Cryptosporidium, Isospora belli, Microsporidia, 
Cyclospora, Toxoplasma, cytomegalovirus, adenovirus, 
Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare, and G. lamblia. In 
immunocompromised patients, when Candida, Asper-
gillus, Cryptococcus, or Histoplasma organisms are seen 
on duodenal biopsy, their presence generally reflects 
systemic infection. Apart from Whipple’s disease and 
infections in the immunocompromised host, the small 
bowel biopsy is seldom used as the primary mode to 
diagnose infection. Even giardiasis is more easily diag-
nosed with duodenal aspirates and/or stool antigen 
studies than by duodenal biopsy.
4.  Diffuse, nonspecific lesions. Celiac disease presents with a 
characteristic mucosal appearance on duodenal/proxi-
mal jejunal mucosal biopsy that is not diagnostic of the 
disease. The diagnosis of celiac disease is established by 
clinical, histologic, and immunologic response to a glu-
ten-free diet. Tropical sprue is associated with histologic 
findings similar to those of celiac disease after a tropical 
or subtropical exposure but does not respond to gluten 
restriction; most often symptoms improve with antibi-
otics and folate administration.
Patients with steatorrhea require assessment of pancre-
atic exocrine function, which is often abnormal in chronic 
pancreatitis. The secretin test that collects pancreatic 
secretions by duodenal intubation following intravenous 
administration of secretin is the only test that directly 
measures pancreatic exocrine function but is available 
only at few specialized centers. Endoscopic approaches 
provide excellent assessment of pancreatic duct anatomy 
but do not assess exocrine function (Chap. 47).
Table 15-7 summarizes the results of the d-xylose 
test, Schilling test, and small-intestinal mucosal biopsy 
in patients with five different causes of steatorrhea.
Specific Disease Entities
Celiac Disease
Celiac disease is a common cause of malabsorption of 
one or more nutrients. Though originally considered 
largely a disease in whites, especially those of European 
descent, recent observations have established that celiac 
disease is a common disease with protean manifestations, 
a worldwide distribution, and an estimated incidence in 
the United States that is as high as 1:113 people. Its inci-
dence has increased over the past 50 years. Celiac dis-
ease has had several other names, including nontropical 
sprue, celiac sprue, adult celiac disease, and gluten-­
sensitive enteropathy. The etiology of celiac disease 
SECTION III
Disorders of the Alimentary Tract
168
is not known, but environmental, immunologic, and 
genetic factors are important. Celiac disease is considered 
an “iceberg” disease with a small number of individu-
als with classical symptoms and manifestations related to 
nutrient malabsorption, and a varied natural history, with 
the onset of symptoms occurring at ages ranging from 
the first year of life through the eighth decade. A much 
larger number of individuals have manifestations that are 
not obviously related to intestinal malabsorption, e.g., 
anemia, osteopenia, infertility, neurologic symptoms 
(“atypical celiac disease”); while an even larger group is 
essentially asymptomatic although with abnormal small-
intestinal histopathology and serologies (discussed later) 
and as is referred to as having “silent” celiac disease.
The hallmark of celiac disease is the presence of an 
abnormal small-intestinal biopsy (Fig. 15-4) and the 
response of the condition—symptoms and the histologic 
changes on the small-intestinal biopsy—to the elimi-
nation of gluten from the diet. The histologic changes 
have a proximal-to-distal intestinal distribution of sever-
ity, which probably reflects the exposure of the intes-
tinal mucosa to varied amounts of dietary gluten; the 
symptoms do not necessarily correlate with histologic 
changes especially as many newly diagnosed patients 
with celiac disease may be asymptomatic.
The symptoms of celiac disease may appear with 
the introduction of cereals in an infant’s diet, although 
spontaneous remissions often occur during the second 
Figure 15-4 
Small-intestinal mucosal biopsies. A. Normal individual. 
B. Untreated celiac sprue. C. Treated celiac sprue. D. Intes-
tinal lymphangiectasia. E. Whipple’s disease. F. Lymphoma. 
G. Giardiasis. (Courtesy of Marie Robert, MD, Yale University; 
with permission.)
 
CHAPTER 15
Disorders of Absorption
169
decade of life that may be either permanent or fol-
lowed by the reappearance of symptoms over several 
years. Alternatively, the symptoms of celiac disease may 
first become evident at almost any age throughout 
adulthood. In many patients, frequent spontaneous 
remissions and exacerbations occur. The symptoms 
range from significant malabsorption of multiple nutri-
ents, with diarrhea, steatorrhea, weight loss, and the 
consequences of nutrient depletion (i.e., anemia and 
metabolic bone disease), to the absence of any gastro-
intestinal symptoms but with evidence of the deple-
tion of a single nutrient (e.g., iron or folate deficiency, 
osteomalacia, edema from protein loss). Asymptomatic 
relatives of patients with celiac disease have been iden-
tified as having this disease either by small-intestinal 
biopsy or by serologic studies [e.g., antiendomysial anti-
bodies, tissue transglutaminase (tTG)]. The availabil-
ity of these “celiac serologies” has led to a substantial 
increase in the diagnosis of celiac disease, and the diag-
nosis is now being made primarily in patients without 
“classic” symptoms but with atypical and subclinical 
presentations.
Etiology
The etiology of celiac disease is not known, but envi-
ronmental, immunologic, and genetic factors all appear 
to contribute to the disease. One environmental factor 
is the clear association of the disease with gliadin, a 
component of gluten that is present in wheat, barley, 
and rye. In addition to the role of gluten restriction in 
treatment, the instillation of gluten into both normal-
appearing rectum and distal ileum of patients with celiac 
disease results in morphologic changes within hours.
An immunologic component in the pathogenesis of celiac 
disease is critical and involves both adaptive and innate 
immune responses. Serum antibodies—IgA antigliadin, 
IgA antiendomysial, and IgA anti-tTG antibodies—are 
present, but it is not known whether such antibodies are 
primary or secondary to the tissue damage. The antien-
domysial antibody has 90–95% sensitivity and 90–95% 
specificity; the antigen recognized by the antiendomysial 
antibody is tTG, which deaminates gliadin, which is pre-
sented to HLA-DQ2 or HLA-DQ8 (discussed later). 
Antibody studies are frequently used to identify patients 
with celiac disease; patients with these antibodies should 
undergo duodenal biopsy. This autoantibody has not 
been linked to a pathogenetic mechanism (or mecha-
nisms) responsible for celiac disease. Nonetheless, this 
antibody is useful in establishing the true prevalence of 
celiac disease in the general population. A 4-week treat-
ment with prednisolone of a patient with celiac disease 
who continues to eat gluten will induce a remission and 
convert the “flat” abnormal duodenal biopsy to a more 
normal-appearing one. In addition, gliadin peptides 
interact with gliadin-specific T cells that mediate tissue 
injury and induce the release of one or more cytokines 
(e.g., IFN-γ) that cause tissue injury.
Genetic factor(s) are also involved in celiac disease. 
The incidence of symptomatic celiac disease varies 
widely in different population groups (high in whites, 
low in blacks and Asians) and is 10% in first-degree rela-
tives of celiac disease patients; however, serologic studies 
provide clear evidence that celiac disease is present 
worldwide. Furthermore, all patients with celiac disease 
express the HLA-DQ2 or HLA-DQ8 allele, though 
only a minority of people expressing DQ2/DQ8 have 
celiac disease. Absence of DQ2/DQ8 excludes the diag-
nosis of celiac disease.
Diagnosis
A small-intestinal biopsy is required to establish a diag-
nosis of celiac disease (Fig. 15-4). A biopsy should be 
performed in patients with symptoms and laboratory 
findings suggestive of nutrient malabsorption and/or 
deficiency and with a positive endomysial antibody test. 
Since the presentation of celiac disease is often subtle, 
without overt evidence of malabsorption or nutri-
ent deficiency, a relatively low threshold to perform 
a biopsy is important. It is more prudent to perform a 
biopsy than to obtain another test of intestinal absorp-
tion, which can never completely exclude or establish 
this diagnosis.
Table 15-7
Results of Diagnostic Studies in Different Causes of Steatorrhea
d-Xylose Test
Schilling Test
Duodenal Mucosal Biopsy
Chronic pancreatitis
Normal
50% abnormal; if abnormal,  
normal with pancreatic enzymes
Normal
Bacterial overgrowth  
syndrome
Normal or only modestly 
abnormal
Often abnormal; if abnormal,  
normal after antibiotics
Usually normal
Ileal disease
Normal
Abnormal
Normal
Celiac disease
Decreased
Normal
Abnormal: probably “flat”
Intestinal  
lymphangiectasia
Normal
Normal
Abnormal: “dilated  
lymphatics”
SECTION III
Disorders of the Alimentary Tract
170
The diagnosis of celiac disease requires the presence 
of characteristic histologic changes on small-intestinal 
biopsy together with a prompt clinical and histologic 
response following the institution of a gluten-free 
diet. If serologic studies have detected the presence 
of IgA antiendomysial or tTG antibodies, they too 
should disappear after a gluten-free diet is started. 
With the increase in number of patients diagnosed 
with celiac disease that have been largely identified by 
serologic studies, the spectrum of histologic changes 
seen on duodenal biopsy has increased and includes 
findings that are not as severe as the classic changes 
shown in Fig. 15-4. The classical changes seen on 
duodenal/jejunal biopsy are restricted to the mucosa 
and include (1) an increase in the number of intraepi-
thelial lymphocytes; (2) absence or reduced height 
of villi, resulting in a flat appearance with increased 
crypt cell proliferation, resulting in crypt hyperpla-
sia and loss of villous structure, with consequent 
villous, but not mucosal, atrophy; (3) cuboidal 
appearance and nuclei that are no longer oriented 
basally in surface epithelial cells; and (4) increased 
lymphocytes and plasma cells in the lamina propria 
(Fig. 15-4B). Although these features are character-
istic of celiac disease, they are not diagnostic because 
a similar appearance can be seen in tropical sprue, 
eosinophilic enteritis, and milk-protein intolerance 
in children and occasionally in lymphoma, bacterial 
overgrowth, Crohn’s disease, and gastrinoma with 
acid hypersecretion. However, the presence of a char-
acteristic histologic appearance that reverts toward 
normal following the initiation of a gluten-free diet 
establishes the diagnosis of celiac disease (Fig. 15-4C). 
Readministration of gluten with or without an 
additional small-intestinal biopsy is not necessary.
Failure to respond to gluten restriction
The most common cause of persistent symptoms in a 
patient who fulfills all the criteria for the diagnosis of 
celiac disease is continued intake of gluten. Gluten 
is ubiquitous, and significant effort must be made to 
exclude all gluten from the diet. Use of rice in place of 
wheat flour is very helpful, and several support groups 
provide important aid to patients with celiac disease and 
to their families. More than 90% of patients who have 
the characteristic findings of celiac disease will respond 
to complete dietary gluten restriction. The remainder 
constitute a heterogeneous group (whose condition is 
often called refractory celiac disease or refractory sprue) that 
includes some patients who (1) respond to restric-
tion of other dietary protein, e.g., soy; (2) respond to 
glucocorticoids; (3) are “temporary” (i.e., the clinical 
and morphologic findings disappear after several months 
or years); or (4) fail to respond to all measures and 
have a fatal outcome, with or without documented 
complications of celiac disease, such as development of 
intestinal T cell lymphoma.
Mechanism of diarrhea
The diarrhea in celiac disease has several pathogenetic 
mechanisms. Diarrhea may be secondary to (1) steatorrhea, 
which is primarily a result of the changes in jejunal 
mucosal function; (2) secondary lactase deficiency, a 
consequence of changes in jejunal brush border enzy-
matic function; (3) bile acid malabsorption resulting in 
bile acid–induced fluid secretion in the colon, in cases 
with more extensive disease involving the ileum; and 
(4) endogenous fluid secretion resulting from crypt 
hyperplasia. Patients with more severe involvement with 
celiac disease may obtain temporary improvement with 
dietary lactose and fat restriction while awaiting the full effects 
of total gluten restriction, which is primary therapy.
Associated diseases
Celiac disease is associated with dermatitis herpetiformis 
(DH), though the association has not been explained. 
Patients with DH have characteristic papulovesicular 
lesions that respond to dapsone. Almost all patients with 
DH have histologic changes in the small intestine con-
sistent with celiac disease, although usually much milder 
and less diffuse in distribution. Most patients with DH 
have mild or no gastrointestinal symptoms. In contrast, 
relatively few patients with celiac disease have DH.
Celiac disease is also associated with diabetes mel-
litus type 1; IgA deficiency; Down syndrome; and 
Turner’s syndrome. The clinical importance of the 
association with diabetes is that although severe watery 
diarrhea without evidence of malabsorption is most 
often diagnosed as diarrhea,” assay of antiendomysial 
antibodies and/or a small-intestinal biopsy must be 
considered to exclude celiac disease.
Complications
The most important complication of celiac disease is 
the development of cancer. An increased incidence of 
both gastrointestinal and nongastrointestinal neoplasms 
as well as intestinal lymphoma exists in patients with 
celiac disease. For unexplained reasons the occur-
rence of lymphoma in patients with celiac disease is 
higher in Ireland and the United Kingdom than in 
the United States. The possibility of lymphoma must 
be considered whenever a patient with celiac disease 
previously doing well on a gluten-free diet is no lon-
ger responsive to gluten restriction or a patient who 
presents with clinical and histologic features consistent 
with celiac disease does not respond to a gluten-free 
diet. Other complications of celiac disease include the 
 
CHAPTER 15
Disorders of Absorption
171
development of intestinal ulceration independent of 
lymphoma and so-called refractory sprue (discussed 
earlier) and collagenous sprue. In collagenous sprue, a 
layer of collagen-like material is present beneath the 
basement membrane; patients with collagenous sprue 
generally do not respond to a gluten-free diet and 
often have a poor prognosis.
Tropical Sprue
Tropical sprue is a poorly understood syndrome 
that affects both expatriates and natives in certain 
but not all tropical areas and is manifested by 
chronic diarrhea, steatorrhea, weight loss, and nutri-
tional deficiencies, including those of both folate and 
cobalamin. This disease affects 5–10% of the population 
in some tropical areas.
Chronic diarrhea in a tropical environment is most 
often caused by infectious agents including G. lamblia, 
Yersinia enterocolitica, C. difficile, Cryptosporidium parvum, 
and Cyclospora cayetanensis, among other organisms. 
Tropical sprue should not be entertained as a possible 
diagnosis until the presence of cysts and trophozoites has 
been excluded in three stool samples.
Chronic infections of the gastrointestinal tract and 
diarrhea in patients with and without AIDS are dis-
cussed in Chap. 23.
The small-intestinal mucosa in individuals living in 
tropical areas is not identical to that of individuals who 
reside in temperate climates. Biopsies reveal a mild 
alteration of villous architecture with a modest increase 
in mononuclear cells in the lamina propria, which on 
occasion can be as severe as that seen in celiac disease. 
These changes are observed both in native residents and 
in expatriates living in tropical regions and are usually 
associated with mild decreases in absorptive function, 
but they revert to “normal” when an individual moves 
or returns to a temperate area. Some have suggested that 
the changes seen in tropical enteropathy and in tropical 
sprue represent different ends of the spectrum of a single 
entity, but convincing evidence to support this concept 
is lacking.
Etiology
Because tropical sprue responds to antibiotics, the con-
sensus is that it may be caused by one or more infec-
tious agents. Nonetheless, the etiology and pathogenesis 
of tropical sprue are uncertain. First, its occurrence is 
not evenly distributed in all tropical areas; rather, it is 
found in specific locations, including southern India, 
the Philippines, and several Caribbean islands (e.g., 
Puerto Rico, Haiti), but is rarely observed in Africa, 
Jamaica, or Southeast Asia. Second, an occasional indi-
vidual will not develop symptoms of tropical sprue 
until long after having left an endemic area. This is the 
reason why the original term for celiac disease (often 
referred to as celiac sprue) was nontropical sprue to dis-
tinguish it from tropical sprue. Third, multiple micro-
organisms have been identified on jejunal aspirate with 
relatively little consistency among studies. Klebsiella 
pneumoniae, Enterobacter cloacae, or E. coli have been 
implicated in some studies of tropical sprue, while 
other studies have favored a role for a toxin produced 
by one or more of these bacteria. Fourth, the incidence 
of tropical sprue appears to have decreased substantially 
during the past two or three decades, perhaps related 
to improved sanitation in many tropical countries dur-
ing this time. One speculation for the reduced occur-
rence is the wider use of antibiotics in acute diarrhea, 
especially in travelers to tropical areas from temper-
ate countries. Fifth, the role of folic acid deficiency in 
the pathogenesis of tropical sprue requires clarification. 
Folic acid is absorbed exclusively in the duodenum 
and proximal jejunum, and most patients with tropical 
sprue have evidence of folate malabsorption and deple-
tion. Although folate deficiency can cause changes in 
small-intestinal mucosa that are corrected by folate 
replacement, several earlier studies reporting that tropi-
cal sprue could be cured by folic acid did not provide 
an explanation for the “insult” that was initially respon-
sible for folate malabsorption.
The clinical pattern of tropical sprue varies in differ-
ent areas of the world (e.g., India vs. Puerto Rico). Not 
infrequently, individuals in South India initially will 
report the occurrence of an acute enteritis before the 
development of steatorrhea and malabsorption. In con-
trast, in Puerto Rico a most insidious onset of symp-
toms and a more dramatic response to antibiotics is seen 
when compared to some other locations. Tropical sprue 
in different areas of the world may not be the same 
disease, and similar clinical entities may have different 
etiologies.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of tropical sprue is best made by the pres-
ence of an abnormal small-intestinal mucosal biopsy 
in an individual with chronic diarrhea and evidence 
of malabsorption who is either residing or has recently 
lived in a tropical country. The small-intestinal biopsy 
in tropical sprue does not have pathognomonic features 
but resembles, and can often be indistinguishable from, 
that seen in celiac disease (Fig. 15-4). The biopsy in 
tropical sprue will have less villous architectural altera-
tion and more mononuclear cell infiltrate in the lamina 
propria. In contrast to celiac disease, the histologic fea-
tures of tropical sprue are present with a similar degree 
of severity throughout the small intestine, and a gluten-
free diet does not result in either clinical or histologic 
improvement in tropical sprue.
SECTION III
Disorders of the Alimentary Tract
172
Treatment	
Tropical Sprue
Broad-spectrum antibiotics and folic acid are most often 
curative, especially if the patient leaves the tropical area 
and does not return. Tetracycline should be used for up 
to 6 months and may be associated with improvement 
within 1–2 weeks. Folic acid alone will induce a hema-
tologic remission as well as improvement in appetite, 
weight gain, and some morphologic changes in small- 
intestinal biopsy. Because of the presence of marked 
folate deficiency, folic acid is most often given together 
with antibiotics.
Short Bowel Syndrome
This is a descriptive term for the myriad clinical prob-
lems that occur following resection of varying lengths 
of small intestine; or on rare occasions, it may be con-
genital, e.g., microvillous inclusion disease. The factors 
that determine both the type and degree of symptoms 
include (1) the specific segment (jejunum vs. ileum) 
resected, (2) the length of the resected segment, (3) the 
integrity of the ileocecal valve, (4) whether any large 
intestine has also been removed, (5) residual disease in 
the remaining small and/or large intestine (e.g., Crohn’s 
disease, mesenteric artery disease), and (6) the degree of 
adaptation in the remaining intestine. Short bowel syn-
drome can occur at any age from neonates through the 
elderly. Intestinal failure is the inability to maintain nutri-
tion without parenteral support.
Three different situations in adults demand intesti-
nal resections: (1) mesenteric vascular disease, including 
atherosclerosis, thrombotic phenomena, and vasculitides; 
(2) primary mucosal and submucosal disease, e.g., 
Crohn’s disease; and (3) operations without preexisting 
small intestinal disease, such as trauma.
Following resection of the small intestine, the resid-
ual intestine undergoes adaptation of both structure and 
function that may last for up to 6–12 months. Contin-
ued intake of dietary nutrients and calories is required 
to stimulate adaptation via direct contact with intestinal 
mucosa, the release of one or more intestinal hormones, 
and pancreatic and biliary secretions. Thus, enteral nutri-
tion with calorie administration must be maintained, 
especially in the early postoperative period, even if an 
extensive intestinal resection requiring parenteral nutri-
tion (PN) had been performed. The subsequent ability 
of such patients to absorb nutrients will not be known 
for several months, until adaptation is completed.
Multiple factors besides the absence of intestinal mucosa 
(required for lipid, fluid, and electrolyte absorption) 
contribute to the diarrhea and steatorrhea in these 
patients. Removal of the ileum and especially the ileo-
cecal valve is often associated with more severe diarrhea 
than jejunal resection. Without part or all of the ileum, 
diarrhea can be caused by an increase in bile acids enter-
ing the colon, leading to their stimulation of colonic 
fluid and electrolyte secretion. Absence of the ileocecal 
valve is also associated with a decrease in intestinal transit 
time and bacterial overgrowth from the colon. The pres-
ence of the colon (or a major portion) is associated with 
substantially less diarrhea and lower likelihood of intes-
tinal failure as a result of fermentation of nonabsorbed 
carbohydrates to SCFAs. The latter are absorbed in the 
colon and stimulate Na and water absorption, improving 
overall fluid balance. Lactose intolerance as a result of the 
removal of lactase-containing mucosa as well as gastric 
hypersecretion may also contribute to the diarrhea.
In addition to diarrhea and/or steatorrhea, a range 
of nonintestinal symptoms is also observed in some 
patients. A significant increase in renal calcium oxalate 
calculi is observed in patients with a small-intestinal 
resection with an intact colon and is due to an increase 
in oxalate absorption by the large intestine, with sub-
sequent hyperoxaluria (called enteric hyperoxaluria). Two 
possible mechanisms for the increase in oxalate absorp-
tion in the colon have been suggested: (1) bile acids 
and fatty acids that increase colonic mucosal perme-
ability, resulting in increased oxalate absorption; and 
(2) increased fatty acids that bind calcium, resulting in 
increased soluble oxalate that is then absorbed. Since 
oxalate is high in relatively few foods (e.g., spinach, 
rhubarb, tea), dietary restrictions alone are not adequate 
treatment. Cholestyramine, an anion-binding resin, and 
calcium have proved useful in reducing the hyperox-
aluria. Similarly, an increase in cholesterol gallstones is 
related to a decrease in the bile acid pool size, which 
results in the generation of cholesterol supersaturation 
in gallbladder bile. Gastric hypersecretion of acid occurs 
in many patients following large resections of the small 
intestine. The etiology is unclear but may be related to 
either reduced hormonal inhibition of acid secretion or 
increased gastrin levels due to reduced small-intestinal 
catabolism of circulating gastrin. The resulting gastric 
acid secretion may be an important factor contribut-
ing to the diarrhea and steatorrhea. A reduced pH in 
the duodenum can inactivate pancreatic lipase and/or 
precipitate duodenal bile acids, thereby increasing ste-
atorrhea, and an increase in gastric secretion can create 
a volume overload relative to the reduced small-intesti-
nal absorptive capacity. Inhibition of gastric acid secre-
tion with proton pump inhibitors can help in reduc-
ing the diarrhea and steatorrhea but only for the first 
6 months.
Treatment	
Short Bowel Syndrome
Treatment of short bowel syndrome depends on the 
severity of symptoms and whether the individual is 
 
CHAPTER 15
Disorders of Absorption
173
able to maintain caloric and electrolyte balance with 
oral intake alone. Initial treatment includes judicious 
use of opiates (including codeine) to reduce stool out-
put and to establish an effective diet. An initial diet 
should be low-fat and high-carbohydrate, if the colon is 
in situ, to minimize the diarrhea from fatty acid stimula-
tion of colonic fluid secretion. MCTs (discussed earlier), 
a low-lactose diet, and various soluble fiber-containing 
diets should also be tried. In the absence of an ileoce-
cal valve, the possibility of bacterial overgrowth must be 
considered and treated. If gastric acid hypersecretion is 
contributing to the diarrhea and steatorrhea, a proton 
pump inhibitor may be helpful. Usually none of these 
therapeutic approaches will provide an instant solution, 
but they can reduce disabling diarrhea.
The patient’s vitamin and mineral status must also 
be monitored; replacement therapy should be initi-
ated if indicated. Fat-soluble vitamins, folate, cobala-
min, calcium, iron, magnesium, and zinc are the most 
critical factors to monitor on a regular basis. If these 
approaches are not successful, home PN is an estab-
lished therapy that can be maintained for many years. 
Small intestinal transplantation is becoming established 
as a possible approach for individuals with extensive 
intestinal resection who cannot be maintained with-
out PN, i.e., “intestinal failure.” Considerable attention 
has been directed to the potential effectiveness of  
trophic hormones, e.g., glucagon-like peptide 2 (GLP-2), 
to improve absorptive function.
Bacterial Overgrowth Syndrome
Bacterial overgrowth syndrome comprises a group of 
disorders with diarrhea, steatorrhea, and macrocytic 
anemia whose common feature is the proliferation of 
colonic-type bacteria within the small intestine. This 
bacterial proliferation is due to stasis caused by impaired 
peristalsis (functional stasis), changes in intestinal anatomy 
(anatomic stasis), or direct communication between the 
small and large intestine. These conditions have also 
been referred to as stagnant bowel syndrome or blind loop 
syndrome.
Pathogenesis
The manifestations of bacterial overgrowth syndromes 
are a direct consequence of the presence of increased 
amounts of a colonic-type bacterial flora, such as E. coli 
or Bacteroides, in the small intestine. Macrocytic anemia is 
due to cobalamin, not folate, deficiency. Most bacteria 
require cobalamin for growth, and increasing concen-
trations of bacteria use up the relatively small amounts 
of dietary cobalamin. Steatorrhea is due to impaired 
micelle formation as a consequence of a reduced intra-
duodenal concentration of conjugated bile acids and the 
presence of unconjugated bile acids. Certain bacteria, 
e.g., Bacteroides, deconjugate conjugated bile acids to 
unconjugated bile acids. Unconjugated bile acids will be 
absorbed more rapidly than conjugated bile acids, and, 
as a result, the intraduodenal concentration of bile acids 
will be reduced. In addition, the CMC of unconjugated 
bile acids is higher than that of conjugated bile acids, 
resulting in a decrease in micelle formation. Diarrhea is 
due, at least in part, to the steatorrhea, when it is present. 
However, some patients manifest diarrhea without steat-
orrhea, and it is assumed that the colonic-type bacteria 
in these patients are producing one or more bacterial 
enterotoxins that are responsible for fluid secretion and 
diarrhea.
Etiology
The etiology of these different disorders is bacterial 
proliferation in the small intestinal lumen secondary to 
either anatomic or functional stasis or to a communi-
cation between the relatively sterile small intestine and 
the colon with its high levels of aerobic and anaerobic 
bacteria. Several examples of anatomic stasis have been 
identified: (1) one or more diverticula (both duodenal 
and jejunal) (Fig. 15-3C); (2) fistulas and strictures 
related to Crohn’s disease (Fig. 15-3D); (3) a proximal 
duodenal afferent loop following a subtotal gastrectomy 
and gastrojejunostomy; (4) a bypass of the intestine, e.g., 
jejunoileal bypass for obesity; and (5) dilation at the site 
of a previous intestinal anastomosis. These anatomic 
derangements are often associated with the presence of 
a segment (or segments) of intestine out of continuity 
of propagated peristalsis, resulting in stasis and bacterial 
proliferation. Bacterial overgrowth syndromes can also 
occur in the absence of an anatomic blind loop when 
functional stasis is present. Impaired peristalsis and bacte-
rial overgrowth in the absence of a blind loop occur in 
scleroderma, where motility abnormalities exist in both 
the esophagus and small intestine. Functional stasis and 
bacterial overgrowth can also occur in association with 
diabetes mellitus and in the small intestine when a direct 
connection exists between the small and large intestine, 
including an ileocolonic resection, or occasionally fol-
lowing an enterocolic anastomosis that permits entry of 
bacteria into the small intestine as a result of bypassing 
the ileocecal valve.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis may be suspected from the combination 
of a low serum cobalamin level and an elevated serum 
folate level, as enteric bacteria frequently produce folate 
compounds that will be absorbed in the duodenum. 
Ideally, the diagnosis of the bacterial overgrowth 
syndrome is the demonstration of increased levels of 
aerobic and/or anaerobic colonic-type bacteria in a 
SECTION III
Disorders of the Alimentary Tract
174
jejunal aspirate obtained by intubation. This special-
ized test is rarely available. Breath hydrogen testing with 
lactulose (a nondigestible disaccharide) administration 
has also been used to detect bacterial overgrowth. 
The Schilling test can also diagnose bacterial over-
growth (see Chap. 16) but is also not available rou-
tinely. Often the diagnosis is suspected clinically and 
confirmed by response to treatment.
Treatment	
Bacterial Overgrowth Syndrome
Primary treatment should be directed, if at all possible, 
to the surgical correction of an anatomic blind loop. 
In the absence of functional stasis, it is important to 
define the anatomic relationships responsible for stasis 
and bacterial overgrowth. For example, bacterial over-
growth secondary to strictures, one or more diverticula, 
or a proximal afferent loop can potentially be cured by 
surgical correction of the anatomic state. In contrast, 
the functional stasis of scleroderma or certain anatomic 
stasis states (e.g., multiple jejunal diverticula) cannot 
be corrected surgically, and these conditions should 
be treated with broad-spectrum antibiotics. Tetracy-
cline used to be the initial treatment of choice; due to 
increasing resistance, however, other antibiotics such as 
metronidazole, amoxicillin/clavulanic acid, and cepha-
losporins have been employed. The antibiotic should  
be given for approximately 3 weeks or until symptoms 
remit. Although the natural history of these conditions is 
chronic, antibiotics should not be given continuously. 
Symptoms usually remit within 2–3 weeks of initial 
antibiotic therapy. Therapy need not be repeated until 
symptoms recur. In the presence of frequent recur-
rences, several treatment strategies exist, but the use of 
antibiotics for 1 week per month, whether or not symp-
toms are present, is often most effective.
Unfortunately, therapy for bacterial overgrowth syn-
drome is largely empirical, with an absence of clini-
cal trials on which to base rational decisions regarding  
the antibiotic choice, the duration of treatment, and/or 
the best approach for treating recurrences. Bacterial over-
growth may also occur as a component of another chronic 
disease, e.g., Crohn’s disease, radiation enteritis, or short 
bowel syndrome. Treatment of the bacterial overgrowth 
in these settings will not cure the underlying problem but 
may be very important in ameliorating a subset of clinical 
problems that are related to bacterial overgrowth.
Whipple’s Disease
Whipple’s disease is a chronic multisystem disease asso-
ciated with diarrhea, steatorrhea, weight loss, arthralgia, 
and central nervous system (CNS) and cardiac prob-
lems; it is caused by the bacteria Tropheryma whipplei. 
Until the identification of T. whipplei by polymerase 
chain reaction, the hallmark of Whipple’s disease had 
been the presence of PAS-positive macrophages in the 
small intestine (Fig. 15-4E) and other organs with evi-
dence of disease.
Etiology
Whipple’s disease is caused by a small gram-positive 
bacillus, T. whipplei. The bacillus, an Actinobacteria, has 
low virulence but high infectivity, and relatively mini-
mal symptoms are observed compared to the extent of 
the bacilli in multiple tissues.
Clinical presentation
The onset of Whipple’s disease is insidious and is charac-
terized by diarrhea, steatorrhea, abdominal pain, weight 
loss, migratory large-joint arthropathy, and fever as well 
as ophthalmologic and CNS symptoms. The develop-
ment of dementia is a relatively late symptom and an 
extremely poor prognostic sign, especially in patients 
who relapse following the induction of a remission with 
antibiotics. For unexplained reasons, the disease occurs 
primarily in middle-aged white men. The steatorrhea 
in these patients is generally believed secondary to both 
small-intestinal mucosal injury and lymphatic obstruction 
secondary to the increased number of PAS-positive mac-
rophages in the lamina propria of the small intestine.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of Whipple’s disease is suggested by 
a multisystem disease in a patient with diarrhea and 
steatorrhea. Obtaining tissue biopsies from the small 
intestine and/or other organs that may be involved (e.g., 
liver, lymph nodes, heart, eyes, CNS, or synovial mem-
branes), based on the patient’s symptoms, is the primary 
approach to establish the diagnosis of Whipple’s disease. 
The presence of PAS-positive macrophages containing 
the characteristic small (0.25—1–2 mm) bacilli is sugges-
tive of this diagnosis. However, Whipple’s disease can be 
confused with the PAS-positive macrophages containing 
M. avium complex, which may be a cause of diarrhea in 
AIDS. The presence of the T. whipplei bacillus outside 
of macrophages is a more important indicator of active 
disease than is their presence within the macrophages. 
T. whipplei has now been successfully grown in culture.
Treatment	
Whipple’s Disease
The treatment for Whipple’s disease is prolonged use of 
antibiotics. The current drug of choice is double-strength 
trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole for approximately 1 year.  
PAS-positive macrophages can persist following suc-
cessful treatment, and the presence of bacilli outside of 
macrophages is indicative of persistent infection or an 
 
CHAPTER 15
Disorders of Absorption
175
early sign of recurrence. Recurrence of disease activity, 
especially with dementia, is an extremely poor prognos-
tic sign and requires an antibiotic that crosses the blood-
brain barrier. If trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole is not tol-
erated, chloramphenicol is an appropriate second choice.
Protein-Losing Enteropathy
Protein-losing enteropathy is not a specific disease but 
rather a group of gastrointestinal and nongastrointes-
tinal disorders with hypoproteinemia and edema in the 
absence of either proteinuria or defects in protein syn-
thesis, e.g., chronic liver disease. These diseases are char-
acterized by excess protein loss into the gastrointestinal 
tract. Normally, about 10% of total protein catabolism 
occurs via the gastrointestinal tract. Evidence of increased 
protein loss into the gastrointestinal tract occurs in 
more than 65 different diseases, which can be classified 
into three groups: (1) mucosal ulceration, such that the 
protein loss primarily represents exudation across damaged 
mucosa, e.g., ulcerative colitis, gastrointestinal carcinomas, 
and peptic ulcer; (2) nonulcerated mucosa, but with evi-
dence of mucosal damage so that the protein loss repre-
sents loss across epithelia with altered permeability, e.g., 
celiac disease and Ménétrier’s disease in the small intestine 
and stomach, respectively; and (3) lymphatic dysfunction, 
representing either primary lymphatic disease or second-
ary to partial lymphatic obstruction that may occur as a 
result of enlarged lymph nodes or cardiac disease.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of protein-losing enteropathy is sug-
gested by the presence of peripheral edema and low 
serum albumin and globulin levels in the absence of 
renal and hepatic disease. An individual with protein-
losing enteropathy only rarely has selective loss of only 
albumin or only globulins. Therefore, marked reduction 
of serum albumin with normal serum globulins should 
not initiate an evaluation for protein-losing enteropa-
thy but should suggest the presence of renal and/or 
hepatic disease. Likewise, reduced serum globulins with 
normal serum albumin levels are more likely a result 
of reduced globulin synthesis rather than enhanced 
globulin loss into the intestine. Documentation of an 
increase in protein loss into the gastrointestinal tract has 
been established by the administration of one of several 
radiolabeled proteins and its quantitation in stool dur-
ing a 24- or 48-h period. Unfortunately, none of these 
radiolabeled proteins is available for routine clinical use. 
α1-Antitrypsin, a protein that accounts for ∼4% of total 
serum proteins and is resistant to proteolysis, can be 
used to document enhanced rates of serum protein loss 
into the intestinal tract but cannot be used to assess gas-
tric protein loss due to its degradation in an acid milieu. 
α1-Antitrypsin clearance is measured by determining 
stool volume and both stool and plasma α1-antitrypsin 
concentrations. In addition to the loss of protein via 
abnormal and distended lymphatics, peripheral lympho-
cytes may also be lost via lymphatics, resulting in a rela-
tive lymphopenia. Thus, the presence of lymphopenia 
in a patient with hypoproteinemia supports the presence 
of increased loss of protein into the gastrointestinal tract.
Patients with increased protein loss into the gastroin-
testinal tract from lymphatic obstruction often have steat-
orrhea and diarrhea. The steatorrhea is a result of altered 
lymphatic flow as lipid-containing chylomicrons exit from 
intestinal epithelial cells via intestinal lymphatics (Table 
15-4; Fig. 15-4). In the absence of mechanical or ana-
tomic lymphatic obstruction, intrinsic intestinal lymphatic 
dysfunction, with or without lymphatic dysfunction in 
the peripheral extremities, has been named intestinal lym-
phangiectasia. Similarly, about 50% of individuals with 
intrinsic peripheral lymphatic disease (Milroy’s disease) 
will also have intestinal lymphangiectasia and hypopro-
teinemia. Other than steatorrhea and enhanced pro-
tein loss into the gastrointestinal tract, all other aspects 
of intestinal absorptive function are normal in intestinal 
lymphangiectasia.
Other causes
Patients who appear to have idiopathic protein-losing 
enteropathy without any evidence of gastrointestinal dis-
ease should be examined for cardiac disease—especially 
right-sided valvular disease and chronic pericarditis. On 
occasion, hypoproteinemia can be the only presenta-
tion for these two types of heart disease. Ménétrier’s dis-
ease (also called hypertrophic gastropathy) is an uncommon 
entity that involves the body and fundus of the stomach 
and is characterized by large gastric folds, reduced gastric 
acid secretion, and, at times, enhanced protein loss into the 
stomach.
Treatment	
Protein-Losing Enteropathy
As excess protein loss into the gastrointestinal tract is 
most often secondary to a specific disease, treatment 
should be directed primarily to the underlying disease 
process and not to the hypoproteinemia. For example, 
if significant hypoproteinemia with resulting peripheral 
edema is secondary to either celiac disease or ulcerative 
colitis, a gluten-free diet or mesalamine, respectively, 
would be the initial therapy. When enhanced protein 
loss is secondary to lymphatic obstruction, it is critical 
to establish the nature of this obstruction. Identification 
of mesenteric nodes or lymphoma may be possible by 
imaging studies. Similarly, it is important to exclude car-
diac disease as a cause of protein-losing enteropathy 
either by echosonography or, on occasion, by a right-
heart catheterization.
SECTION III
Disorders of the Alimentary Tract
176
The increased protein loss that occurs in intestinal 
lymphangiectasia is a result of distended lymphatics 
associated with lipid malabsorption. Treatment of the 
hypoproteinemia is accomplished by a low-fat diet and 
the administration of MCTs (Table 15-3), which do not 
exit from the intestinal epithelial cells via lymphatics but 
are delivered to the body via the portal vein.
Summary
A pathophysiologic classification of the many conditions 
that can produce malabsorption is given in Table 15-8. 
A summary of the pathophysiology of the various clinical 
manifestations of malabsorption is given in Table 15-9.
Table 15-8 
Classification of Malabsorption Syndromes
Inadequate digestion
Postgastrectomya
Deficiency or inactivation of pancreatic lipase
Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency
Chronic pancreatitis
Pancreatic carcinoma
Cystic fibrosis
Pancreatic insufficiency—congenital or acquired
Gastrinoma—acid inactivation of lipasea
Drugs—orlistat
Reduced intraduodenal bile acid concentration/impaired 
micelle formation
Liver disease
Parenchymal liver disease
Cholestatic liver disease
Bacterial overgrowth in small intestine:
Anatomic stasis	
Functional stasis
Afferent loop	
  Diabetesa
Stasis/blind	
  Sclerodermaa
  loop/strictures/	
  Intestinal  
fistulae	
  pseudoobstruction
Interrupted enterohepatic circulation of bile salts
Ileal resection
Crohn’s diseasea
Drugs (bind or precipitate bile salts)—neomycin,  
cholestyramine, calcium carbonate
Impaired mucosal absorption/mucosal loss or defect
Intestinal resection or bypassa
Inflammation, infiltration, or infection:
Crohn’s diseasea	
Celiac disease
Amyloidosis	
Collagenous sprue
Sclerodermaa	
Whipple’s diseasea
Lymphomaa	
Radiation enteritisa
Eosinophilic enteritis	
Folate and vitamin B12 deficiency
Mastocytosis	
Infections—giardiasis
Tropical sprue	
Graft-versus-host disease
Genetic disorders
Disaccharidase deficiency
Agammaglobulinemia
Abetalipoproteinemia
Hartnup’s disease
Cystinuria
Impaired nutrient delivery to and/or from intestine:
Lymphatic obstruction	 Circulatory disorders
Lymphomaa	
  Congestive heart failure
Lymphangiectasia	
  Constrictive pericarditis
	 	
Mesenteric artery atherosclerosis
	 	
Vasculitis
Endocrine and metabolic disorders
Diabetesa
Hypoparathyroidism
Adrenal insufficiency
Hyperthyroidism
Carcinoid syndrome
aMalabsorption caused by more than one mechanism.
Table 15-9 
Pathophysiology of Clinical Manifestations 
of Malabsorption Disorders
Symptom or Sign Mechanism
Weight loss/ 
malnutrition
Anorexia, malabsorption of nutrients
Diarrhea
Impaired absorption or secretion of 
water and electrolytes; colonic fluid 
secretion secondary to unabsorbed 
dihydroxy bile acids and fatty acids
Flatus
Bacterial fermentation of unabsorbed 
carbohydrate
Glossitis, cheilo-
sis, stomatitis
Deficiency of iron, vitamin B12, folate, 
and vitamin A
Abdominal pain
Bowel distention or inflammation, 
pancreatitis
Bone pain
Calcium, vitamin D malabsorption, 
protein deficiency, osteoporosis
Tetany, paresthesia
Calcium and magnesium malabsorption
Weakness
Anemia, electrolyte depletion  
(particularly K+)
Azotemia,  
hypotension
Fluid and electrolyte depletion
Amenorrhea, 
decreased libido
Protein depletion, decreased calories, 
secondary hypopituitarism
Anemia
Impaired absorption of iron, folate, 
vitamin B12
Bleeding
Vitamin K malabsorption, hypopro-
thrombinemia
Night blindness/
xerophthalmia
Vitamin A malabsorption
Peripheral  
neuropathy
Vitamin B12 and thiamine deficiency
Dermatitis
Deficiency of vitamin A, zinc, and 
essential fatty acids
 Henry J. Binder 
177
 The Schilling test is performed to determine the cause 
for cobalamin malabsorption. Unfortunately, this test 
has not been available commercially in the United 
States for the last few years. Since understanding the 
physiology and pathophysiology of cobalamin absorp-
tion is very valuable for enhancing one’s understanding 
of aspects of gastric, pancreatic, and ileal function, dis-
cussion of the Schilling test is provided as supplemental 
information to  Chap. 294 . Since cobalamin absorption 
requires multiple steps, including gastric, pancreatic, 
and ileal processes, the Schilling test also can be used to 
assess the integrity of those other organs ( Chap. 105 ). 
Cobalamin is present primarily in meat. Except in strict 
vegans,  dietary cobalamin defi ciency is exceedingly 
uncommon. Dietary cobalamin is bound in the stomach 
to a glycoprotein called  R-binder protein , which is syn-
thesized in both the stomach and the salivary glands. 
This cobalamin–R binder complex is formed in the acid 
milieu of the stomach. Cobalamin absorption has an 
absolute requirement for intrinsic factor, another glyco-
protein synthesized and released by gastric parietal cells, 
to promote its uptake by specifi c cobalamin receptors 
on the brush border of ileal enterocytes. Pancreatic pro-
tease enzymes split the cobalamin–R binder complex to 
release cobalamin in the proximal small intestine, where 
cobalamin then is bound by intrinsic factor. 
 As a consequence, cobalamin absorption may be 
abnormal in the following: 
1. Pernicious anemia , a disease in which immunologi-
cally mediated atrophy of gastric parietal cells leads 
to an absence of both gastric acid and intrinsic factor 
secretion. 
2. Chronic pancreatitis as a result of defi ciency of pancreatic 
proteases to split the cobalamin–R binder complex. 
Although 50% of patients with chronic pancreati-
tis have been reported to have an abnormal Schilling 
test that was corrected by pancreatic enzyme 
replacement, the presence of a cobalamin-responsive 
macrocytic anemia in chronic pancreatitis is extremely 
rare. Although this probably reﬂ ects a difference in the 
digestion/absorption of cobalamin in food versus that 
in a crystalline form, the Schilling test still can be used 
to assess pancreatic exocrine function. 
3. Achlorhydria , or absence of another factor secreted 
with acid that is responsible for splitting cobalamin 
away from the proteins in food to which it is bound. 
Up to one-third of individuals>60 years of age 
have marginal vitamin B 12 absorption because of 
the inability to release cobalamin from food; these 
people have no defects in absorbing crystalline 
 vitamin B 12 . 
4. Bacterial overgrowth syndromes , which are most often 
secondary to stasis in the small intestine, leading to 
bacterial utilization of cobalamin (often referred to as 
stagnant bowel syndrome ; see below). 
5. Ileal dysfunction (as a result of either inﬂ ammation 
or prior intestinal resection) due to impaired func-
tion of the mechanism of cobalamin–intrinsic factor 
uptake by ileal intestinal epithelial cells. 
 The Schilling test is performed by administering 
58 Co-labeled cobalamin orally and collecting urine for 
24 h, and it is dependent on normal renal and bladder 
function. Urinary excretion of cobalamin will reﬂ ect 
cobalamin absorption provided that intrahepatic bind-
ing sites for cobalamin are fully occupied. To ensure 
saturation of hepatic cobalamin binding sites so that all 
absorbed radiolabeled cobalamin will be excreted in 
urine, 1 mg of cobalamin is administered intramuscu-
larly 1 h after ingestion of the radiolabeled cobalamin. 
The Schilling test may be abnormal (usually defi ned as 
<10% excretion in 24 h) in pernicious anemia, chronic 
pancreatitis, blind loop syndrome, and ileal disease 
 ( Table 16-1 ) . Therefore, whenever an abnormal 
Schilling test is found,  58 Co-labeled cobalamin should 
be administered on another occasion bound to intrinsic 
factor, with pancreatic enzymes, or after a 5-day course 
 THE SCHILLING TEST 
 CHAPTER 16 
SECTION III
Disorders of the Alimentary Tract
178
of antibiotics (often tetracycline). A variation of the 
Schilling test can detect failure to split cobalamin from 
food proteins. The labeled cobalamin is cooked together 
with a scrambled egg and administered orally. ­People 
with achlorydria will excrete <10% of the labeled 
cobalamin in the urine. In addition to establishing the 
etiology for cobalamin deficiency, the Schilling test can 
be used to help delineate the pathologic process respon­
sible for steatorrhea by assessing ileal, pancreatic, and 
small-intestinal luminal function. Unfortunately, the 
Schilling test is performed infrequently because of the 
unavailability of human intrinsic factor.
TABLE 16-1
DIFFERENTIAL RESULTS OF SCHILLING TEST IN SEVERAL DISEASES ASSOCIATED WITH COBALAMIN (CBL) 
MALABSORPTION
58CO-CBL
WITH INTRINSIC 
FACTOR
WITH PANCREATIC 
ENZYMES
AFTER 5 DAYS OF 
ANTIBIOTICS
Pernicious anemia
Reduced
Normal
Reduced
Reduced
Chronic pancreatitis
Reduced
Reduced
Normal
Reduced
Bacterial overgrowth
Reduced
Reduced
Reduced
Normal
Ileal disease
Reduced
Reduced
Reduced
Reduced
 Sonia Friedman  I   Richard S. Blumberg 
179
 Infl ammatory bowel disease (IBD) is an immune-mediated 
chronic intestinal condition. Ulcerative colitis (UC) and 
Crohn’s disease (CD) are the two major types of IBD. 
 EPIDEMIOLOGY 
 
The incidence of IBD varies within different 
geographic areas. CD and UC both occur at 
the highest incidence in Europe, the United 
Kingdom, and North America. In North America, 
 incidence rates range from 2.2–14.3 cases per 100,000 person-
years for UC and from 3.1–14.6 cases per 100,000 person-
years for CD  ( Table 17-1 ) . Prevalence ranges from 
37–246 cases per 100,000 person-years for UC and 
from 26−199 cases per 100,000 person-years for CD. In 
Europe, incidence ranges from 1.5–20.3 cases per 
100,000 person-years for UC and from 0.7–9.8 cases for 
CD; prevalence ranges from 21.4–243 cases for UC and 
from 8.3–214 cases per 100,000 person-years for CD. 
IBD has been rare in other areas except Israel, Australia, 
and South Africa. The incidence of IBD, especially UC, 
is rising in Japan, South Korea, Singapore, northern 
India, and Latin America, areas previously thought to 
have low incidence. The incidence of UC has increased 
sixfold in the past two decades in Hong Kong. Reports 
from the United States, Poland, Denmark, and South 
Korea indicate that the incidence of pediatric IBD is 
increasing rapidly as well. The highest mortality is dur-
ing the fi rst years of disease and in long-duration disease 
due to the risk of colon cancer. In a Danish population 
study, the standardized mortality ratios for CD and UC 
were 1.31 and 1.1, respectively. 
 The peak age of onset of UC and CD is between 15 
and 30 years. A second peak occurs between the ages of 
60 and 80. The male to female ratio for UC is 1:1 and 
for CD is 1.1–1.8:1. UC and CD have two- to four-
fold increased frequency in Jewish populations in the 
United States, Europe, and South Africa. Furthermore, 
disease frequency differs within the Jewish populations. 
The prevalence of IBD in Ashkenazi Jews is about 
twice that of Israeli-born, Sephardic, or Asian Jews. The 
prevalence decreases progressively in non-Jewish white, 
African-American, Hispanic, and Asian populations. 
Urban areas have a higher prevalence of IBD than rural 
areas, and high socioeconomic classes have a higher 
prevalence than lower socioeconomic classes. 
 The effects of cigarette smoking are different in 
UC and CD. The risk of UC in smokers is 40% that 
of nonsmokers. Additionally, former smokers have a 
1.7-fold increased risk for UC than people who have 
never smoked. In contrast, smoking is associated with 
a twofold increased risk of CD. Oral contraceptives 
are also linked to CD; the odds ratio of CD for oral 
 INFLAMMATORY BOWEL DISEASE 
 CHAPTER 17 
TABLE 17-1
 EPIDEMIOLOGY OF IBD 
ULCERATIVE 
COLITIS
CROHN’S DISEASE
Incidence (North 
America) per 
person-years
2.2–14.3:100,000
3.1–14.6:100,000
Age of onset
15–30 & 60–80
15–30 & 60–80
Ethnicity
Jewish > non-Jewish white > African 
American > Hispanic > Asian
Male/female 
ratio
1:1
1.1–1.8:1
Smoking
May prevent 
disease
May cause 
disease
Oral 
contraceptives
No increased risk
Odds ratio 1.4
Appendectomy
Protective
Not protective
Monozygotic 
twins
6% concordance
58% concordance
Dizygotic twins
0% concordance
4% concordance
SECTION III
Disorders of the Alimentary Tract
180
contraceptive users is about 1.4. Appendectomy is pro­
tective against UC but is associated with an increased 
risk of CD. This elevated risk in CD is observed early 
after an appendectomy, which is diminished thereafter, 
making it likely that it reflects diagnostic problems in 
patients with incipient CD.
IBD is a familial disease in 5–10% of patients. Some 
of these patients may exhibit early onset disease dur­
ing the first decade of life and, in CD, a concordance 
of anatomic site and clinical type within families. In the 
remainder of patients, IBD is observed in the absence of 
a family history (i.e., sporadic disease). If a patient has 
IBD, the lifetime risk that a first-degree relative will be 
affected is ∼10%. If two parents have IBD, each child 
has a 36% chance of being affected. In twin studies, 58% 
of monozygotic twins are concordant for CD and 
6% are concordant for UC, whereas 4% of dizygotic 
twins are concordant for CD and none are concordant 
for UC. In a recent twin study from Germany, the 
relative risk of a monozygotic twin developing Crohn’s 
disease if his or her twin was affected was 738. The risks 
of developing IBD are higher in first-degree relatives of 
Jewish versus non-Jewish patients: 7.8% versus 5.2% for 
CD and 4.5% versus 1.6% for UC.
Additional evidence for genetic predisposition to 
IBD comes from its association with certain genetic 
­syndromes. UC and CD are both associated with 
­Turner’s syndrome, and Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome is 
associated with granulomatous colitis. Glycogen storage 
disease type 1b can present with Crohn’s-like lesions 
of the large and small bowel. Severe immunodefi­
ciency disorders such as Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome and 
chronic granulomatous disease are associated with IBD. 
Immune dysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, enter­
opathy, X-linked (IPEX) syndrome is associated with 
a severe enteropathy and autoimmunity (Table 17-2). 
Other immunodeficiency disorders such as hypogam­
maglobulinemia, selective IgA deficiency, and heredi­
tary angioedema, also exhibit an increased association 
with IBD.
ETIOLOGY AND PATHOGENESIS
A consensus hypothesis is that in genetically predisposed 
individuals, both exogenous factors (e.g., composition 
of normal intestinal microbiota) and endogenous host 
factors (e.g., intestinal epithelial cell barrier function, 
innate and adaptive immune function) interact to cause 
a chronic state of dysregulated mucosal immune func­
tion that is further modified by specific environmental 
factors (e.g., smoking, enteropathogens). Although 
chronic activation of the mucosal immune system may 
represent an appropriate response to an unidentified 
infectious agent, a search for such an agent has thus 
far been unrewarding in IBD. As such, IBD is currently 
considered an inappropriate immune response to the 
endogenous commensal microbiota within the intestines, 
with or without some component of autoimmunity. 
Importantly, the normal intestines contain a large num­
ber of immune cells in a chronic state of so-called phys­
iologic inflammation, in which the gut is restrained from 
full immunologic responses to the commensal microbiota 
and dietary antigens by very powerful regulatory pathways 
that function within the immune system (e.g., FoxP3+ T 
regulatory cells). During the course of infections in the 
normal host, full activation of the gut-associated lymphoid 
tissues occurs but is rapidly superseded by dampening of 
the immune response and tissue repair. In IBD this pro­
cess may not be regulated normally.
TABLE 17-2 
PRIMARY GENETIC DISORDERS ASSOCIATED WITH IBD
NAME
GENETIC ASSOCIATION
PHENOTYPE
Turner’s syndrome
Loss of part or all of X chromosome
Associated with UC and colonic CD
Hermansky-Pudlak
Autosomal recessive chromosome 
10q23
Granulomatous colitis, oculocutaneous albinism, 
platelet dysfunction, pulmonary fibrosis
Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome 
(WAS)
X-linked recessive disorder, loss of 
WAS protein function
Colitis, immunodeficiency, severely dysfunctional 
platelets, and thrombocytopenia
Glycogen Storage disease
Deficiency of the glucose-6-phosphate 
transport protein type B1
Granulomatous colitis, presents in infancy with 
hypoglycemia, growth failure, hepatomegaly, 
and neutropenia
Immune dysregulation 
polyendocrinopathy, 
enteropathy X-linked (IPEX)
Loss of FoxP3 transcription factor and
 T regulatory cell function
UC-like autoimmune enteropathy, with endocri­
nopathy (neonatal type 1 diabetes or thyroiditis), 
dermatitis
Early onset IBD
Deficient IL-10 receptor function
Severe, refractory IBD in early life
Abbreviations: CD, Crohn’s disease; IBD, inflammatory bowel disease; IL, interleukin; UC, ulcerative colitis; WASP, Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein.

CHAPTER 17
Inflammatory Bowel Disease
181
GENETIC CONSIDERATIONS
IBD is a polygenic disorder that gives rise to mul­
tiple clinical subgroups within UC and CD. A 
variety of genetic approaches including candidate 
gene studies, linkage analysis and genome-wide associa­
tion studies that focus on the identification of disease-
associated, single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) 
within the human genome have identified Approxi­
mately 100 disease-associated loci on many different 
chromosomes (Table 17-3). About one-third of these 
genetic risk factors are shared between CD and UC 
accounting for the overlapping immunopathogenesis 
and consequently epidemiologic observations of both 
diseases in the same families and similarities in response 
to therapies. Because the specific causal variants for each 
gene or locus are largely unknown, it is not clear 
whether the similarities in the genetic risk factors associ­
ated with CD and UC that are observed are shared at 
structural or functional levels. Similarly, many of the 
genetic risk factors identified are also observed to be 
associated with risk for other immune-mediated diseases 
suggesting that related immunogenetic pathways are 
involved in the pathogenesis of multiple different disor­
ders accounting for the common responsiveness to simi­
lar types of biologic therapies (e.g., anti-tumor necrosis 
factor therapies) and possibly the simultaneous occur­
rence of these disorders. The diseases and the genetic 
risk factors that are shared with IBD include rheumatoid 
arthritis (TNFAIP3), psoriasis (IL23R, IL12B), ankylos­
ing spondylitis (IL23R), type 1 diabetes mellitus (IL10, 
PTPN2), asthma (ORMDL3), and systemic lupus 
­erythematosus (TNFAIP3, IL10).
The genetic factors defined to date that are recog­
nized to mediate risk for IBD have highlighted the 
importance of several common mechanisms of 
disease (Table 17-3). These include the following: 
Those genes that are associated with innate immunity 
TABLE 17-3 
GENETIC LOCI ASSOCIATED WITH CD AND/OR UC
CHR
PUTATIVE 
GENE
GENE NAME
PROTEIN FUNCTION
CD
UC
Innate Immunity and Autophagy
1q23
ITLN1
Intelectin 1
Bacterial binding
+
2q37
ATG16L1
ATG16 autophagy related 16-like 1
Autophagy
+
5q33
IRGM
Immunity-related GTPase family, M
Autophagy
+
9p24
JAK2
Janus kinase 2
IL-6R & IL-23R signaling
+
+
12q12
LRRK2
Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2
Autophagy ?
+
16q12
NOD2
Nucleotide-binding 
oligomerization domain containing 2
Bacterial sensing
+
17q21
STAT3
Signal transducer and activator of 
transcription 3
IL-6R, IL-23R & IL-10R 
signaling
+
+
ER Stress and Metabolism
5q31
SLC22A5
Solute carrier family 22, member 5
β carnitine transporter
+
7p21
AGR2
Anterior gradient 2
ER stress
+
+
17q21
ORMDL3
Orosomucoid related member 1-like 3
ER stress
+
+
22q12
XBP1
X-box binding protein 1
ER stress
+
+
Adaptive Immunity
1p31
IL23R
Interleukin 23 receptor
Th17 cell stimulation
+
+
1q32
IL10
Interleukin-10
Treg associated cytokine
+
5q33
IL12B
Interleukin 12B
IL-12 p40 chain of IL-12/
IL-23
+
+
18p11
PTPN2
Protein tyrosine phosphatase, 
nonreceptor type 2
T cell regulation
+
Inflammation
3p21
MST1
Macrophage stimulating 1
Macrophage activation
+
+
5p13
PTGER4
Prostaglandin E receptor 4
PGE2 receptor
+
+
6q23
TNFAIP3
Tumor necrosis factor, alpha-induced 
protein 3 (A20)
Toll-like receptor regulation
+
6q27
CCR6
Chemokine (C-C motif) receptor 6
Dendritic cell migration
+
Abbreviations: CD, Crohn’s disease; ER, endoplasmic reticulum; GTPase, guanosine triphosphatase; IL, interleukin; UC, ulcerative colitis.
Source: Adapted from Kaser et al, Ann Rev Immunol 2010
SECTION III
Disorders of the Alimentary Tract
182
and autophagy (e.g., NOD2, ATG16L1, IRGM, 
JAK2, STAT3) that function in innate immune cells 
(both parenchymal and hematopoietic) to respond 
to and clear bacteria, mycobacteria and viruses; those 
that are associated with endoplasmic reticulum (ER) 
and metabolic stress (e.g., XBP1, ORMDL3, OCTN), 
which serve to regulate the secretory activity of cells 
involved in responses to the commensal microbiota 
such as Paneth and goblet cells and the manner in 
which intestinal cells respond to the metabolic prod­
ucts of bacteria; those that are associated with the 
regulation of adaptive immunity (e.g., IL23R, IL12B, 
IL10, PTPN2), which regulate the balance between 
inflammatory and regulatory cytokines; and, finally, 
those that are involved in the development and resolu­
tion of inflammation (e.g., MST1, CCR6, TNFAIP3, 
PTGER4) and ultimately leukocyte recruitment and 
inflammatory mediator production. Some of these loci 
are associated with specific subtypes of disease such as 
the association between NOD2 polymorphisms and 
fibrostenosing CD, especially within the ileum. How­
ever, the clinical utility of these genetic risk factors for 
the diagnosis or determination of prognosis and thera­
peutic responses remains to be defined.
DEFECTIVE IMMUNE REGULATION IN IBD
The mucosal immune system is normally unreactive to 
luminal contents due to oral (mucosal) tolerance. When 
soluble antigens are administered orally rather than sub­
cutaneously or intramuscularly, antigen-specific non­
responsiveness is induced. Multiple mechanisms are 
involved in the induction of oral tolerance and include 
deletion or anergy of antigen-reactive T cells or induc­
tion of CD4+ T cells that suppress gut inflammation 
(e.g., T regulatory cells expressing the FoxP3 transcrip­
tion factor) that secrete anti-inflammatory cytokines 
such as interleukin (IL) 10 and transforming growth fac­
tor β (TGF-β). Oral tolerance may be responsible for 
the lack of immune responsiveness to dietary antigens 
and the commensal microbiota in the intestinal lumen. 
In IBD this suppression of inflammation is altered, lead­
ing to uncontrolled inflammation. The mechanisms of 
this regulated immune suppression are incompletely 
known.
Gene knockout (−/−) or transgenic (Tg) mouse mod­
els of IBD have revealed that deleting specific cytokines 
(e.g., IL-2, IL-10, TGF-β) or their receptors, deleting 
molecules associated with T cell antigen recognition 
(e.g., T cell antigen receptors) or interfering with intes­
tinal epithelial cell barrier function and the regulation 
of responses to commensal bacteria (e.g., XBP1, N-
cadherin, mucus glycoprotein or NFκB) leads to 
spontaneous colitis or enteritis. In the majority of 
circumstances, intestinal inflammation in these animal 
models requires the presence of the commensal micro­
biota. Thus, a variety of specific alterations can lead 
to immune activation by commensal microbiota and 
inflammation directed at the intestines in mice. How 
these relate to human IBD remains to be defined but 
are consistent with inappropriate responses of the genet­
ically susceptible host to the commensal bacteria.
In both UC and CD, an inflammatory pathway 
thus likely emerges from the genetic predisposition 
that is associated with inappropriate innate immune 
sensing and reactivity to commensal bacteria together 
with inadequate regulatory pathways that lead to acti­
vated CD4+ T cells in the lamina propria that secrete 
excessive quantities of inflammatory cytokines rela­
tive to anti-inflammatory cytokines. Some cytokines 
activate other inflammatory cells (macrophages and 
B cells) and others act indirectly to recruit other lympho­
cytes, inflammatory leukocytes, and mononuclear cells 
from the bloodstream into the gut through interactions 
between homing receptors on leukocytes (e.g., α4β7 
integrin) and addressins on vascular endothelium (e.g., 
MadCAM1). CD4+ T helper (TH) cells that promote 
inflammation are of three major types, all of which may 
be associated with colitis in animal models and perhaps 
humans: TH1 cells [secrete interferon (IFN) g], TH2 
cells (secrete IL-4, IL-5, IL-13), and TH17 cells (secrete 
IL-17, IL-21). TH1 cells induce transmural granuloma­
tous inflammation that resembles CD, TH2 cells, and 
related natural killer T cells that secrete IL-13 induce 
superficial mucosal inflammation resembling UC, and 
TH17 cells may be responsible for neutrophilic recruit­
ment. Each of these T cell subsets cross-regulate each 
other. The TH1 cytokine pathway is initiated by IL-12, 
a key cytokine in the pathogenesis of experimen­
tal models of mucosal inflammation. IL-4 and IL-23, 
together with IL-6 and TGF-β, induce TH2 and TH17 
cells, respectively. Activated macrophages secrete tumor 
necrosis factor (TNF and IL-6). Thus, use of antibod­
ies to block proinflammatory cytokines (e.g., anti-TNF, 
anti-IL-12, anti-IL-23, anti-IL-6, anti-IFN-g) or mol­
ecules associated with leukocyte recruitment (e.g., anti-
α4β7) or use of cytokines that inhibit inflammation and 
promote regulatory T cells (e.g., IL-10) or promote 
intestinal barrier function may be beneficial to humans 
with intestinal inflammation.
THE INFLAMMATORY CASCADE IN IBD
Once initiated in IBD by abnormal innate immune 
sensing of bacteria by parenchymal cells (e.g., intesti­
nal epithelial cells) and hematopoietic cells (e.g., den­
dritic cells), the immune inflammatory response is 
perpetuated by T-cell activation. A sequential cascade of 
 
CHAPTER 17
Inflammatory Bowel Disease
183
inflammatory mediators extends the response; each step 
is a potential target for therapy. Inflammatory cytokines 
such as IL-1, IL-6, and TNF, have diverse effects on tis­
sues. They promote fibrogenesis, collagen production, 
activation of tissue metalloproteinases, and the produc­
tion of other inflammatory mediators; they also acti­
vate the coagulation cascade in local blood vessels (e.g., 
increased production of von Willebrand’s factor). These 
cytokines are normally produced in response to infec­
tion but are usually turned off or inhibited at the appro­
priate time to limit tissue damage. In IBD their activ­
ity is not regulated, resulting in an imbalance between 
the proinflammatory and anti-inflammatory mediators. 
Therapies such as the 5-aminosalicylic acid (5-ASA) 
compounds are potent inhibitors of these inflammatory 
mediators through inhibition of transcription factors 
such as NFκB that regulate their expression.
EXOGENOUS FACTORS
IBD may have an as yet undefined infectious etiology. 
Observational studies suggest that multiple pathogens 
(e.g., Salmonella, Shigella, Campylobacter, Clostridium 
difficile spp.) may initiate IBD by triggering an inflam­
matory response that the mucosal immune system may 
fail to control. However, in an IBD patient, the nor­
mal microbiota is likely perceived inappropriately as if 
it were a pathogen. Alterations in the composition of 
the commensal microbiota are observed in both CD 
and UC. However, whether these changes are primary 
or secondary to inflammation is unknown. Anaerobic 
organisms, particularly Bacteroides and Clostridia species, 
and some aerobic species such as Escherichia may be 
responsible for the induction of inflammation. This 
notion is supported by the immune response in patients 
with CD to a number of bacterial antigens. In addition, 
agents that alter the intestinal flora such as metronida­
zole, ciprofloxacin, and elemental diets, may improve 
CD. CD also responds to fecal diversion, demonstrat­
ing the ability of luminal contents to exacerbate disease. 
Conversely, other organisms, so-called probiotics (e.g., 
Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, Lactobacillus, Bifidobacterium, 
Taenia suis, and Saccharomyces boulardii spp.), may inhibit 
inflammation in animal models and humans.
Psychosocial factors can contribute to worsening of 
symptoms. Major life events such as illness or death in 
the family, divorce or separation, interpersonal con­
flict, or other major loss are associated with an increase 
in IBD symptoms such as pain, bowel dysfunction, and 
bleeding. Acute daily stress can worsen bowel symp­
toms even after controlling for major life events. When 
measured with validated psychological scales, patients 
with active IBD have lower psychological well-being 
and mastery as well as higher distress than non-IBD 
controls.
PATHOLOGY
ULCERATIVE COLITIS: MACROSCOPIC 
FEATURES
UC is a mucosal disease that usually involves the rectum 
and extends proximally to involve all or part of the 
colon. About 40–50% of patients have disease limited 
to the rectum and rectosigmoid, 30–40% have dis­
ease extending beyond the sigmoid but not involving 
the whole colon, and 20% have a total colitis. Proxi­
mal spread occurs in continuity without areas of unin­
volved mucosa. When the whole colon is involved, 
the inflammation extends 2–3 cm into the terminal 
ileum in 10–20% of patients. The endoscopic changes 
of backwash ileitis are superficial and mild and are of 
little clinical significance. Although variations in mac­
roscopic activity may suggest skip areas, biopsies from 
normal-appearing mucosa are usually abnormal. Thus, 
it is important to obtain multiple biopsies from appar­
ently uninvolved mucosa, whether proximal or distal, 
during endoscopy. One caveat is that effective medical 
therapy can change the appearance of the mucosa such 
that either skip areas or the entire colon can be micro­
scopically normal.
With mild inflammation, the mucosa is erythematous 
and has a fine granular surface that resembles sandpaper. 
In more severe disease, the mucosa is hemorrhagic, 
edematous, and ulcerated (Fig. 17-1) In long-­standing 
disease, inflammatory polyps (pseudopolyps) may be 
present as a result of epithelial regeneration. The mucosa 
FIGURE 17-1 
Ulcerative colitis. Diffuse (nonsegmental) mucosal dis­
ease, with broad areas of ulceration. The bowel wall is 
not thickened, and there is no cobblestoning. (Courtesy of 
Dr. R Odze, Division of Gastrointestinal Pathology, Depart­
ment of Pathology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, 
Massachusetts; with permission.)
SECTION III
Disorders of the Alimentary Tract
184
may appear normal in remission, but in patients with 
many years of disease it appears atrophic and feature­
less, and the entire colon becomes narrowed and short­
ened. Patients with fulminant disease can develop a 
toxic colitis or megacolon where the bowel wall thins 
and the mucosa is severely ulcerated; this may lead to 
perforation.
ULCERATIVE COLITIS: 
MICROSCOPIC FEATURES
Histologic findings correlate well with the endoscopic 
appearance and clinical course of UC. The process is 
limited to the mucosa and superficial submucosa, with 
deeper layers unaffected except in fulminant disease. 
In UC, two major histologic features suggest chronic­
ity and help distinguish it from infectious or acute self-
limited colitis. First, the crypt architecture of the colon 
is distorted; crypts may be bifid and reduced in num­
ber, often with a gap between the crypt bases and the 
muscularis mucosae. Second, some patients have basal 
plasma cells and multiple basal lymphoid aggregates. 
Mucosal vascular congestion, with edema and focal 
hemorrhage, and an inflammatory cell infiltrate of neu­
trophils, lymphocytes, plasma cells, and macrophages 
may be present. The neutrophils invade the epithelium, 
usually in the crypts, giving rise to cryptitis and, ulti­
mately, to crypt abscesses (Fig. 17-2). Ileal changes in 
patients with backwash ileitis include villous atrophy 
and crypt regeneration with increased inflammation, 
increased neutrophil and mononuclear inflammation 
in the lamina propria, and patchy cryptitis and crypt 
abscesses.
CROHN’S DISEASE: MACROSCOPIC 
FEATURES
CD can affect any part of the gastrointestinal (GI) tract 
from the mouth to the anus. Some 30–40% of patients 
have smallbowel disease alone, 40–55% have disease 
involving both the small and large intestines, and 
15–25% have colitis alone. In the 75% of patients with 
smallintestinal disease, the terminal ileum is involved 
in 90%. Unlike UC, which almost always involves the 
rectum, the rectum is often spared in CD. CD is seg­
mental with skip areas in the midst of diseased intestine 
(Fig. 17-3) Perirectal fistulas, fissures, abscesses, and 
anal stenosis are present in one-third of patients with 
CD, particularly those with colonic involvement. 
Rarely, CD may also involve the liver and the pancreas.
Unlike UC, CD is a transmural process. Endoscopi­
cally, aphthous or small superficial ulcerations char­
acterize mild disease; in more active disease, stellate 
ulcerations fuse longitudinally and transversely to 
demarcate islands of mucosa that frequently are histo­
logically normal. This “cobblestone” appearance is char­
acteristic of CD, both endoscopically and by barium 
radiography. As in UC, pseudopolyps can form in CD.
Active CD is characterized by focal inflammation 
and formation of fistula tracts, which resolve by fibrosis 
and stricturing of the bowel. The bowel wall thickens 
and becomes narrowed and fibrotic, leading to chronic, 
FIGURE 17-2 
Medium power view of colonic mucosa in ulcerative colitis 
showing diffuse mixed inflammation, basal lymphoplasmacy­
tosis, crypt atrophy and irregularity and superficial erosion. 
These features are typical of chronic active ulcerative colitis. 
(Courtesy of Dr. R Odze, Division of Gastrointestinal Pathology, 
Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, 
Boston, Massachusetts; with permission.)
FIGURE 17-3 
Crohn’s disease of the colon showing thickening of the 
wall, with stenosis, linear serpiginous ulcers and cobble­
stoning of the mucosa. (Courtesy of Dr. R Odze, Division 
of Gastrointestinal Pathology, Department of Pathology, 
Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts; 
with permission.)
 
CHAPTER 17
Inflammatory Bowel Disease
185
recurrent bowel obstructions. Projections of thickened 
mesentery encase the bowel (“creeping fat”), and serosal 
and mesenteric inflammation promotes adhesions and 
fistula formation.
CROHN’S DISEASE: MICROSCOPIC 
FEATURES
The earliest lesions are aphthoid ulcerations and focal 
crypt abscesses with loose aggregations of macrophages, 
which form noncaseating granulomas in all layers of 
the bowel wall (Fig. 17-4). Granulomas can be seen in 
lymph nodes, mesentery, peritoneum, liver, and pancreas. 
Although granulomas are a pathognomonic feature of 
CD, they are rarely found on mucosal biopsies. Surgical 
resection reveals granulomas in about one-half of cases. 
Other histologic features of CD include submucosal or 
subserosal lymphoid aggregates, particularly away from 
areas of ulceration, gross and microscopic skip areas, and 
transmural inflammation that is accompanied by fissures 
that penetrate deeply into the bowel wall and sometimes 
form fistulous tracts or local abscesses.
CLINICAL PRESENTATION
ULCERATIVE COLITIS
Signs and symptoms
The major symptoms of UC are diarrhea, rectal bleed­
ing, tenesmus, passage of mucus, and crampy abdominal 
pain. The severity of symptoms correlates with the 
extent of disease. Although UC can present acutely, 
symptoms usually have been present for weeks to 
months. Occasionally, diarrhea and bleeding are so 
intermittent and mild that the patient does not seek 
medical attention.
Patients with proctitis usually pass fresh blood or 
blood-stained mucus, either mixed with stool or 
streaked onto the surface of a normal or hard stool. 
They also have tenesmus, or urgency with a feeling of 
incomplete evacuation, but rarely have abdominal pain. 
With proctitis or proctosigmoiditis, proximal transit 
slows, which may account for the constipation com­
monly seen in patients with distal disease.
When the disease extends beyond the rectum, blood 
is usually mixed with stool or grossly bloody diarrhea 
may be noted. Colonic motility is altered by inflamma­
tion with rapid transit through the inflamed intestine. 
When the disease is severe, patients pass a liquid stool 
containing blood, pus, and fecal matter. Diarrhea is 
often nocturnal and/or postprandial. Although severe 
pain is not a prominent symptom, some patients with 
active disease may experience vague lower abdominal 
discomfort or mild central abdominal cramping. Severe 
cramping and abdominal pain can occur with severe 
attacks of the disease. Other symptoms in moderate to 
severe disease include anorexia, nausea, vomiting, fever, 
and weight loss.
Physical signs of proctitis include a tender anal canal 
and blood on rectal examination. With more extensive 
disease, patients have tenderness to palpation directly 
over the colon. Patients with a toxic colitis have severe 
pain and bleeding, and those with megacolon have 
hepatic tympany. Both may have signs of peritonitis if 
a perforation has occurred. The classification of disease 
activity is shown in Table 17-4.
Laboratory, endoscopic, and 
radiographic features
Active disease can be associated with a rise in acute-
phase reactants [C-reactive protein (CRP)], platelet 
count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), and a 
decrease in hemoglobin. Fecal lactoferrin is a highly 
sensitive and specific marker for detecting intestinal 
inflammation. Fecal calprotectin levels correlate well 
with histologic inflammation, predict relapses, and 
detect pouchitis. In severely ill patients, the serum albu­
min level will fall rather quickly. Leukocytosis may be 
present but is not a specific indicator of disease activity. 
Proctitis or proctosigmoiditis rarely causes a rise in 
CRP. Diagnosis relies upon the patient’s history; clini­
cal symptoms; negative stool examination for bacteria, 
C. difficile toxin, and ova and parasites; sigmoidoscopic 
appearance (see Fig. 291-4A); and histology of rectal or 
colonic biopsy specimens.
FIGURE 17-4 
Medium power view of Crohn’s colitis showing mixed 
acute and chronic inflammation, crypt atrophy, and multiple 
small epithelioid granulomas in the mucosa. (Courtesy of 
Dr. R Odze, Division of Gastrointestinal Pathology, Depart­
ment of Pathology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, 
Massachusetts; with permission.)
SECTION III
Disorders of the Alimentary Tract
186
Sigmoidoscopy is used to assess disease activity and 
is usually performed before treatment. If the patient is 
not having an acute flare, colonoscopy is used to assess 
disease extent and activity (Fig. 17-5). Endoscopically 
mild disease is characterized by erythema, decreased 
vascular pattern, and mild friability. Moderate disease is 
characterized by marked erythema, absent vascular pat­
tern, friability and erosions, and severe disease by spon­
taneous bleeding and ulcerations. Histologic features 
change more slowly than clinical features but can also 
be used to grade disease activity.
The earliest radiologic change of UC seen on single-
contrast barium enema is a fine mucosal granularity. 
With increasing severity, the mucosa becomes thick­
ened, and superficial ulcers are seen. Deep ulcerations 
can appear as “collar-button” ulcers, which indicate that 
the ulceration has penetrated the mucosa. Haustral folds 
may be normal in mild disease, but as activity progresses 
they become edematous and thickened. Loss of haustra­
tion can occur, especially in patients with long-standing 
disease. In addition, the colon becomes shortened and 
narrowed. Polyps in the colon may be postinflamma­
tory polyps or pseudopolyps, adenomatous polyps, or 
carcinoma.
CT scanning is not as helpful as endoscopy and 
barium enema in making the diagnosis of UC, but typi­
cal findings include mild mural thickening (<1.5 cm), 
inhomogeneous wall density, absence of small bowel 
thickening, increased perirectal and presacral fat, target 
appearance of the rectum, and adenopathy.
Complications
Only 15% of patients with UC present initially with 
catastrophic illness. Massive hemorrhage occurs with 
severe attacks of disease in 1% of patients, and treatment 
for the disease usually stops the bleeding. However, if a 
patient requires 6–8 units of blood within 24–48 hours, 
colectomy is indicated. Toxic megacolon is defined as 
a transverse or right colon with a diameter of >6 cm, 
with loss of haustration in patients with severe attacks 
of UC. It occurs in about 5% of attacks and can be trig­
gered by electrolyte abnormalities and narcotics. About 
50% of acute dilations will resolve with medical therapy 
alone, but urgent colectomy is required for those that 
do not improve. Perforation is the most dangerous of 
the local complications, and the physical signs of peri­
tonitis may not be obvious, especially if the patient is 
receiving glucocorticoids. Although perforation is rare, 
the mortality rate for perforation complicating a toxic 
megacolon is about 15%. In addition, patients can 
develop a toxic colitis and such severe ulcerations that 
the bowel may perforate without first dilating.
Strictures occur in 5–10% of patients and are always 
a concern in UC because of the possibility of underly­
ing neoplasia. Although benign strictures can form from 
TABLE 17-4 
ULCERATIVE COLITIS: DISEASE PRESENTATION
MILD
MODERATE
SEVERE
Bowel movements
<4 per day
4–6 per day
>6 per day
Blood in stool
Small
Moderate
Severe
Fever
None
<37.5°C mean (<99.5°F)
>37.5°C mean (>99.5°F)
Tachycardia
None
<90 mean pulse
>90 mean pulse
Anemia
Mild
>75%
≤75%
Sedimentation rate
<30 mm
>30 mm
Endoscopic appearance
Erythema, decreased 
vascular pattern, 
fine granularity
Marked erythema, coarse granularity, 
absent vascular markings, 
contact bleeding, no ulcerations
Spontaneous bleeding, 
ulcerations
FIGURE 17-5 
Colonoscopy with acute ulcerative colitis: Severe colon 
inflammation with erythema, friability, and exudates. (Cour­
tesy of Dr. M. Hamilton, Gastroenterology Division, Depart­
ment of Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, 
Massachusetts; with permission.)
 
CHAPTER 17
Inflammatory Bowel Disease
187
the inflammation and fibrosis of UC, strictures that are 
impassable with the colonoscope should be presumed 
malignant until proven otherwise. A stricture that pre­
vents passage of the colonoscope is an indication for 
surgery. UC patients occasionally develop anal fissures, 
perianal abscesses, or hemorrhoids, but the occurrence 
of extensive perianal lesions should suggest CD.
CROHN’S DISEASE
Signs and symptoms
Although CD usually presents as acute or chronic bowel 
inflammation, the inflammatory process evolves toward 
one of two patterns of disease: a fibrostenotic obstruct­
ing pattern or a penetrating fistulous pattern, each with 
different treatments and prognoses. The site of disease 
influences the clinical manifestations.
Ileocolitis
Because the most common site of inflammation is the 
terminal ileum, the usual presentation of ileocolitis is 
a chronic history of recurrent episodes of right lower 
quadrant pain and diarrhea. Sometimes the initial pre­
sentation mimics acute appendicitis with pronounced 
right lower quadrant pain, a palpable mass, fever, and 
leukocytosis. Pain is usually colicky; it precedes and 
is relieved by defecation. A low-grade fever is usu­
ally noted. High-spiking fever suggests intraabdominal 
abscess formation. Weight loss is common—typically 
10–20% of body weight—and develops as a conse­
quence of diarrhea, anorexia, and fear of eating.
An inflammatory mass may be palpated in the right 
lower quadrant of the abdomen. The mass is composed 
of inflamed bowel, adherent and indurated mesentery, 
and enlarged abdominal lymph nodes. Extension of the 
mass can cause obstruction of the right ureter or bladder 
inflammation, manifested by dysuria and fever. Edema, 
bowel wall thickening, and fibrosis of the bowel wall 
within the mass account for the radiographic “string 
sign” of a narrowed intestinal lumen.
Bowel obstruction may take several forms. In the 
early stages of disease, bowel wall edema and spasm 
produce intermittent obstructive manifestations and 
increasing symptoms of postprandial pain. Over sev­
eral years, persistent inflammation gradually progresses 
to fibrostenotic narrowing and stricture. Diarrhea will 
decrease and be replaced by chronic bowel obstruction. 
Acute episodes of obstruction occur as well, precipi­
tated by bowel inflammation and spasm or sometimes 
by impaction of undigested food or medication. These 
episodes usually resolve with intravenous fluids and 
gastric decompression.
Severe inflammation of the ileocecal region may lead 
to localized wall thinning, with microperforation and 
fistula formation to the adjacent bowel, the skin, or the 
urinary bladder, or to an abscess cavity in the mesen­
tery. Enterovesical fistulas typically present as dysuria 
or recurrent bladder infections or, less commonly, as 
pneumaturia or fecaluria. Enterocutaneous fistulas fol­
low tissue planes of least resistance, usually draining 
through abdominal surgical scars. Enterovaginal fistulas 
are rare and present as dyspareunia or as a feculent or 
foul-smelling, often painful vaginal discharge. They are 
unlikely to develop without a prior hysterectomy.
Jejunoileitis
Extensive inflammatory disease is associated with a loss 
of digestive and absorptive surface, resulting in malab­
sorption and steatorrhea. Nutritional deficiencies can 
also result from poor intake and enteric losses of protein 
and other nutrients. Intestinal malabsorption can cause 
anemia, hypoalbuminemia, hypocalcemia, hypomagne­
semia, coagulopathy, and hyperoxaluria with nephroli­
thiasis in patients with an intact colon. Many patients 
need to take oral and often intravenous iron. Vertebral 
fractures are caused by a combination of vitamin D 
deficiency, hypocalcemia, and prolonged glucocorticoid 
use. Pellagra from niacin deficiency can occur in exten­
sive small bowel disease, and malabsorption of vitamin 
B12 can lead to megaloblastic anemia and neurologic 
symptoms. Other important nutrients to measure and 
replete if low are folate and vitamins A, E, and K. Lev­
els of minerals such as zinc, selenium, copper, and mag­
nesium are often low in patients with extensive small 
bowel inflammation or resections and these should be 
repleted as well. Most patients should take a daily multi­
vitamin, calcium, and vitamin D supplements.
Diarrhea is characteristic of active disease; its causes 
include (1) bacterial overgrowth in obstructive stasis 
or fistulization, (2) bile-acid malabsorption due to a 
diseased or resected terminal ileum, and (3) intesti­
nal inflammation with decreased water absorption and 
increased secretion of electrolytes.
Colitis and perianal disease
Patients with colitis present with low-grade fevers, mal­
aise, diarrhea, crampy abdominal pain, and sometimes 
hematochezia. Gross bleeding is not as common as in 
UC and appears in about one-half of patients with exclu­
sively colonic disease. Only 1–2% bleed massively. Pain 
is caused by passage of fecal material through narrowed 
and inflamed segments of the large bowel. Decreased 
rectal compliance is another cause for diarrhea in Crohn’s 
colitis patients. Toxic megacolon is rare but may be seen 
with severe inflammation and short duration disease.
Stricturing can occur in the colon in 4–16% of 
patients and produce symptoms of bowel obstruction. 
If the endoscopist is unable to traverse a stricture in 
Crohn’s colitis, surgical resection should be consid­
ered, especially if the patient has symptoms of chronic 
obstruction. Colonic disease may fistulize into the 
SECTION III
Disorders of the Alimentary Tract
188
stomach or duodenum, causing feculent vomiting, or to 
the proximal or mid-small bowel, causing malabsorp­
tion by “short circuiting” and bacterial overgrowth. 
Ten percent of women with Crohn’s colitis will 
develop a rectovaginal fistula.
Perianal disease affects about one-third of patients 
with Crohn’s colitis and is manifested by incontinence, 
large hemorrhoidal tags, anal strictures, anorectal fistulae, 
and perirectal abscesses. Not all patients with perianal 
fistula will have endoscopic evidence of colonic 
inflammation.
Gastroduodenal disease
Symptoms and signs of upper GI tract disease include 
nausea, vomiting, and epigastric pain. Patients usu­
ally have an Helicobacter pylori–negative gastritis. The 
second portion of the duodenum is more commonly 
involved than the bulb. Fistulas involving the stomach 
or duodenum arise from the small or large bowel and 
do not necessarily signify the presence of upper GI tract 
involvement. Patients with advanced gastroduodenal 
CD may develop a chronic gastric outlet obstruction.
Laboratory, endoscopic, and 
radiographic features
Laboratory abnormalities include elevated ESR and 
CRP. In more severe disease, findings include hypoal­
buminemia, anemia, and leukocytosis.
Endoscopic features of CD include rectal spar­
ing, aphthous ulcerations, fistulas, and skip lesions. 
Colonoscopy allows examination and biopsy of mass 
lesions or strictures and biopsy of the terminal ileum. 
Upper endoscopy is useful in diagnosing gastroduodenal 
involvement in patients with upper tract symptoms. 
Ileal or colonic strictures may be dilated with balloons 
introduced through the colonoscope. Strictures ≤ 4 cm 
and those at a anastomotic sites respond better to endo­
scopic dilation. The perforation rate is as high as 10%. 
Most endoscopists dilate only fibrotic strictures and not 
those associated with active inflammation. Wireless cap­
sule endoscopy (WCE) allows direct visualization of the 
entire small bowel mucosa (Fig. 17-6). The diagnos­
tic yield of detecting lesions suggestive of active CD 
is higher with WCE than CT enterography or small 
bowel series. WCE cannot be used in the setting of a 
small bowel stricture. Capsule retention occurs in <1% 
of patients with suspected CD, but retention rates of 
4–6% are seen in patients with established CD.
In CD, early radiographic findings in the small 
bowel include thickened folds and aphthous ulcerations. 
“Cobblestoning” from longitudinal and transverse 
ulcerations most frequently involves the small bowel. 
In more advanced disease, strictures, fistulas, inflamma­
tory masses, and abscesses may be detected. The earliest 
macroscopic findings of colonic CD are aphthous 
ulcers. These small ulcers are often multiple and sepa­
rated by normal intervening mucosa. As the disease 
progresses, aphthous ulcers become enlarged, deeper, 
and occasionally connected to one another, forming 
longitudinal stellate, serpiginous, and linear ulcers (see 
Fig. 291-4B).
The transmural inflammation of CD leads to 
decreased luminal diameter and limited distensibility. 
As ulcers progress deeper, they can lead to fistula for­
mation. The radiographic “string sign” represents long 
areas of circumferential inflammation and fibrosis, 
resulting in long segments of luminal narrowing. The 
segmental nature of CD results in wide gaps of normal 
or dilated bowel between involved segments.
CT enterography combines the improved spatial 
and temporal resolution of multidetector-row CT with 
large volumes of ingested neutral enteric contrast mate­
rial to permit visualization of the entire small bowel 
and lumen. Unlike routine CT, which is used to detect 
the extraenteric complications of CD such as fistula 
and abscess, CT enterography clearly depicts the small 
bowel inflammation associated with CD by displaying 
mural hyperenhancement, stratification, and thickening; 
engorged vasa recta; and perienteric inflammatory 
changes (Figs. 17-7 and 17-8). CT enterography is 
the first-line test for the evaluation of suspected CD 
and its complications. As an initial test in children 
or in adults with multiple radiation exposures, MR 
FIGURE 17-6 
Wireless capsule endoscopy image in a patient with 
Crohn’s disease of the ileum shows ulcerations and narrow­
ing of the intestinal lumen. (Courtesy of Dr. S Reddy, Gastro­
enterology Division, Department of Medicine, Brigham and 
Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts; with permission.)
 
CHAPTER 17
Inflammatory Bowel Disease
189
enterography is comparable to CT in diagnostic accu­
racy. Pelvic MRI is superior to CT for demonstrating 
pelvic lesions such as ischiorectal abscesses and perianal 
fistulae (Fig. 17-9).
Complications
Because CD is a transmural process, serosal adhesions 
develop that provide direct pathways for fistula for­
mation and reduce the incidence of free perforation. 
Perforation occurs in 1–2% of patients, usually in the 
ileum but occasionally in the jejunum or as a complica­
tion of toxic megacolon. The peritonitis of free perfora­
tion, especially colonic, may be fatal. Intraabdominal and 
pelvic abscesses occur in 10–30% of patients with Crohn’s 
disease at some time in the course of their illness. CT-
guided percutaneous drainage of the abscess is standard 
therapy. Despite adequate drainage, most patients need 
resection of the offending bowel segment. Percutaneous 
drainage has an especially high failure rate in abdominal 
wall abscesses. Systemic glucocorticoid therapy increases 
the risk of intraabdominal and pelvic abscesses in CD 
patients who have never had an operation. Other com­
plications include intestinal obstruction in 40%, massive 
hemorrhage, malabsorption, and severe perianal disease.
Serologic markers
Patients with Crohn’s disease show a wide variation 
in the way they present and progress over time. Some 
patients present with mild disease activity and do well 
with generally safe and mild medications, but many 
others exhibit more severe disease and can develop seri­
ous complications that will require surgery. Current 
and developing biologic therapies can help halt pro­
gression of disease and give patients with moderate to 
severe Crohn’s disease a better quality of life. There are 
potential risks of biologic therapies such as infection and 
malignancy, and it would be optimal to determine at 
the time of diagnosis which patients will require more 
aggressive medical therapy. This same argument holds 
true for UC patients as well.
FIGURE 17-8 
Coronal 
contrast-enhanced 
multidetector 
computed 
tomography (MDCT) image obtained after oral admin­
istration of 1350 cc of neutral oral contrast material shows 
mucosal hyperenhancement of the terminal ileum with nar­
rowing and mild prestenotic dilatation. (Courtesy of Dr. K 
Mortele, Gastrointestinal Radiology, Department of Radiology, 
Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts; 
with permission.)
FIGURE 17-7 
Coronal 
contrast-enhanced 
multidetector 
computed 
tomography (MDCT) image obtained after oral admin­
istration of 1350 cc of neutral oral contrast material shows 
dilation of small bowel loops, segmental mucosal hyperen­
hancement, and interloop sinus tracts (white arrow) and 
mesenteric fat stranding. (Courtesy of Dr. K Mortele, Gastro­
intestinal Radiology, Department of Radiology, Brigham and 
Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts; with permission.)
SECTION III
Disorders of the Alimentary Tract
190
Subsets of patients with differing immune responses 
to microbial antigens have been described. These 
include antibodies to Escherichia coli (E. coli) outer 
membrane porin protein C (OmpC), which is found in 
55% of CD patients, an antibody to I2, a homologue 
of the bacterial transcription-factor families from a 
Pseudomonas fluorescens–associated sequence that is found 
in 50–54% of CD patients, as well as anti-Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae (ASCA) and autoantigens [perinuclear anti­
neutrophil antibody (pANCA)]. A novel immune 
response, antiflagellin (anti-CBir1) has been identi­
fied in approximately 50% of Crohn’s patients and has 
been suggested to represent a unique subgroup of CD 
patients.
Unfortunately, these serologic markers are only mar­
ginally useful in helping to make the diagnosis of UC 
or CD and in predicting the course of disease. For suc­
cess in diagnosing IBD and in differentiating between 
CD and UC, the efficacy of these serologic tests 
depends upon the prevalence of IBD in a specific 
population. pANCA positivity is found in about 60–70% 
of UC patients and 5–10% of CD patients; 5–15% of 
first-degree relatives of UC patients are pANCA posi­
tive, whereas only 2–3% of the general population is 
pANCA positive.
Sixty to seventy percent of CD patients, 10–15% of 
UC patients, and up to 5% of non-IBD controls are 
ASCA-positive. In a patient population with a com­
bined prevalence of UC and CD of 62%, pANCA/
ASCA serology showed a sensitivity of 64% and a speci­
ficity of 94%. Positive and negative predictive values 
(PPVs and NPVs) for pANCA/ASCA also vary based 
on the prevalence of IBD in a given population. For the 
patient population with a prevalence of IBD of 62%, 
the PPV is 94%, and the NPV is 63%.
Combining these diagnostic assays may improve the 
ability to diagnose CD. In a referral population of CD 
patients, 85% had an antibody to at least one antigen 
(pANCA, ASCA, OmpC, and I2); only 4% responded 
to all four. Some evidence suggests that antibody 
positivity may help predict disease phenotype. ASCA 
positivity is associated with an increased rate of early 
CD complications; OmpC–positive patients are more 
likely to have internal perforating disease; and I2 posi­
tive patients are more likely to have fibrostenosing 
disease. Patients positive for I2, OmpC, and ASCA 
are the most likely to have undergone small bowel 
surgery.
Anti-Cbir1 expression is associated with small-bowel 
disease, fibrostenosing, and internal penetrating disease. 
Children with CD positive for all four immune 
responses (ASCA+, OmpC+, I2+, and anti-Cbir1+) 
may have more aggressive disease and a shorter time 
to progression to internal perforating and/or strictur­
ing disease. However, larger prospective studies in both 
children and adults have not yet been performed and 
compared to CRP or other markers.
Clinical factors described at diagnosis are more help­
ful than serologies at predicting the natural history of 
Crohn’s disease. The initial requirement for glucocor­
ticoid use, an age at diagnosis below 40 years and the 
presence of perianal disease at diagnosis, have been 
shown to be independently associated with subsequent 
disabling CD after 5 years. Except in special circum­
stances [such as before consideration of an ileoanal 
pouch anastomosis (IPAA) in a patient with indetermi­
nate colitis], serologic markers have only minimal clini­
cal utility.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF 
UC AND CD
UC and CD have similar features to many other 
diseases. In the absence of a key diagnostic test, a com­
bination of features is used (Table 17-5). Once a diag­
nosis of IBD is made, distinguishing between UC and 
CD is impossible initially in up to 15% of cases. These 
are termed indeterminate colitis. Fortunately, in most 
cases, the true nature of the underlying colitis becomes 
evident later in the course of the patient’s disease. 
Approximately 5% (range 1–20%) of colon resection 
specimens are difficult to classify as either UC or CD 
because they exhibit overlapping histologic features.
FIGURE 17-9 
Axial T2-weighted MR image obtained in a 37-year-old 
man with Crohn’s disease shows a linear fluid-filled peri­
anal fistula (arrow) in the right ischioanal fossa. (Courtesy of 
Dr. K Mortele, Gastrointestinal Radiology, Department of 
­Radiology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massa­
chusetts; with permission.)
 
CHAPTER 17
Inflammatory Bowel Disease
191
INFECTIOUS DISEASE
Infections of the small intestines and colon can mimic 
CD or UC. They may be bacterial, fungal, viral, or 
protozoal in origin (Table 17-6). Campylobacter coli­
tis can mimic the endoscopic appearance of severe UC 
and can cause a relapse of established UC. Salmonella 
can cause watery or bloody diarrhea, nausea, and vomit­
ing. Shigellosis causes watery diarrhea, abdominal pain, 
and fever followed by rectal tenesmus and by the passage 
of blood and mucus per rectum. All three are usually 
self-limited, but 1% of patients infected with Salmo­
nella become asymptomatic carriers. Yersinia enterocolitica 
infection occurs mainly in the terminal ileum and causes 
mucosal ulceration, neutrophil invasion, and thicken­
ing of the ileal wall. Other bacterial infections that may 
mimic IBD include C. difficile, which presents with 
watery diarrhea, tenesmus, nausea, and vomiting; and 
E. coli, three categories of which can cause colitis. 
These are enterohemorrhagic, enteroinvasive, and 
enteroadherent E. coli, all of which can cause bloody 
diarrhea and abdominal tenderness. Diagnosis of bacte­
rial colitis is made by sending stool specimens for bac­
terial culture and C. difficile toxin analysis. Gonorrhea, 
Chlamydia, and syphilis can also cause proctitis.
GI involvement with mycobacterial infection occurs 
primarily in the immunosuppressed patient but may 
occur in patients with normal immunity. Distal ileal and 
cecal involvement predominates, and patients present 
with symptoms of small bowel obstruction and a tender 
abdominal mass. The diagnosis is made most directly 
by colonoscopy with biopsy and culture. Mycobacterium 
avium-intracellulare complex infection occurs in advanced 
stages of HIV infection and in other immunocompro­
mised states; it usually manifests as a systemic infec­
tion with diarrhea, abdominal pain, weight loss, fever, 
TABLE 17-6 
DISEASES THAT MIMIC IBD
Infectious Etiologies
Bacterial
Salmonella
Shigella
Toxigenic
Escherichia coli
Campylobacter
Yersinia
Clostridium 
difficile
Gonorrhea
Chlamydia 
trachomatis
Mycobacterial
Tuberculosis
Mycobacte­
rium avium
Parasitic
Amebiasis
Isospora
Trichuris 
trichiura
Hookworm
Strongyloides
Viral
Cytomegalovirus
Herpes simplex
HIV
Fungal
Histoplasmosis
Candida
Aspergillus
Noninfectious Etiologies
Inflammatory
Appendicitis
Diverticulitis
Diversion colitis
Collagenous/
lymphocytic 
colitis
Ischemic colitis
Radiation 
colitis/enteritis
Solitary rectal 
ulcer syn­
drome
Eosinophilic 
gastroenteritis
Neutropenic 
colitis
Behçet’s 
syndrome
Graft-versus-
host disease
Neoplastic
Lymphoma
Metastatic 
carcinoma
Carcinoma of 
the ileum
Carcinoid
Familial 
polyposis
Drugs and 
Chemicals
  NSAIDs
Phosphosoda
Cathartic colon
Gold
Oral 
contraceptives
Cocaine
Chemotherapy
Abbreviation: NSAIDs, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.
TABLE 17-5 
DIFFERENT CLINICAL, ENDOSCOPIC, AND 
RADIOGRAPHIC FEATURES
ULCERATIVE 
COLITIS
CROHN’S 
DISEASE
Clinical
Gross blood in stool
Yes
Occasionally
Mucus
Yes
Occasionally
Systemic symptoms
Occasionally
Frequently
Pain
Occasionally
Frequently
Abdominal mass
Rarely
Yes
Significant perineal 
disease
No
Frequently
Fistulas
No
Yes
Small intestinal 
obstruction
No
Frequently
Colonic obstruction
Rarely
Frequently
Response to antibiotics
No
Yes
Recurrence after 
surgery
No
Yes
ANCA-positive
Frequently
Rarely
ASCA-positive
Rarely
Frequently
Endoscopic
Rectal sparing
Rarely
Frequently
Continuous disease
Yes
Occasionally
“Cobblestoning”
No
Yes
Granuloma on biopsy
No
Occasionally
Radiographic
Small bowel significantly 
abnormal
No
Yes
Abnormal terminal ileum
No
Yes
Segmental colitis
No
Yes
Asymmetric colitis
No
Yes
Stricture
Occasionally
Frequently
Abbreviations: ANCA, antineutrophil cytoplasm antibody; ASCA, 
anti-Saccharomyces cerevisiae antibody.
SECTION III
Disorders of the Alimentary Tract
192
and malabsorption. Diagnosis is established by acid-fast 
smear and culture of mucosal biopsies.
Although most of the patients with viral colitis are 
immunosuppressed, cytomegalovirus (CMV) and her­
pes simplex proctitis may occur in immunocompetent 
individuals. CMV occurs most commonly in the esoph­
agus, colon, and rectum but may also involve the small 
intestine. Symptoms include abdominal pain, bloody 
diarrhea, fever, and weight loss. With severe disease, 
necrosis and perforation can occur. Diagnosis is made 
by identification of characteristic intranuclear inclusions 
in mucosal cells on biopsy. Herpes simplex infection of 
the GI tract is limited to the oropharynx, anorectum, 
and perianal areas. Symptoms include anorectal pain, 
tenesmus, constipation, inguinal adenopathy, difficulty 
with urinary voiding, and sacral paresthesias. Diagnosis 
is made by rectal biopsy with identification of character­
istic cellular inclusions and viral culture. HIV itself can 
cause diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, and anorexia. Small 
intestinal biopsies show partial villous atrophy; small 
bowel bacterial overgrowth and fat malabsorption may 
also be noted.
Protozoan parasites include Isospora belli, which can 
cause a self-limited infection in healthy hosts but causes 
a chronic profuse, watery diarrhea, and weight loss 
in AIDS patients. Entamoeba histolytica or related spe­
cies infect about 10% of the world’s population; symp­
toms include abdominal pain, tenesmus, frequent loose 
stools containing blood and mucus, and abdominal 
tenderness. Colonoscopy reveals focal punctate ulcers 
with normal intervening mucosa; diagnosis is made by 
biopsy or serum amebic antibodies. Fulminant amebic 
colitis is rare but has a mortality rate of >50%.
Other parasitic infections that may mimic IBD 
include hookworm (Necator americanus), whipworm 
(T. trichiura), and Strongyloides stercoralis. In severely 
immunocompromised patients, Candida or Aspergil­
lus can be identified in the submucosa. Disseminated 
­histoplasmosis can involve the ileocecal area.
NONINFECTIOUS DISEASE
Diverticulitis can be confused with CD clinically and 
radiographically. Both diseases cause fever, abdomi­
nal pain, tender abdominal mass, leukocytosis, elevated 
ESR, partial obstruction, and fistulas. Perianal disease 
or ileitis on small bowel series favors the diagnosis of 
CD. Significant endoscopic mucosal abnormalities are 
more likely in CD than in diverticulitis. Endoscopic or 
clinical recurrence following segmental resection favors 
CD. Diverticular-associated colitis is similar to CD, but 
mucosal abnormalities are limited to the sigmoid and 
descending colon.
Ischemic colitis is commonly confused with IBD. 
The ischemic process can be chronic and diffuse, as in 
UC, or segmental, as in CD. Colonic inflammation 
due to ischemia may resolve quickly or may persist and 
result in transmural scarring and stricture formation. 
Ischemic bowel disease should be considered in the 
elderly following abdominal aortic aneurysm repair or 
when a patient has a hypercoagulable state or a severe 
cardiac or peripheral vascular disorder. Patients usually 
present with sudden onset of left lower quadrant pain, 
urgency to defecate, and the passage of bright red blood 
per rectum. Endoscopic examination often demon­
strates a normal-appearing rectum and a sharp transition 
to an area of inflammation in the descending colon and 
splenic flexure.
The effects of radiotherapy on the GI tract can be 
difficult to distinguish from IBD. Acute symptoms can 
occur within 1–2 weeks of starting radiotherapy. When 
the rectum and sigmoid are irradiated, patients develop 
bloody, mucoid diarrhea and tenesmus, as in distal UC. 
With small bowel involvement, diarrhea is common. 
Late symptoms include malabsorption and weight loss. 
Stricturing with obstruction and bacterial overgrowth 
may occur. Fistulas can penetrate the bladder, vagina, or 
abdominal wall. Flexible sigmoidoscopy reveals mucosal 
granularity, friability, numerous telangiectasias, and occa­
sionally discrete ulcerations. Biopsy can be diagnostic.
Solitary rectal ulcer syndrome is uncommon and can 
be confused with IBD. It occurs in persons of all ages 
and may be caused by impaired evacuation and failure 
of relaxation of the puborectalis muscle. Single or mul­
tiple ulcerations may arise from anal sphincter overac­
tivity, higher intrarectal pressures during defecation, 
and digital removal of stool. Patients complain of con­
stipation with straining and pass blood and mucus per 
­rectum. Other symptoms include abdominal pain, diar­
rhea, tenesmus, and perineal pain. Ulceration as large as 
5 cm in diameter is usually seen anteriorly or anterior-
laterally 3–15 cm from the anal verge. Biopsies can be 
diagnostic.
Several types of colitis are associated with nonste­
roidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), including de 
novo colitis, reactivation of IBD, and proctitis caused 
by use of suppositories. Most patients with NSAID-
related colitis present with diarrhea and abdominal pain, 
and complications include stricture, bleeding, obstruc­
tion, perforation, and fistulization. Withdrawal of these 
agents is crucial, and in cases of reactivated IBD, stan­
dard therapies are indicated.
THE ATYPICAL COLITIDES
Two atypical colitides—collagenous colitis and lym­
phocytic colitis—have completely normal endoscopic 
appearances. Collagenous colitis has two main histologic 
components: increased subepithelial collagen deposition 
and colitis with increased intraepithelial lymphocytes. 
The female to male ratio is 9:1, and most patients pres­
ent in the sixth or seventh decades of life. The main 
 
CHAPTER 17
Inflammatory Bowel Disease
193
symptom is chronic watery diarrhea. Treatments range 
from sulfasalazine or mesalamine and Lomotil to bis­
muth to budesonide to prednisone for refractory disease.
Lymphocytic colitis has features similar to collag­
enous colitis, including age at onset and clinical pre­
sentation, but it has almost equal incidence in men and 
women and no subepithelial collagen deposition on 
pathologic section. However, intraepithelial lympho­
cytes are increased. The frequency of celiac disease is 
increased in lymphocytic colitis and ranges from 9 to 
27%. Celiac disease should be excluded in all patients 
with lymphocytic colitis, particularly if diarrhea does 
not respond to conventional therapy. Treatment is simi­
lar to that of collagenous colitis with the exception of a 
gluten-free diet for those who have celiac disease.
Diversion colitis is an inflammatory process that arises 
in segments of the large intestine that are excluded from 
the fecal stream. It usually occurs in patients with ileos­
tomy or colostomy when a mucus fistula or a Hartmann’s 
pouch has been created. Clinically, patients have mucus 
or bloody discharge from the rectum. Erythema, granu­
larity, friability, and, in more severe cases, ulceration 
can be seen on endoscopy. Histopathology shows areas 
of active inflammation with foci of cryptitis and crypt 
abscesses. Crypt architecture is normal, which differenti­
ates it from UC. It may be impossible to distinguish from 
CD. Short-chain fatty acid enemas may help in diversion 
colitis, but the definitive therapy is surgical reanastomosis.
EXTRAINTESTINAL MANIFESTATIONS
Up to one-third of IBD patients have at least one 
extraintestinal disease manifestation.
DERMATOLOGIC
Erythema nodosum (EN) occurs in up to 15% of CD 
patients and 10% of UC patients. Attacks usually cor­
relate with bowel activity; skin lesions develop after the 
onset of bowel symptoms, and patients frequently have 
concomitant active peripheral arthritis. The lesions of 
EN are hot, red, tender nodules measuring 1–5 cm in 
diameter and are found on the anterior surface of the 
lower legs, ankles, calves, thighs, and arms. Therapy is 
directed toward the underlying bowel disease.
Pyoderma gangrenosum (PG) is seen in 1–12% 
of UC patients and less commonly in Crohn’s colitis. 
Although it usually presents after the diagnosis of IBD, 
PG may occur years before the onset of bowel symp­
toms, run a course independent of the bowel disease, 
respond poorly to colectomy, and even develop years 
after proctocolectomy. It is usually associated with 
severe disease. Lesions are commonly found on the 
dorsal surface of the feet and legs but may occur on the 
arms, chest, stoma, and even the face. PG usually begins 
as a pustule and then spreads concentrically to rapidly 
undermine healthy skin. Lesions then ulcerate, with 
violaceous edges surrounded by a margin of erythema. 
Centrally, they contain necrotic tissue with blood and 
exudates. Lesions may be single or multiple and grow 
as large as 30 cm. They are sometimes very difficult 
to treat and often require intravenous (IV) antibiotics, 
intravenous, glucocorticoids, dapsone, azathioprine, 
thalidomide, IV cyclosporine, or infliximab.
Other dermatologic manifestations include pyoderma 
vegetans, which occurs in intertriginous areas; pyos­
tomatitis vegetans, which involves the mucous mem­
branes; Sweet’s syndrome, a neutrophilic dermatosis; 
and metastatic CD, a rare disorder defined by cutaneous 
granuloma formation. Psoriasis affects 5–10% of patients 
with IBD and is unrelated to bowel activity consis­
tent with the potential shared immunogenetic basis of 
these diseases. Perianal skin tags are found in 75–80% of 
patients with CD, especially those with colon involve­
ment. Oral mucosal lesions, seen often in CD and rarely 
in UC, include aphthous stomatitis and “cobblestone” 
lesions of the buccal mucosa.
RHEUMATOLOGIC
Peripheral arthritis develops in 15–20% of IBD patients, 
is more common in CD, and worsens with exacerba­
tions of bowel activity. It is asymmetric, polyarticular, 
and migratory and most often affects large joints of the 
upper and lower extremities. Treatment is directed at 
reducing bowel inflammation. In severe UC, colectomy 
frequently cures the arthritis.
Ankylosing spondylitis (AS) occurs in about 10% of 
IBD patients and is more common in CD than UC. 
About two-thirds of IBD patients with AS express the 
HLA-B27 antigen. The AS activity is not related to 
bowel activity and does not remit with glucocorticoids 
or colectomy. It most often affects the spine and pelvis, 
producing symptoms of diffuse low-back pain, buttock 
pain, and morning stiffness. The course is continuous 
and progressive, leading to permanent skeletal damage 
and deformity. Infliximab reduces spinal inflammation 
and improves functional status and quality of life.
Sacroiliitis is symmetric, occurs equally in UC and 
CD, is often asymptomatic, does not correlate with 
bowel activity, and does not always progress to AS. 
Other rheumatic manifestations include hypertrophic 
osteoarthropathy, pelvic/femoral osteomyelitis, and 
relapsing polychondritis.
OCULAR
The incidence of ocular complications in IBD patients 
is 1–10%. The most common are conjunctivitis, 
SECTION III
Disorders of the Alimentary Tract
194
anterior uveitis/iritis, and episcleritis. Uveitis is associ­
ated with both UC and Crohn’s colitis, may be found 
during periods of remission, and may develop in 
patients following bowel resection. Symptoms include 
ocular pain, photophobia, blurred vision, and headache. 
Prompt 
intervention, 
sometimes 
with 
systemic 
­glucocorticoids, is required to prevent scarring and visual 
impairment. Episcleritis is a benign disorder that pres­
ents with symptoms of mild ocular burning. It occurs 
in 3–4% of IBD patients, more commonly in Crohn’s 
­colitis, and is treated with topical glucocorticoids.
HEPATOBILIARY
Hepatic steatosis is detectable in about one-half of the 
abnormal liver biopsies from patients with CD and UC; 
patients usually present with hepatomegaly. Fatty liver 
usually results from a combination of chronic debilitat­
ing illness, malnutrition, and glucocorticoid therapy. 
Cholelithiasis occurs in 10–35% of CD patients with 
ileitis or ileal resection. Gallstone formation is caused by 
malabsorption of bile acids, resulting in depletion of the 
bile salt pool and the secretion of lithogenic bile.
Primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) is a disorder 
characterized by both intrahepatic and extrahepatic bile 
duct inflammation and fibrosis, frequently leading to 
biliary cirrhosis and hepatic failure; approximately 5% 
of patients with UC have PSC, but 50–75% of patients 
with PSC have IBD. PSC occurs less often in patients 
with CD. Although it can be recognized after the diag­
nosis of IBD, PSC can be detected earlier or even years 
after proctocolectomy. Consistent with this, the immu­
nogenetic basis for PSC appears to be overlapping but 
distinct from UC based upon genome-wide association 
studies (GWAS) although both IBD and PSC are com­
monly pANCA positive. Most patients have no symp­
toms at the time of diagnosis; when symptoms are pres­
ent, they consist of fatigue, jaundice, abdominal pain, 
fever, anorexia, and malaise. The traditional gold-­
standard diagnostic test is endoscopic retrograde chol­
angiopancreatography (ERCP), but magnetic resonance 
cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) is also sensitive and 
specific. MRCP is reasonable as an initial diagnostic test 
in children and can visualize irregularities, multifocal 
strictures, and dilatations of all levels of the biliary tree. 
In patients with PSC, both ERCP and MRCP demon­
strate multiple bile duct strictures alternating with rela­
tively normal segments.
The bile acid ursodeoxycholic acid (ursodiol) may 
reduce alkaline phosphatase and serum aminotransferase 
levels, but histologic improvement has been marginal. 
High doses (25–30 mg/kg per day) may decrease the 
risk of colorectal dysplasia and cancer in patients with 
UC and PSC. Endoscopic stenting may be palliative for 
cholestasis secondary to bile duct obstruction. Patients 
with symptomatic disease develop cirrhosis and liver 
failure over 5–10 years and eventually require liver 
transplantation. PSC patients have a 10–15% lifetime 
risk of developing cholangiocarcinoma and then can­
not be transplanted. Patients with IBD and PSC are at 
increased risk of colon cancer and should be surveyed 
yearly by colonoscopy and biopsy.
In addition, cholangiography is normal in a small 
percentage of patients who have a variant of PSC 
known as small duct primary sclerosing cholangitis. This 
variant (sometimes referred to as “pericholangitis”) 
is probably a form of PSC involving small caliber bile 
ducts. It has similar biochemical and histologic features 
to classic PSC. It appears to have a significantly better 
prognosis than classic PSC, although it may evolve into 
classic PSC. Granulomatous hepatitis and hepatic amy­
loidosis are much rarer extraintestinal manifestations of 
IBD.
UROLOGIC
The most frequent genitourinary complications are calculi, 
ureteral obstruction, and ileal bladder fistulas. The 
highest frequency of nephrolithiasis (10–20%) occurs 
in patients with CD following small bowel resection. 
Calcium oxalate stones develop secondary to hyper­
oxaluria, which results from increased absorption of 
dietary oxalate. Normally, dietary calcium combines 
with luminal oxalate to form insoluble calcium oxalate, 
which is eliminated in the stool. In patients with ileal 
dysfunction, however, nonabsorbed fatty acids bind 
calcium and leave oxalate unbound. The unbound 
oxalate is then delivered to the colon, where it is readily 
absorbed, especially in the presence of inflammation.
METABOLIC BONE DISORDERS
Low bone mass occurs in 3–30% of IBD patients. 
The risk is increased by glucocorticoids, cyclosporine, 
methotrexate and total parenteral nutrition (TPN). 
Malabsorption and inflammation mediated by IL-1, 
IL-6, TNF and other inflammatory mediators also con­
tribute to low bone density. An increased incidence 
of hip, spine, wrist, and rib fractures has been noted: 
36% in CD and 45% in UC. The absolute risk of an 
osteoporotic fracture is about 1% per person per year. 
Fracture rates, particularly in the spine and hip, were 
highest among the elderly (age >60). One study noted 
an odds ratio of vertebral fracture to be 1.72 and hip 
fracture 1.59. The disease severity predicted the risk of 
a fracture. Only 13% of IBD patients who had a frac­
ture were on any kind of antifracture treatment. Up 
to 20% of bone mass can be lost per year with chronic 
glucocorticoid use. The effect is dosage-dependent. 
Budesonide may also suppress the pituitary-adrenal axis 
and thus carries a risk of causing osteoporosis.
 
CHAPTER 17
Inflammatory Bowel Disease
195
Osteonecrosis is characterized by death of osteo­
cytes and adipocytes and eventual bone collapse. The 
pain is aggravated by motion and swelling of the joints. 
It affects the hips more often than knees and shoulders, 
and in one series 4.3% of patients developed osteo­
necrosis within 6 months of starting glucocorticoids. 
Diagnosis is made by bone scan or MRI, and treatment 
consists of pain control, cord decompression, osteot­
omy, and joint replacement.
THROMBOEMBOLIC DISORDERS
Patients with IBD have an increased risk of both venous 
and arterial thrombosis even if the disease is not active. 
Factors responsible for the hypercoagulable state have 
included abnormalities of the platelet-endothelial inter­
action, hyperhomocysteinemia, alterations in the coag­
ulation cascade, impaired fibrinolysis, involvement of 
tissue factor-bearing microvesicles, disruption of the 
normal coagulation system by autoantibodies, as well 
as a genetic predisposition. A spectrum of vasculitides 
involving small, medium, and large vessels has also been 
observed.
OTHER DISORDERS
More common cardiopulmonary manifestations include 
endocarditis, myocarditis, pleuropericarditis, and inter­
stitial lung disease. A secondary or reactive amyloidosis 
can occur in patients with long-standing IBD, especially 
in patients with CD. Amyloid material is deposited 
systemically and can cause diarrhea, constipation, 
and renal failure. The renal disease can be successfully 
treated with colchicine. Pancreatitis is a rare extra­
intestinal manifestation of IBD and results from duo­
denal fistulas; ampullary CD; gallstones; PSC; drugs 
such as 6-mercaptopurine, azathioprine, or, very rarely, 
5-ASA agents; autoimmune pancreatitis; and primary 
CD of the pancreas.
TREATMENT	
Inflammatory Bowel Disease Treatment
5-ASA AGENTS  The mainstay of therapy for mild 
to moderate UC is sulfasalazine and the other 5-ASA 
agents. These agents are effective at inducing and main­
taining remission in UC. They may have a limited role in 
inducing remission in CD but no clear role in mainte­
nance of CD. The most convincing evidence for the use 
of sulfasalazine is treatment of active Crohn’s disease 
involving the colon. Sulfasalazine was originally devel­
oped to deliver both antibacterial (sulfapyridine) and 
anti-inflammatory (5-ASA) therapy into the connective 
tissues of joints and the colonic mucosa. The molecular 
structure provides a convenient delivery system to the 
colon by allowing the intact molecule to pass through 
the small intestine after only partial absorption, and to 
be broken down in the colon by bacterial azo reduc­
tases that cleave the azo bond linking the sulfa and 
5-ASA moieties. Sulfasalazine is effective treatment for 
mild to moderate UC, but its high rate of side effects 
limits its use. Although sulfasalazine is more effective at 
higher doses, at 6 or 8 g/d up to 30% of patients expe­
rience allergic reactions or intolerable side effects such 
as headache, anorexia, nausea, and vomiting that are 
attributable to the sulfapyridine moiety. Hypersensi­
tivity reactions, independent of sulfapyridine levels, 
include rash, fever, hepatitis, agranulocytosis, hypersen­
sitivity pneumonitis, pancreatitis, worsening of colitis, 
and reversible sperm abnormalities. Sulfasalazine can 
also impair folate absorption, and patients should be 
given folic acid supplements.
Newer 
sulfa-free 
aminosalicylate 
preparations 
deliver increased amounts of the pharmacologically 
active ingredient of sulfasalazine (5-ASA, mesalamine) 
to the site of active bowel disease while limiting sys­
temic toxicity. Peroxisome proliferator activated recep­
tor g (PPAR-g) may mediate 5-ASA therapeutic action 
by decreasing nuclear localization of NF κB. Sulfa-free 
aminosalicylate formulations include alternative azo-
bonded carriers, 5-ASA dimers, pH-dependent tablets, 
delayed-release and controlled-release preparations. 
Each has the same efficacy as sulfasalazine when equi­
molar concentrations are used. Olsalazine is composed 
of two 5-ASA radicals linked by an azo bond, which is 
split in the colon by bacterial reduction, and two 5-ASA 
molecules are released. Olsalazine is similar in effec­
tiveness to sulfasalazine in treating UC, but up to 17% 
of patients experience nonbloody diarrhea caused by 
increased secretion of fluid in the small bowel. Balsalazide 
contains an azo bond binding mesalamine to the car­
rier molecule 4-aminobenzoyl-β-alanine; it is effective 
in the colon.
Asacol is an enteric-coated form of mesalamine with 
the 5-ASA being released at pH >7. The disintegration 
of Asacol is variable, with complete breakup of the tab­
let occurring in many different parts of the gut ranging 
from the small intestine to the splenic flexure; it has 
increased gastric residence when taken with a meal. 
Pentasa is another mesalamine formulation that uses 
an ethylcellulose coating to allow water absorption into 
small beads containing the mesalamine. Water dissolves 
the 5-ASA, which then diffuses out of the bead into the 
lumen. Disintegration of the capsule occurs in the stomach. 
The microspheres then disperse throughout the entire 
tract from the small intestine through the distal colon in 
both fasted and fed conditions. Additional formulations 
of mesalamine continue to be developed. A ­once-a-day 
SECTION III
Disorders of the Alimentary Tract
196
formulation 
of 
mesalamine 
[Multi-Matrix 
System 
(MMX), marketed in the United States as Lialda] is 
designed to release mesalamine in the colon. The MMX 
technology incorporates mesalamine into a lipophilic 
matrix within a hydrophilic matrix encapsulated in a 
polymer resistant to degradation at a low pH (<7) to 
delay release throughout the colon. The safety profile 
appears to be comparable to other 5-ASA formulations. 
A formulation containing encapsulated mesalamine 
granules (Apriso) was approved for use in the United 
States. Apriso delivers mesalamine to the terminal ileum 
and colon via a proprietary extended-release mecha­
nism (Intellicor). The outer coating (Eudragit L) dissolves 
at a pH >6. In addition, there is a polymer matrix core 
that aids in sustained release throughout the colon. 
Since Lialda and Apriso are given once daily, an antici­
pated benefit is improved compliance compared with 
two to four daily doses required for other mesalamine 
preparations. Unencapsulated versions of mesalamine 
(Salofalk Granu-Stix) have been in use in Europe for 
induction and maintenance of remission for several 
years.
Appropriate doses of Asacol and other 5-ASA com­
pounds are shown in Table 17-7. Some 50–75% of 
patients with mild to moderate UC improve when 
treated with 5-ASA doses equivalent to 2 g/d of mesala­
mine; the dose response continues up to at least 4.8 g/d. 
As a general rule, 5-ASA agents act within 2–4 weeks. 
5-ASA doses equivalent to 1.5–4 g/d of mesalamine 
maintain remission in 50–75% of patients with UC.
Topical mesalamine enemas are effective in mild-to-
moderate distal UC. Clinical response occurs in up to 
80% of UC patients with colitis distal to the splenic 
flexure. Combination therapy with mesalamine in both 
oral and enema form is more effective than either treat­
ment alone for both distal and extensive UC. Mesala­
mine suppositories are effective in treating proctitis.
GLUCOCORTICOIDS  The majority of patients 
with moderate-to-severe UC benefit from oral or par­
enteral glucocorticoids. Prednisone is usually started at 
doses of 40–60 mg/d for active UC that is unresponsive 
to 5-ASA therapy. Parenteral glucocorticoids may be 
administered as hydrocortisone, 300 mg/d, or methyl­
prednisolone, 40–60 mg/d. Topically applied glucocorti­
coids are also beneficial for distal colitis and may serve 
as an adjunct in those who have rectal involvement 
plus more proximal disease. Hydrocortisone enemas or 
foam may control active disease, although they have no 
proven role as maintenance therapy. These glucocor­
ticoids are significantly absorbed from the rectum and 
can lead to adrenal suppression with prolonged admin­
istration. Topical 5-ASA therapy is more effective than 
topical steroid therapy in the treatment of distal UC.
Glucocorticoids are also effective for treatment of 
moderate-to-severe CD and induce a 60–70% remission 
rate compared to a 30% placebo response. The systemic 
effects of standard glucocorticoid formulations have 
led to the development of more potent formulations 
that are less well-absorbed and have increased first-
pass metabolism. Controlled ileal-release budesonide 
has been nearly equal to prednisone for ileocolonic CD 
with fewer glucocorticoid side effects. Budesonide is 
used for 2–3 months at a dose of 9 mg/d, then tapered. 
TABLE 17-7 
ORAL 5-ASA PREPARATIONS
PREPARATION
FORMULATION
DELIVERY
DOSING PER DAY
Azo-Bond
Sulfasalazine (500 mg) (Azulfidine)
Sulfapyridine-5-ASA
Colon
3–6 g (acute)
2–4 g (maintenance)
Olsalazine (250 mg) (Dipentum)
5-ASA-5-ASA
Colon
1–3 g
Balsalazide (750 mg) (Colazal)
Aminobenzoyl-alanine-5-ASA
Colon
6.75–9 g
Delayed-Release
Mesalamine (400, 800 mg) (Asacol)
Eudragit S (pH 7)
Distal 
ileum-colon
2.4–4.8 g (acute)
1.6–4.8 g (maintenance)
Mesalamine (1.2 g) (Lialda)
MMX mesalamine (SPD476)
Ileum-colon
2.4–4.8 g
Controlled-Release
Mesalamine (250, 500, 1000 mg) 
(Pentasa)
Ethylcellulose microgranules
Stomach-colon
2–4 g (acute)
1.5–4 g (maintenance)
Delayed and Extended-Release
Mesalamine (.375 g) (Apriso)
Intellicor extended-release 
mechanism
Ileum-colon
1.5 g (maintenance)
 
CHAPTER 17
Inflammatory Bowel Disease
197
Budesonide 6 mg/d is effective in reducing relapse rates 
at 3–6 months but not at 12 months in CD patients with 
a medically induced remission.
Glucocorticoids play no role in maintenance therapy 
in either UC or CD. Once clinical remission has been 
induced, they should be tapered according to the clinical 
activity, normally at a rate of no more than 5 mg/week. 
They can usually be tapered to 20 mg/d within 4–5 weeks 
but often take several months to be discontinued 
altogether. The side effects are numerous, including 
fluid retention, abdominal striae, fat redistribution, 
hyperglycemia, subcapsular cataracts, osteonecrosis, 
osteoporosis, myopathy, emotional disturbances, and 
withdrawal symptoms. Most of these side effects, aside 
from osteonecrosis, are related to the dose and duration 
of therapy.
ANTIBIOTICS  Antibiotics have no role in the treat­
ment of active or quiescent UC. However, pouchitis, 
which occurs in about a third of UC patients after colec­
tomy and IPAA, usually responds to treatment with met­
ronidazole and/or ciprofloxacin.
Metronidazole is effective in active inflammatory, 
fistulous, and perianal CD and may prevent recur­
rence after ileal resection. The most effective dose is 
15–20 mg/kg per day in three divided doses; it is usu­
ally continued for several months. Common side effects 
include nausea, metallic taste, and disulfiram-like reaction. 
Peripheral neuropathy can occur with prolonged 
administration (several months) and on rare occasions is 
permanent despite discontinuation. Ciprofloxacin (500 mg 
bid) is also beneficial for inflammatory, perianal, and fis­
tulous CD but has recently been associated with Achil­
les tendinitis and rupture. Both ciprofloxacin and met­
ronidazole antibiotics can be used as first-line drugs for 
short periods of time in active inflammatory, fistulizing 
and perianal CD.
AZATHIOPRINE AND 6-MERCAPTOPURINE  
Azathioprine and 6-mercaptopurine (6-MP) are purine 
analogues commonly employed in the management 
of glucocorticoid-dependent IBD. Azathioprine is rap­
idly absorbed and converted to 6-MP, which is then 
metabolized to the active end product, thioinosinic 
acid, an inhibitor of purine ribonucleotide synthesis and 
cell proliferation. These agents also inhibit the immune 
response. Efficacy can be seen as early as 3–4 weeks but 
can take up to 4–6 months. Adherence can be moni­
tored by measuring the levels of 6-thioguanine 
and 6-methyl-mercaptopurine, end products of 6-MP 
metabolism. Azathioprine (2–3 mg/kg per day) or 6-MP 
(1–1.5 mg/kg per day) have been employed successfully 
as glucocorticoid-sparing agents in up to two-thirds of 
UC and CD patients previously unable to be weaned from 
glucocorticoids. The role of these immunomodulators 
as maintenance therapy in UC and CD and for treating 
active perianal disease and fistulas in CD appears prom­
ising. In addition, 6-MP or azathioprine is effective for 
postoperative prophylaxis of CD.
Although azathioprine and 6-MP are usually well 
tolerated, pancreatitis occurs in 3–4% of patients, typi­
cally presents within the first few weeks of therapy, 
and is completely reversible when the drug is stopped. 
Other side effects include nausea, fever, rash, and hepa­
titis. Bone marrow suppression (particularly leukopenia) 
is dose-related and often delayed, necessitating regu­
lar monitoring of the complete blood cell count (CBC). 
Additionally, 1 in 300 individuals lacks thiopurine methyl­
transferase, the enzyme responsible for drug metabolism; 
an additional 11% of the population are heterozygotes 
with intermediate enzyme activity. Both are at increased 
risk of toxicity because of increased accumulation of 
thioguanine 
metabolites. 
Although 
6-thioguanine 
and 6-methylmercaptopurine levels can be followed 
to determine correct drug dosing and reduce toxicity, 
weight-based dosing is an acceptable alternative. CBCs 
and liver function tests should be monitored frequently 
regardless of dosing strategy. IBD patients treated with 
azathioprine/6-MP are at a fourfold increased risk of 
developing a lymphoma. This increased risk could be 
a result of the medications, the underlying disease, or 
both.
METHOTREXATE  Methotrexate 
(MTX) 
inhibits 
dihydrofolate reductase, resulting in impaired DNA 
synthesis. Additional anti-inflammatory properties may 
be related to decreased IL-1 production. Intramuscular 
(IM) or subcutaneous (SC) MTX (25 mg/week) is effec­
tive in inducing remission and reducing glucocorticoid 
dosage; 15 mg/week is effective in maintaining remis­
sion in active CD. Potential toxicities include leukopenia 
and hepatic fibrosis, necessitating periodic evaluation 
of CBCs and liver enzymes. The role of liver biopsy in 
patients on long-term MTX is uncertain but is probably 
limited to those with increased liver enzymes. Hyper­
sensitivity pneumonitis is a rare but serious complica­
tion of therapy.
CYCLOSPORINE  Cyclosporine (CSA) is a lipophilic 
peptide with inhibitory effects on both the cellular and 
humoral immune systems. CSA blocks the production of 
IL-2 by T-helper lymphocytes. CSA binds to cyclophilin, 
and this complex inhibits calcineurin, a cytoplasmic 
phosphatase enzyme involved in the activation of 
T cells. CSA also indirectly inhibits B cell function by 
blocking helper T cells. CSA has a more rapid onset of 
action than 6-MP and azathioprine.
CSA is most effective when given at 2–4 mg/kg per 
day IV in severe UC that is refractory to IV glucocorti­
coids, with 82% of patients responding. CSA can be an 
SECTION III
Disorders of the Alimentary Tract
198
alternative to colectomy. The long-term success of oral 
CSA is not as dramatic, but if patients are started on 
6-MP or azathioprine at the time of hospital discharge, 
remission can be maintained. For the 2 mg/kg dose, lev­
els as measured by monoclonal radioimmunoassay or 
by the high performance liquid chromatography assay 
should be maintained between 150 and 350 ng/mL.
CSA may cause significant toxicity; renal function 
should be monitored frequently. Hypertension, gingival 
hyperplasia, hypertrichosis, paresthesias, tremors, head­
aches, and electrolyte abnormalities are common side 
effects. Creatinine elevation calls for dose reduction or 
discontinuation. Seizures may also complicate therapy, 
especially if the patient is hypomagnesemic or if serum 
cholesterol levels are <3.1 mmol/L (<120 mg/dL). 
Opportunistic infections, most notably Pneumocystis 
carinii pneumonia, may occur with combination immu­
nosuppressive treatment; prophylaxis should be given. 
Major adverse events occurred in 15% of patients in one 
large study including nephrotoxicity not responding to 
dose adjustment, serious infections, seizures, anaphylaxis, 
and death of two patients. This high incidence suggests 
that vigorous monitoring by experienced clinicians at 
tertiary care centers may be required.
TACROLIMUS  Tacrolimus is a macrolide antibiotic 
with immunomodulatory properties similar to CSA. It 
is 100 times as potent as CSA and is not dependent on 
bile or mucosal integrity for absorption. These phar­
macologic properties enable tacrolimus to have good 
oral absorption despite proximal small bowel Crohn’s 
involvement. It has shown efficacy in children with 
refractory IBD and in adults with extensive involve­
ment of the small bowel. It is also effective in adults with 
steroid-dependent or refractory UC and CD as well as 
refractory fistulizing CD.
BIOLOGIC 
THERAPIES  Biologic 
therapy 
is 
often reserved for moderately to severely ill patients 
with Crohn’s disease, who have failed other therapies. 
Patients who respond to biologic therapies enjoy an 
improvement in clinical symptoms, a better quality of 
life, less disability, fatigue and depression, and fewer 
surgeries and hospitalizations.
Anti-TNF 
Therapy  The first biologic therapy 
approved for Crohn’s disease was infliximab, a chimeric 
IgG1 antibody against TNF-alpha, which is now also 
approved for treatment of moderately to severely active 
ulcerative colitis. Of active CD patients refractory to 
glucocorticoids, 6-MP, or 5-ASA, 65% will respond to 
IV infliximab (5 mg/kg); one-third will enter complete 
remission. The ACCENT I (A Crohn’s Disease Clinical Trial 
Evaluating Infliximab in a New Long Term Treatment 
Regimen) study showed that of the patients who expe­
rience an initial response, 40% of these will maintain 
remission for at least 1 year with repeated infusions of 
infliximab every 8 weeks.
Infliximab is also effective in CD patients with refrac­
tory perianal and enterocutaneous fistulas, with the 
ACCENT II trial showing a 68% response rate (50% 
reduction in fistula drainage) and a 50% complete 
remission rate. Reinfusion, typically every 8 weeks, is 
necessary to continue therapeutic benefits in many 
patients.
The development of antibodies to infliximab (ATI) is 
associated with an increased risk of infusion reactions 
and a decreased response to treatment. Current prac­
tice does not include giving on-demand or episodic 
infusions rather than periodic (every 8 weeks) infu­
sions because patients are more likely to develop ATI. 
ATI are generally present when the quality of response 
or the response duration to infliximab infusion 
decreases. Decreasing the dosing intervals or increas­
ing the dosage to 10 mg/kg may restore the efficacy of 
the drug.
The SONIC (Study of Biologic and Immunomodulator-­
Naïve Patients with Crohn’s Disease) Trial compared 
infliximab plus azathioprine, infliximab alone and aza­
thioprine alone in immunomodulator and biologic 
naïve patients with moderate-to-severe Crohn’s disease. 
At one year, of 508 randomized patients, the infliximab 
plus azathioprine group exhibited a steroid-free remis­
sion rate of 46% compared with 35% (infliximab alone) 
and 24% (azathioprine alone). There was also increased 
complete mucosal healing at week 26 with the com­
bined approach relative to either infliximab or azathio­
prine alone (44% vs. 30% vs. 17%). The adverse events 
were equal between groups.
The annual risk of lymphoma (e.g., Hodgkin’s and 
non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma) with infliximab has been 
estimated to be anywhere from 5:10,000 to 20:10,000. 
The annual risk of lymphoma in the general popula­
tion is 2:10,000. Forty-eight cases of malignancy were 
identified by the FDA in children and adolescents with 
the use of TNF blockers. Etanercept and infliximab 
were the only TNF blockers included in the analysis. 
Of the 48 cases, about 50% were lymphomas. Other 
malignancies such as leukemia, melanoma, and solid 
organ tumors were reported; malignancies rarely seen 
in children (e.g., leiomyosarcoma, hepatic malignan­
cies, and renal cell carcinoma) were also observed. Of 
note, most of these cases (88%) were receiving other 
immunosuppressive medications (e.g., azathioprine 
and methotrexate).
Hepatosplenic T cell lymphoma is a nearly univer­
sally fatal lymphoma in patients with Crohn’s disease. At 
least 12 cases involved immunomodulators alone, and 
19 cases received combination therapy. There have 
been three reports in patients taking adalimumab alone 
 
CHAPTER 17
Inflammatory Bowel Disease
199
without an immunomodulator. Patients tend to be 
young and almost all male.
The FDA also reviewed 147 postmarketing reports of 
leukemia (including acute myeloid leukemia, chronic lym­
phocytic leukemia, and chronic myeloid leukemia) and 
69 cases of new-onset psoriasis (including pustular, palmo­
plantar) occurring in patients using TNF blockers. The FDA 
concluded that there is a possible association with both leu­
kemia and new-onset psoriasis with the use of TNF blockers.
Other morbidities of infliximab include acute infusion 
reactions and severe serum sickness. All of the anti-TNF 
drugs are associated with an increased risk of infec­
tions, particularly reactivation of latent tuberculosis and 
opportunistic fungal infections including disseminated 
histoplasmosis and coccidioidomycosis. Rarely, inflix­
imab and the other anti-TNF drugs have been associ­
ated with optic neuritis, seizures, new-onset or exacer­
bation of clinical symptoms, and radiographic evidence 
of central nervous system demyelinating disorders, 
including multiple sclerosis. They may exacerbate symp­
toms in patients with New York Heart Association func­
tional class III/IV heart failure.
Infliximab has also shown efficacy in UC. In two large 
randomized, placebo-controlled trials, 37–49% of patients 
responded to infliximab and 22% and 20% of patients 
were able to maintain remission after 30 and 54 weeks, 
respectively. Patients received infliximab at 0, 2, and 
6 weeks and then every 8 weeks until the end of the study.
Some patients losing response or not tolerating inf­
liximab can be switched to adalimumab or certolizumab 
pegol. The GAIN (Gauging Infliximab Efficacy in Inflix­
imab Non-Responders) trial evaluated patients who 
were previously treated with infliximab and became 
intolerant or who initially responded and lost response. 
Three-hundred and twenty-five patients were random­
ized to adalimumab or placebo. At 4 weeks, 21% of the 
adalimumab group and 7% of the placebo group were 
in remission. In clinical practice, this remission rate in 
the adalimumab group increases over time with a dose 
increase to 40 mg weekly instead of every other week.
Adalimumab is a recombinant human monoclonal 
IgG1 
antibody 
containing 
only 
human 
peptide 
sequences and is injected subcutaneously. Adalimumab 
binds TNF and neutralizes its function by blocking the 
interaction between TNF and its cell-surface recep­
tor. Therefore, it seems to have a similar mechanism of 
action to infliximab but with less immunogenicity. Adali­
mumab has been approved for treatment of moderate 
to severe CD. CHARM (Crohn’s Trial of the Fully Human 
Adalimumab for Remission Maintenance) is an adalim­
umab maintenance study in patients who responded 
to adalimumab induction therapy. About 50% of the 
patients in this trial were previously treated with infliximab. 
Remission rates ranged from 42–48% of infliximab 
naïve patients at 1 year compared with remission rates 
of 31–34% in the patients who had previously received 
infliximab. Certolizumab pegol is a PEGylated form of 
an anti-TNF antibody administered SC once monthly. SC 
certolizumab pegol was effective for induction of clini­
cal response in patients with active inflammatory CD. In 
the PRECISE II (The PEGylated Antibody Fragment Evalu­
ation in Crohn’s Disease) trial of maintenance therapy 
with certolizumab in patients who responded to certoli­
zumab induction, the results were similar to the CHARM 
trial. At week 26, the subgroup of patients who were 
infliximab naïve had a response of 69% as compared to 
44% in patients who had previously received infliximab.
At least one-third of patients do not respond to inf­
liximab, but no published controlled trial has examined 
infliximab nonresponders for a response to other anti-
TNF agents. If a patient does not have an initial response 
to any anti-TNF therapy, currently it must be considered 
futile to try another. Before the approval of natalizumab, 
the only option for this group of patients was surgery.
Natalizumab  Integrins are expressed on the sur­
face of leukocytes and serve as mediators of leukocyte 
adhesion to vascular endothelium. Alpha4 (α4) integrin 
along with its beta1 (β1) or beta7 (β7) subunit interact 
with endothelial ligands, termed adhesion molecules 
or vascular addressins. Interaction between α4β7 
and mucosal addressin cellular adhesion molecule 
(MAdCAM-1) is important in lymphocyte tracking to 
gut mucosa. Natalizumab is a recombinant humanized 
immunoglobulin G4 antibody against α4 integrin that 
is effective in the induction and maintenance of remis­
sion in CD patients. It was approved February 2008 for 
the treatment of patients with CD refractory or intoler­
ant to anti-TNF therapy. In the ENACT-2 (Evaluation of 
Natalizumab in Active Crohn’s Disease Therapy) study, 
354 patients who had a response to natalizumab in 
ENACT-1 were enrolled into maintenance therapy with 
an infusion of natalizumab or placebo every 4 weeks 
through week 56. Natalizumab patients were more 
likely to have a response (61% vs. 28% placebo) and 
remission 44% versus 26% placebo. However, 3 cases 
of progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML) 
associated with the JC polyoma virus in the clinical trials 
and 102 cases in the postmarketing setting have been 
reported to date. One case occurred in a patient with 
Crohn’s disease and 104 in patients with multiple 
sclerosis. The annual risk of PML associated with natali­
zumab is approximately 1:1000. Patients and caregivers 
must now adhere to the TOUCH Treatment Program, 
which details strict criteria including no concomitant 
6-MP, azathioprine or MTX, no glucocorticoids for lon­
ger than 6 months, the signing of consent forms and a 
monthly check by nurses for symptoms of PML.
SECTION III
Disorders of the Alimentary Tract
200
THERAPIES IN DEVELOPMENT  Other thera­
pies currently in development include monoclonal 
antibodies against IL-12 and IL-23. IL-12, derived from 
intestinal antigen presenting cells, initiates TH1 medi­
ated inflammation. IL-23 is a cytokine composed of a 
unique p19 subunit together with the p40 subunit 
of IL-12, which is also upregulated in CD mucosa and 
promotes TH17 cells and inhibits T regulatory cells. 
Therefore, both IL-12 and IL-23 biologic activity can 
be inhibited by neutralizing IL-12 p40 with specific 
antibodies. The discovery of IL-23R as an IBD suscep­
tibility gene strengthens the case for the use of IL-23 
directed immunotherapy in IBD. Clinical trials are 
under way. Other promising therapies included those 
directed at IL-6 and the class of selective adhesion 
molecule inhibitors (e.g., anti-α4β7 and anti-MadCAM1 
antibodies).
NUTRITIONAL 
THERAPIES  Dietary antigens 
may stimulate the mucosal immune response. Patients 
with active CD respond to bowel rest, along with TPN. 
Bowel rest and TPN are as effective as glucocorticoids 
at inducing remission of active CD but are not effective 
as maintenance therapy. Enteral nutrition in the form 
of elemental or peptide-based preparations is also as 
effective as glucocorticoids or TPN, but these diets are 
not palatable. Enteral diets may provide the small intes­
tine with nutrients vital to cell growth and do not have 
the complications of TPN. In contrast to CD, dietary 
intervention does not reduce inflammation in UC. Stan­
dard medical management of UC and CD is shown in 
Fig. 17-10.
SURGICAL THERAPY
Ulcerative Colitis  Nearly one-half of patients with 
extensive chronic UC undergo surgery within the first 10 
years of their illness. The indications for surgery are listed 
in Table 17-8. Morbidity is about 20% in elective, 30% 
for urgent, and 40% for emergency proctocolectomy. 
The risks are primarily hemorrhage, contamination and 
5-ASA rectal or oral
Glucocorticoid rectal
Glucocorticoid oral
Glucocorticoid IV
6-Mercaptopurine 
or azathioprine
IV
cyclosporine 
or infliximab
Sulfasalazine antibiotics
Prednisone
Glucocorticoid IV
Infliximab/adalimumab/
certolizumab pegol
IV 
cyclosporine 
or tacrolimus
natalizumab
Antibiotics
6-Mercaptopurine or
azathioprine/methotrexate
Infliximab/adalimumab/
certolizumab pegol
IV
cyclosporine or tacrolimus
natalizumab
Total 
parenteral 
nutrition
Budesonide (Ileal and R colon)
5-ASA rectal or oral
Glucocorticoid rectal
Glucocorticoid oral
Glucocorticoid IV
6-Mercaptopurine 
or azathioprine
IV
cyclosporine 
or infliximab
6-Mercaptopurine or
azathioprine/methotrexate
Distal UC
Extensive UC
Inflammatory CD
Fistulizing CD
FIGURE 17-10 
Medical management of IBD. 5-ASA, 5-aminosalicylic acid; CD, Crohn’s disease; UC, ulcerative colitis.
 
CHAPTER 17
Inflammatory Bowel Disease
201
sepsis, and neural injury. The operation of choice is an 
IPAA.
Because UC is a mucosal disease, the rectal mucosa 
can be dissected and removed down to the dentate line 
of the anus or about 2 cm proximal to this landmark. 
The ileum is fashioned into a pouch that serves as a 
neorectum. This ileal pouch is then sutured circumferen­
tially to the anus in an end-to-end fashion. If performed 
carefully, this operation preserves the anal sphincter 
and maintains continence. The overall operative mor­
bidity is 10%, with the major complication being bowel 
obstruction. Pouch failure necessitating conversion to 
permanent ileostomy occurs in 5–10% of patients. Some 
inflamed rectal mucosa is usually left behind, and thus 
endoscopic surveillance is necessary. Primary dysplasia 
of the ileal mucosa of the pouch has occurred rarely.
Patients with IPAA usually have about 6–10 bowel 
movements a day. On validated quality-of-life indices, 
they report better performance in sports and sexual 
activities than ileostomy patients. The most frequent 
complication of IPAA is pouchitis in about 30–50% of 
patients with UC. This syndrome consists of increased 
stool frequency, watery stools, cramping, urgency, noc­
turnal leakage of stool, arthralgias, malaise, and fever. 
Pouch biopsies may distinguish true pouchitis from 
underlying CD. Although pouchitis usually responds to 
antibiotics, 3–5% of patients remain refractory and may 
require steroids, immunomodulators, anti-TNF therapy 
or even pouch removal. A highly concentrated probiotic 
preparation with four strains of Lactobacillus, three 
strains of Bifidobacterium, and one strain of Streptococcus 
salivarius can prevent the recurrence of pouchitis when 
taken daily.
Crohn’s Disease  Most patients with CD require 
at least one operation in their lifetime. The need for 
surgery is related to duration of disease and the site of 
involvement. Patients with small-bowel disease have 
an 80% chance of requiring surgery. Those with coli­
tis alone have a 50% chance. Surgery is an option only 
when medical treatment has failed or complications 
dictate its necessity. The indications for surgery are 
shown in Table 17-8.
Small intestinal disease  Because CD is chronic 
and recurrent, with no clear surgical cure, as little intes­
tine as possible is resected. Current surgical alternatives 
for treatment of obstructing CD include resection of the 
diseased segment and strictureplasty. Surgical resec­
tion of the diseased segment is the most frequently 
performed operation, and in most cases primary anas­
tomosis can be done to restore continuity. If much of 
the small bowel has already been resected and the 
strictures are short, with intervening areas of normal 
mucosa, strictureplasties should be done to avoid a 
functionally insufficient length of bowel. The strictured 
area of intestine is incised longitudinally and the inci­
sion sutured transversely, thus widening the narrowed 
area. Complications of strictureplasty include prolonged 
ileus, hemorrhage, fistula, abscess, leak, and restricture.
There is evidence that mesalamine, nitro-imidazole 
antibiotics, 6-MP/azathioprine and infliximab are all 
superior to placebo for the prevention of postoperative 
recurrence of Crohn’s disease. Mesalamine is the least 
effective and the side effects of the nitro-imidazole anti­
biotics limit their use. Risk factors for early recurrence of 
disease include cigarette smoking, penetrating disease 
(internal fistulas, abscesses or other evidence of pen­
etration through the wall of the bowel), early recurrence 
since a previous surgery, multiple surgeries or a young 
age at the time of the first surgery. Aggressive post­
operative treatment with 6-MP/azathioprine or inflix­
imab should be considered for this group of patients. It 
is also recommended to evaluate for endoscopic recur­
rence of Crohn’s disease via a colonoscopy, if possible, 
6 months after surgery.
Colorectal 
disease  A greater percentage of 
patients with Crohn’s colitis require surgery for intracta­
bility, fulminant disease, and anorectal disease. Several 
alternatives are available, ranging from the use of a tem­
porary loop ileostomy to resection of segments of dis­
eased colon or even the entire colon and rectum. For 
patients with segmental involvement, segmental colon 
resection with primary anastomosis can be performed. 
In 20–25% of patients with extensive colitis, the rectum 
is spared sufficiently to consider rectal preservation. 
Most surgeons believe that an IPAA is contraindicated 
in CD due to the high incidence of pouch failure. 
TABLE 17-8 
INDICATIONS FOR SURGERY
ULCERATIVE COLITIS
CROHN’S DISEASE
Intractable disease
Fulminant disease
Toxic megacolon
Colonic perforation
Massive colonic 
hemorrhage
Extracolonic disease
Colonic obstruction
Colon cancer prophylaxis
Colon dysplasia or cancer
Small Intestine
Stricture and obstruction 
unresponsive to medical 
therapy
Massive hemorrhage
Refractory fistula
Abscess
Colon and rectum
Intractable disease
Fulminant disease
Perianal disease 
unresponsive to medical 
therapy
Refractory fistula
Colonic obstruction
Cancer prophylaxis
Colon dysplasia or cancer
SECTION III
Disorders of the Alimentary Tract
202
A diverting colostomy may help heal severe perianal 
disease or rectovaginal fistulas, but disease almost 
always recurs with reanastomosis. These patients often 
require a total proctocolectomy and ileostomy.
INFLAMMATORY BOWEL DISEASE 
AND PREGNANCY
Patients with quiescent UC and CD have normal fer­
tility rates; the fallopian tubes can be scarred by the 
inflammatory process of CD, especially on the right 
side because of the proximity of the terminal ileum. In 
addition, perirectal, perineal, and rectovaginal abscesses 
and fistulae can result in dyspareunia. Infertility in 
men can be caused by sulfasalazine but reverses when 
treatment is stopped. In women who have had pouch 
surgery, most studies show that the fertility rate is 
reduced to about one-third of normal. This is due to 
scarring or occlusion of the fallopian tubes secondary to 
pelvic inflammation.
In mild or quiescent UC and CD, fetal outcome is 
nearly normal. Spontaneous abortions, stillbirths, and 
developmental defects are increased with increased dis­
ease activity, not medications. The courses of CD and 
UC during pregnancy mostly correlate with disease 
activity at the time of conception. Patients should be 
in remission for 6 months before conceiving. Most CD 
patients can deliver vaginally, but cesarean section may 
be the preferred route of delivery for patients with ano­
rectal and perirectal abscesses and fistulas to reduce the 
likelihood of fistulas developing or extending into the 
episiotomy scar.
Sulfasalazine, mesalamine, and balsalazide are safe for 
use in pregnancy and nursing, but additional folate sup­
plementation must be given with sulfasalazine. Topical 
5-ASA agents are also safe during pregnancy and nurs­
ing. Glucocorticoids are generally safe for use during 
pregnancy and are indicated for patients with moder­
ate to severe disease activity. The amount of glucocor­
ticoids received by the nursing infant is minimal. The 
safest antibiotics to use for CD in pregnancy for short 
periods of time (weeks, not months) are ampicillin and 
cephalosporin. Metronidazole can be used in the second 
or third trimester. Ciprofloxacin causes cartilage lesions 
in immature animals and should be avoided because of 
the absence of data on its effects on growth and devel­
opment in humans.
6-MP and azathioprine pose minimal or no risk dur­
ing pregnancy, but experience is limited. If the patient 
cannot be weaned from the drug or has an exacerbation 
that requires 6-MP/azathioprine during pregnancy, she 
should continue the drug with informed consent. Breast 
milk contained negligible levels of 6-MP/azathioprine 
when measured in a limited number of patients.
Little data exist on CSA in pregnancy. In a small 
number of patients with severe IBD treated with IV 
CSA during pregnancy, 80% of pregnancies were suc­
cessfully completed without development of renal 
toxicity, congenital malformations, or developmen­
tal defects. However, because of the lack of data, CSA 
should probably be avoided unless the patient would 
otherwise require surgery. Methotrexate is contrain­
dicated in pregnancy and nursing. No increased risk 
of stillbirths, miscarriages, or spontaneous abortions 
has been seen with infliximab, adalimumab or certoli­
zumab, all class B drugs. The anti-TNF drugs are rela­
tively safe in nursing as well because they do not pass 
into breast milk. Natalizumab is a class C drug, and 
there is limited data on pregnancy.
Surgery in UC should be performed only for emer­
gency indications, including severe hemorrhage, per­
foration, and megacolon refractory to medical therapy. 
Total colectomy and ileostomy carry a 50–60% risk of 
postoperative spontaneous abortion. Fetal mortality is 
also high in CD requiring surgery. Patients with IPAAs 
have increased nighttime stool frequency during preg­
nancy that resolves postpartum. Transient small bowel 
obstruction or ileus has been noted in up to 8% of 
patients with ileostomies.
CANCER IN INFLAMMATORY 
BOWEL DISEASE
ULCERATIVE COLITIS
Patients with long-standing UC are at increased risk for 
developing colonic epithelial dysplasia and carcinoma 
(Fig. 17-11).
FIGURE 17-11 
Medium power view of low-grade dysplasia in a patient 
with chronic ulcerative colitis. Low-grade dysplastic crypts 
are interspersed among regenerating crypts. (Courtesy of 
Dr. R Odze, Division of Gastrointestinal Pathology, Depart­
ment of Pathology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, 
Massachusetts; with permission.)
 
CHAPTER 17
Inflammatory Bowel Disease
203
The risk of neoplasia in chronic UC increases with 
duration and extent of disease. The risk of cancer, as 
measured in tertiary referral centers, rises 0.5–1% per 
year after 8–10 years of disease in patients with pancolitis. 
The only prospective surveillance study reported a 
lower rate of cancer; 2.5% at 20 years of disease, 7.6% at 
30 years of disease, and 10.8% at 40 years. The rates of 
colon cancer are higher than in the general population, 
and colonoscopic surveillance is the standard of care.
Annual or biennial colonoscopy with multiple biop­
sies is recommended for patients with >8–10 years of 
pancolitis or 12–15 years of left-sided colitis and has 
been widely employed to screen and survey for subse­
quent dysplasia and carcinoma. Risk factors for cancer 
in UC include long-duration disease, extensive disease, 
family history of colon cancer, PSC, a colon stricture, 
and the presence of postinflammatory pseudopolyps on 
colonoscopy.
CROHN’S DISEASE
Risk factors for developing cancer in Crohn’s colitis 
are long-duration and extensive disease, bypassed colon 
segments, colon strictures, PSC, and family history 
of colon cancer. The cancer risks in CD and UC are 
probably equivalent for similar extent and duration of 
disease. In patients with extensive Crohn’s colitis, the 
cumulative risk of detecting an initial finding of any 
definite dysplasia or cancer after a negative screening 
colonoscopy is 25% by the tenth surveillance examina­
tion. The cumulative risk of detecting an initial find­
ing of flat high-grade dysplasia (HGD) or cancer after 
a negative screening colonoscopy is 7% by the ninth 
surveillance examination. Thus, the same endoscopic 
surveillance strategy used for UC is recommended for 
patients with chronic Crohn’s colitis. A pediatric colo­
noscope can be used to pass narrow strictures in CD 
patients, but surgery should be considered in symptom­
atic patients with impassable strictures.
MANAGEMENT OF DYSPLASIA 
AND CANCER
Dysplasia can be flat or polypoid. If flat HGD is 
encountered on colonoscopic surveillance, the usual 
treatment for UC is colectomy and for CD is either 
colectomy or segmental resection. If flat low-grade 
dysplasia (LGD) is found (Fig. 17-11), most investiga­
tors recommend immediate colectomy. Adenomas may 
occur coincidently in UC and CD patients with chronic 
colitis and can be removed endoscopically provided that 
biopsies of the surrounding mucosa are free of dysplasia. 
New techniques such as high definition and magnifica­
tion colonoscopes and dye sprays have increased the rate 
of dysplasia detection. In the future, endoscopists may 
be able to do targeted rather than segmental biopsies in 
patients with chronic Crohn’s or ulcerative colitis.
IBD patients are also at greater risk for other malig­
nancies. Patients with CD may have an increased risk 
of non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, leukemia, and myelo­
dysplastic syndromes. Severe chronic, complicated peri­
anal disease in CD patients may be associated with an 
increased risk of cancer in the lower rectum and anal 
canal (squamous cell cancers). Although the abso­
lute risk of small-bowel adenocarcinoma in CD is low 
(2.2% at 25 years in one study), patients with long-
standing, extensive, small-bowel disease should consider 
screening.
 Chung Owyang 
204
 Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is a functional bowel 
disorder characterized by abdominal pain or discom-
fort and altered bowel habits in the absence of detect-
able structural abnormalities. No clear diagnostic 
markers exist for IBS, thus the diagnosis of the dis-
order is based on clinical presentation. In 2006, the 
Rome II criteria for the diagnosis of IBS were revised 
 ( Table 18-1 ) . Throughout the world, about 10–20% 
of adults and adolescents have symptoms consistent with 
IBS, and most studies show a female predominance. 
IBS symptoms tend to come and go over time and 
often overlap with other functional disorders such as 
fi bromyalgia, headache, backache, and genitourinary 
symptoms. Severity of symptoms varies and can signifi -
cantly impair quality of life, resulting in high health care 
costs. Advances in basic, mechanistic, and clinical inves-
tigations have improved our understanding of this dis-
order and its physiologic and psychosocial determinants. 
Altered gastrointestinal (GI) motility, visceral hyper-
algesia, disturbance of brain-gut interaction, abnormal 
central processing, autonomic and hormonal events, 
genetic and environmental factors, and psychosocial 
disturbances are variably involved, depending on the 
individual. This progress may result in improved meth-
ods of treatment. 
 CLINICAL FEATURES 
 IBS is a disorder that affects all ages, although most 
patients have their fi rst symptoms before age 45. Older 
individuals have a lower reporting frequency. Women 
are diagnosed with IBS two to three times as often as men 
and make up 80% of the population with severe IBS. As 
indicated in  Table 18-1 , pain or abdominal discomfort is 
a key symptom for the diagnosis of IBS. These symptoms 
should be improved with defecation and/or have their 
onset associated with a change in frequency or form of 
stool. Painless diarrhea or constipation does not fulfi ll the 
diagnostic criteria to be classifi ed as IBS. Supportive symp-
toms that are not part of the diagnostic criteria include 
defecation straining, urgency or a feeling of incomplete 
bowel movement, passing mucus, and bloating. 
 Abdominal pain 
 According to the current IBS diagnostic criteria, 
abdominal pain or discomfort is a prerequisite clinical 
feature of IBS. Abdominal pain in IBS is highly vari-
able in intensity and location. It is frequently episodic 
and crampy, but it may be superimposed on a back-
ground of constant ache. Pain may be mild enough 
to be ignored or it may interfere with daily activities. 
Despite this, malnutrition due to inadequate caloric 
intake is exceedingly rare with IBS. Sleep deprivation is 
also unusual because abdominal pain is almost uniformly 
present only during waking hours. However, patients 
with severe IBS frequently wake repeatedly during the 
night; thus, nocturnal pain is a poor discriminating fac-
tor between organic and functional bowel disease. Pain 
is often exacerbated by eating or emotional stress and 
 IRRITABLE BOWEL SYNDROME 
 CHAPTER 18 
TABLE 18-1 
 DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA FOR IRRITABLE 
BOWEL SYNDROME a 
 Recurrent abdominal pain or discomfort b at least 3 days 
per month in the last 3 months associated with  two or 
more of the following: 
 1. Improvement with defecation 
 2. Onset associated with a change in frequency of stool 
 3.  Onset associated with a change in form (appearance) 
of stool 
 a Criteria fulfi lled for the last 3 months with symptom onset at least 
6 months prior to diagnosis.
 b Discomfort means an uncomfortable sensation not described as 
pain. In pathophysiology research and clinical trials, a pain/discomfort 
frequency of at least 2 days a week during screening evaluation is 
required for subject eligibility.
 Source: Adapted from Longstreth et al.
 
CHAPTER 18
Irritable Bowel Syndrome
205
improved by passage of flatus or stools. In addition, 
female patients with IBS commonly report worsen-
ing symptoms during the premenstrual and menstrual 
phases.
Altered bowel habits
Alteration in bowel habits is the most consistent clini-
cal feature in IBS. The most common pattern is con-
stipation alternating with diarrhea, usually with one of 
these symptoms predominating. At first, constipation 
may be episodic, but eventually it becomes continuous 
and increasingly intractable to treatment with laxatives. 
Stools are usually hard with narrowed caliber, possibly 
reflecting excessive dehydration caused by prolonged 
colonic retention and spasm. Most patients also expe-
rience a sense of incomplete evacuation, thus lead-
ing to repeated attempts at defecation in a short time 
span. Patients whose predominant symptom is constipa-
tion may have weeks or months of constipation inter-
rupted with brief periods of diarrhea. In other patients, 
diarrhea may be the predominant symptom. Diarrhea 
resulting from IBS usually consists of small volumes 
of loose stools. Most patients have stool volumes of 
<200 mL. Nocturnal diarrhea does not occur in IBS. 
Diarrhea may be aggravated by emotional stress or eat-
ing. Stool may be accompanied by passage of large 
amounts of mucus. Bleeding is not a feature of IBS 
unless hemorrhoids are present, and malabsorption or 
weight loss does not occur.
Bowel pattern subtypes are highly unstable. In a 
patient population with ∼33% prevalence rates of IBS-
diarrhea predominant (IBS-D), IBS-constipation pre-
dominant (IBS-C), and IBS-mixed (IBS-M) forms, 75% 
of patients change subtypes and 29% switch between 
IBS-C and IBS-D over 1 year. The heterogeneity and 
variable natural history of bowel habits in IBS increase 
the difficulty of conducting pathophysiology studies and 
clinical trials.
Gas and flatulence
Patients with IBS frequently complain of abdominal 
distention and increased belching or flatulence, all of 
which they attribute to increased gas. Although some 
patients with these symptoms actually may have a 
larger amount of gas, quantitative measurements reveal 
that most patients who complain of increased gas gen-
erate no more than a normal amount of intestinal gas. 
Most IBS patients have impaired transit and tolerance of 
intestinal gas loads. In addition, patients with IBS tend 
to reflux gas from the distal to the more proximal intes-
tine, which may explain the belching.
Some patients with bloating may also experience vis-
ible distention with increase in abdominal girth. Both 
symptoms are more common among female patients 
and in those with higher overall Somatic Symptom 
Checklist scores. IBS patients who experienced bloat-
ing alone have been shown to have lower thresholds for 
pain and desire to defecate compared to those with con-
comitant distention irrespective of bowel habit. When 
patients were grouped according to sensory threshold, 
hyposensitive individuals had distention significantly 
more than those with hypersensitivity and this was 
observed more in the constipation subgroup. This sug-
gests that the pathogenesis of bloating and distention 
may not be the same.
Upper gastrointestinal symptoms
Between 25 and 50% of patients with IBS complain of 
dyspepsia, heartburn, nausea, and vomiting. This sug-
gests that other areas of the gut apart from the colon 
may be involved. Prolonged ambulant recordings of 
small-bowel motility in patients with IBS show a high 
incidence of abnormalities in the small bowel during 
the diurnal (waking) period; nocturnal motor patterns 
are not different from those of healthy controls. The 
overlap between dyspepsia and IBS is great. The prev-
alence of IBS is higher among patients with dyspepsia 
(31.7%) than among those who reported no symptoms 
of dyspepsia (7.9%). Conversely, among patients with 
IBS, 55.6% reported symptoms of dyspepsia. In addi-
tion, the functional abdominal symptoms can change 
over time. Those with predominant dyspepsia or IBS 
can flux between the two. Although the prevalence of 
functional gastrointestinal disorders is stable over time, 
the turnover in symptom status is high. Many episodes 
of symptom disappearance are due to subjects changing 
symptoms rather than total symptom resolution. Thus it 
is conceivable that functional dyspepsia and IBS are two 
manifestations of a single, more extensive digestive sys-
tem disorder. Furthermore, IBS symptoms are prevalent 
in noncardiac chest pain patients, suggesting overlap 
with other functional gut disorders.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
The pathogenesis of IBS is poorly understood, although 
roles of abnormal gut motor and sensory activity, 
central neural dysfunction, psychological disturbances, 
mucosal inflammation, stress, and luminal factors have 
been proposed.
Gastrointestinal motor abnormalities
Studies of colonic myoelectrical and motor activity 
under unstimulated conditions have not shown con-
sistent abnormalities in IBS. In contrast, colonic motor 
abnormalities are more prominent under stimulated 
conditions in IBS. IBS patients may exhibit increased 
rectosigmoid motor activity for up to 3 h after eating. 
SECTION III
Disorders of the Alimentary Tract
206
Similarly, inflation of rectal balloons both in IBS-D and 
IBS-C patients leads to marked and prolonged distention- 
evoked contractile activity. Recordings from the trans-
verse, descending, and sigmoid colon showed that the 
motility index and peak amplitude of high-amplitude pro­
pagating contractions (HAPCs) in diarrhea-prone IBS 
patients were greatly increased compared to those in 
healthy subjects and were associated with rapid colonic 
transit and accompanied by abdominal pain.
Visceral hypersensitivity
As with studies of motor activity, IBS patients 
frequently exhibit exaggerated sensory responses to vis-
ceral stimulation. Postprandial pain has been tempo-
rally related to entry of the food bolus into the cecum 
in 74% of patients. Rectal balloon inflation produces 
nonpainful and painful sensations at lower volumes in 
IBS patients than in healthy controls without altering 
rectal tension, suggestive of visceral afferent dysfunc-
tion in IBS. Similar studies show gastric and esophageal 
hypersensitivity in patients with nonulcer dyspepsia and 
noncardiac chest pain, raising the possibility that these 
conditions have a similar pathophysiologic basis. Lipids 
lower the thresholds for the first sensation of gas, dis-
comfort, and pain in IBS patients. Hence, postprandial 
symptoms in IBS patients may be explained in part by a 
nutrient-dependent exaggerated sensory component of 
the gastrocolonic response. In contrast to enhanced gut 
sensitivity, IBS patients do not exhibit heightened sen-
sitivity elsewhere in the body. Thus, the afferent path-
way disturbances in IBS appear to be selective for 
visceral innervation with sparing of somatic pathways. 
The mechanisms responsible for visceral hypersensitivity 
are still under investigation. It has been proposed that 
these exaggerated responses may be due to (1) increased 
end-organ sensitivity with recruitment of “silent” noci-
ceptors; (2) spinal hyperexcitability with activation of 
nitric oxide and possibly other neurotransmitters; (3) 
endogenous (cortical and brainstem) modulation of cau-
dad nociceptive transmission; and (4) over time, the 
possible development of long-term hyperalgesia due 
to development of neuroplasticity, resulting in perma-
nent or semipermanent changes in neural responses to 
chronic or recurrent visceral stimulation (Table 18-2).
Central neural dysregulation
The role of central nervous system (CNS) factors in the 
pathogenesis of IBS is strongly suggested by the clini-
cal association of emotional disorders and stress with 
symptom exacerbation and the therapeutic response to 
therapies that act on cerebral cortical sites. Functional 
brain imaging studies such as MRI have shown that in 
response to distal colonic stimulation, the mid-cingulate 
cortex—a brain region concerned with attention pro-
cesses and response selection—shows greater activation 
in IBS patients. Modulation of this region is associated 
with changes in the subjective unpleasantness of pain. 
In addition, IBS patients also show preferential activa-
tion of the prefrontal lobe, which contains a vigilance 
network within the brain that increases alertness. These 
may represent a form of cerebral dysfunction leading to 
the increased perception of visceral pain.
Abnormal psychological features
Abnormal psychiatric features are recorded in up to 80% 
of IBS patients, especially in referral centers; however, 
no single psychiatric diagnosis predominates. Most of 
these patients demonstrated exaggerated symptoms in 
response to visceral distention, and this abnormality per-
sists even after exclusion of psychological factors.
Psychological factors influence pain thresholds in IBS 
patients, as stress alters sensory thresholds. An association 
between prior sexual or physical abuse and develop-
ment of IBS has been reported. Abuse is associated with 
greater pain reporting, psychological distress, and poor 
health outcome. Brain functional MRI studies show 
greater activation of the posterior and middle dorsal cin-
gulate cortex, which is implicated in affect processing in 
IBS patients with a past history of sexual abuse.
Thus, patients with IBS frequently demonstrate 
increased motor reactivity of the colon and small bowel 
to a variety of stimuli and altered visceral sensation asso-
ciated with lowered sensation thresholds. These may 
result from CNS—enteric nervous system dysregulation 
(Fig. 18-1).
Post-infectious IBS
IBS may be induced by GI infection. In an investigation 
of 544 patients with confirmed bacterial gastroenteritis, 
one-quarter developed IBS subsequently. Conversely, 
about a third of IBS patients experienced an acute 
“gastroenteritis-like” illness at the onset of their chronic 
IBS symptomatology. This group of “postinfective” IBS 
occurs more commonly in females and affects younger 
rather than older patients. Risk factors for develop-
ing post-infectious IBS include, in order of impor-
tance, prolonged duration of initial illness, toxicity of 
infecting bacterial strain, smoking, mucosal markers 
TABLE 18-2 
PROPOSED MECHANISMS FOR VISCERAL 
HYPERSENSITIVITY
End-organ sensitivity
Long-term hyperalgesia
“Silent” nociceptors
Tonic cortical regulation
CNS modulation
Neuroplasticity
Cortex
Brainstem
Abbreviation: CNS, central nervous system.
 
CHAPTER 18
Irritable Bowel Syndrome
207
of inflammation, female gender, depression, hypo-
chondriasis, and adverse-life events in the preceding 
3 months. Age older than 60 years might protect against 
post-infectious IBS, whereas treatment with antibiotics 
has been associated with increased risk. The microbes 
involved in the initial infection are Campylobacter, Sal-
monella, and Shigella. Those patients with Campylo-
bacter infection who are toxin-positive are more likely 
to develop postinfective IBS. Increased rectal mucosal 
enteroendocrine cells, T lymphocytes, and increased gut 
permeability are acute changes following Campylobacter 
enteritis that could persist for more than a year and may 
contribute to postinfective IBS.
Immune activation and mucosal inflammation
Some patients with IBS display persistent signs of low-
grade mucosal inflammation with activated lymphocytes, 
mast cells, and enhanced expression of proinflamma-
tory cytokines. These abnormalities may contribute to 
abnormal epithelial secretion and visceral hypersensitiv-
ity. Interestingly, clinical studies have shown increased 
intestinal permeability in patients with IBS-D. Psy-
chological stress and anxiety can increase the release of 
proinflammatory cytokine and this in turn may alter 
intestinal permeability. This provides a functional link 
between psychological stress, immune activation, and 
symptom generation in patients with IBS.
Altered gut flora
A high prevalence of small intestinal bacterial over-
growth in IBS patients has been noted based on positive 
lactulose hydrogen breath test. This finding, however, 
has been challenged by a number of other studies that 
found no increased incidence of bacterial overgrowth 
based on jejunal aspirate culture. Abnormal H2 breath 
test can occur because of small bowel rapid transit and 
may lead to erroneous interpretation. Hence, the role of 
testing for small intestinal bacterial overgrowth in IBS 
patients remains unclear.
A number of studies found significant differences 
between the molecular profile of the fecal microbiota 
of IBS patients compared with that of healthy subjects. 
Several bacterial genera with Lactobacillus sequence 
appear to be absent from IBS, and Collinsella sequences 
were greatly reduced in this group of patients. Cur-
rently it is unclear whether such changes are causal, 
consequential, or merely the result of constipation and 
diarrhea. In addition, the stability of the changes in the 
microbiota needs to be determined.
Abnormal serotonin pathways
The serotonin (5HT)-containing enterochromaffin cells 
in the colon are increased in a subset of IBS-D patients 
compared to healthy individuals or patients with ulcer-
ative colitis. Furthermore, postprandial plasma 5HT 
levels were significantly higher in this group of patients 
compared to healthy controls. Since serotonin plays 
an important role in the regulation of GI motility and 
visceral perception, the increased release of serotonin 
may contribute to the postprandial symptoms of these 
patients and provides a rationale for the use of serotonin 
antagonists in the treatment of this disorder.
APPROACH TO THE
PATIENT	
Irritable Bowel Syndrome
Because IBS is a disorder for which no pathognomonic 
abnormalities have been identified, its diagnosis relies 
on recognition of positive clinical features and elimi-
nation of other organic diseases. A careful history and 
physical examination are frequently helpful in estab-
lishing the diagnosis. Clinical features suggestive of IBS 
include the following: recurrence of lower abdominal 
pain with altered bowel habits over a period of time 
without progressive deterioration, onset of symptoms 
during periods of stress or emotional upset, absence of 
other systemic symptoms such as fever and weight loss, 
and small-volume stool without any evidence of blood.
On the other hand, the appearance of the disorder 
for the first time in old age, progressive course from 
time of onset, persistent diarrhea after a 48-h fast, and 
presence of nocturnal diarrhea or steatorrheal stools 
argue against the diagnosis of IBS.
Because the major symptoms of IBS—abdomi-
nal pain, abdominal bloating, and alteration in bowel  
Severity
Severe
Moderate
Mild
Environment
Psychological
Cognitive
Gut 
Luminal
Mucosal
Brain-Gut Axis
CNS
ENS
Antidepressants,
Psychotherapy, behavioral
  therapy, hypnotherapy,
Somatization-disorder
  management
Antispasmodics,
Antidiarrheals,
Dietary modification,
Fiber supplements,
Newer gut serotonin
  modulators
Heightened
  sensorimotor
  activity
FIGURE 18-1 
Therapeutic targets for irritable bowel syndrome. Patients 
with mild to moderate symptoms usually have intermittent 
symptoms that correlate with altered gut physiology. Treat-
ments include gut-acting pharmacologic agents such as 
antispasmodics, antidiarrheals, fiber supplements, and gut 
serotonin modulators. Patients who have severe symptoms 
usually have constant pain and psychosocial difficulties. 
This group of patients is best managed with antidepressants 
and other psychosocial treatments. CNS, central nervous 
system; ENS, enteric nervous system.
SECTION III
Disorders of the Alimentary Tract
208
habits—are common complaints of many GI organic 
disorders, the list of differential diagnoses is a long one. 
The quality, location, and timing of pain may be help-
ful to suggest specific disorders. Pain due to IBS that 
occurs in the epigastric or periumbilical area must be 
differentiated from biliary tract disease, peptic ulcer dis-
orders, intestinal ischemia, and carcinoma of the stom-
ach and pancreas. If pain occurs mainly in the lower 
abdomen, the possibility of diverticular disease of the 
colon, inflammatory bowel disease (including ulcerative 
colitis and Crohn’s disease), and carcinoma of the colon 
must be considered. Postprandial pain accompanied by 
bloating, nausea, and vomiting suggests gastroparesis 
or partial intestinal obstruction. Intestinal infestation 
with Giardia lamblia or other parasites may cause simi-
lar symptoms. When diarrhea is the major complaint, 
the possibility of lactase deficiency, laxative abuse, 
malabsorption, celiac sprue, hyperthyroidism, inflam-
matory bowel disease, and infectious diarrhea must be 
ruled out. On the other hand, constipation may be a 
side effect of many different drugs, such as anticholiner-
gic, antihypertensive, and antidepressant medications.  
Endocrinopathies such as hypothyroidism and hypo-
parathyroidism must also be considered in the differ-
ential diagnosis of constipation, particularly if other  
systemic signs or symptoms of these endocrinopathies 
are present. In addition, acute intermittent porphyria 
and lead poisoning may present in a fashion similar to 
IBS, with painful constipation as the major complaint. 
These possibilities are suspected on the basis of their 
clinical presentations and are confirmed by appropriate 
serum and urine tests.
Few tests are required for patients who have typical  
IBS symptoms and no alarm features. Unnecessary 
investigations may be costly and even harmful. The 
American Gastroenterological Association has delin-
eated factors to be considered when determining the 
aggressiveness of the diagnostic evaluation. These  
include the duration of symptoms, the change in symp-
toms over time, the age and sex of the patient, the 
referral status of the patient, prior diagnostic studies, a  
family history of colorectal malignancy, and the degree 
of psychosocial dysfunction. Thus, a younger individual  
with mild symptoms requires a minimal diagnostic 
evaluation, while an older person or an individual with  
rapidly progressive symptoms should undergo a more 
thorough exclusion of organic disease. Most patients 
should have a complete blood count and sigmoido-
scopic examination; in addition, stool specimens should  
be examined for ova and parasites in those who have 
diarrhea. In patients with persistent diarrhea not 
responding to simple anti-diarrhea agents, a sigmoid 
colon biopsy should be performed to rule out micro-
scopic colitis. In those aged >40 years, an air-contrast 
barium enema or colonoscopy should also be per-
formed. If the main symptoms are diarrhea and 
increased gas, the possibility of lactase deficiency 
should be ruled out with a hydrogen breath test or 
with evaluation after a 3-week lactose-free diet. Some 
patients with IBS-D may have undiagnosed celiac 
sprue. Because the symptoms of celiac sprue respond 
to a gluten-free diet, testing for celiac sprue in IBS may 
prevent years of morbidity and attendant expense. 
Decision-analysis studies show that serology testing for 
celiac sprue in patients with IBS-D has an acceptable 
cost when the prevalence of celiac sprue is >1% and is 
the dominant strategy when the prevalence is >8%. In 
patients with concurrent symptoms of dyspepsia, upper 
GI radiographs or esophagogastroduodenoscopy may 
be advisable. In patients with postprandial right upper 
quadrant pain, an ultrasonogram of the gallbladder 
should be obtained. Laboratory features that argue 
against IBS include evidence of anemia, elevated sedi-
mentation rate, presence of leukocytes or blood in stool, 
and stool volume >200–300 mL/d. These findings would 
necessitate other diagnostic considerations.
TREATMENT	
Irritable bowel syndrome
PATIENT 
COUNSELING 
AND 
DIETARY 
ALTERATIONS  Reassurance and careful explana-
tion of the functional nature of the disorder and of how  
to avoid obvious food precipitants are important  
first steps in patient counseling and dietary change. 
Occasionally, a meticulous dietary history may reveal 
substances (such as coffee, disaccharides, legumes, and 
cabbage) that aggravate symptoms. Excessive fructose 
and artificial sweeteners, such as sorbitol or mannitol, 
may cause diarrhea, bloating, cramping or flatulence. 
As a therapeutic trial, patients should be encouraged 
to eliminate any foodstuffs that appear to produce  
symptoms. However patients should avoid nutrition-
ally depleted diets. Patients with IBS-D anecdotally  
report symptom improvement after initiating a low- 
carbohydrate diet. A prospective study has shown 
marked symptomatic improvement in stool frequency, 
consistency, pain scores, and quality of life following  
4 weeks of a very-low-carbohydrate (CHO) diet (20 g 
CHO/day). This diet may be tried in IBS patients who 
report intolerance to certain carbohydrates.
Stool-Bulking Agents  High-fiber diets and bulk-
ing agents, such as bran or hydrophilic colloid, are fre-
quently used in treating IBS. The water-holding action 
of fibers may contribute to increased stool bulk because 
of the ability of fiber to increase fecal output of bacteria. 
 
CHAPTER 18
Irritable Bowel Syndrome
209
Fiber also speeds up colonic transit in most persons. In 
diarrhea-prone patients, whole-colonic transit is faster 
than average; however, dietary fiber can delay transit. 
Furthermore, because of their hydrophilic properties, 
stool-bulking agents bind water and thus prevent both  
excessive hydration and dehydration of stool. The  
latter observation may explain the clinical experience that 
a high-fiber diet relieves diarrhea in some IBS patients. 
Fiber supplementation with psyllium has been shown 
to reduce perception of rectal distention, indicating  
that fiber may have a positive effect on visceral afferent 
function.
The beneficial effects of dietary fiber on colonic phys-
iology suggest that dietary fiber should be an effec-
tive treatment for IBS patients, but controlled trials of 
dietary fiber have produced variable results. This is not 
surprising since IBS is a heterogeneous disorder, with 
some patients being constipated and other having pre-
dominant diarrhea. Most investigations report increases  
in stool weight, decreases in colonic transit times, and 
improvement in constipation. Others have noted benefits 
in patients with alternating diarrhea and constipation,  
pain, and bloating. However, most studies observe no 
responses in patients with diarrhea- or pain-predominant 
IBS. It is possible that different fiber preparations may 
have dissimilar effects on selected symptoms in IBS. A 
cross-over comparison of different fiber preparations 
found that psyllium produced greater improvements 
in stool pattern and abdominal pain than bran. Fur-
thermore, psyllium preparations tend to produce less 
bloating and distention. Despite the equivocal data 
regarding efficacy, most gastroenterologists consider 
stool-bulking agents worth trying in patients with IBS-C.
Antispasmodics  Clinicians have observed that 
anticholinergic drugs may provide temporary relief for 
symptoms such as painful cramps related to intestinal 
spasm. Although controlled clinical trials have produced 
mixed results, evidence generally supports beneficial  
effects of anticholinergic drugs for pain. A meta-analysis  
of 26 double-blind clinical trials of antispasmodic 
agents in IBS reported better global improvement 
(62%) and abdominal pain reductions (64%) compared 
to placebo (35% and 45%, respectively), suggesting 
efficacy in some patients. The drugs are most effective 
when prescribed in anticipation of predictable pain. 
Physiologic studies demonstrate that anticholinergic 
drugs inhibit the gastrocolic reflex; hence, postprandial 
pain is best managed by giving antispasmodics 30 min 
before meals so that effective blood levels are achieved 
shortly before the anticipated onset of pain. Most anti-
cholinergics contain natural belladonna alkaloids, which 
may cause xerostomia, urinary hesitancy and retention, 
blurred vision, and drowsiness. They should be used in 
the elderly with caution. Some physicians prefer to use 
synthetic anticholinergics such as dicyclomine that have 
less effect on mucous membrane secretions and pro-
duce fewer undesirable side effects.
Antidiarrheal Agents  Peripherally acting opiate-
based agents are the initial therapy of choice for IBS-D. 
Physiologic studies demonstrate increases in segment-
ing colonic contractions, delays in fecal transit, increases 
in anal pressures, and reductions in rectal perception 
with these drugs. When diarrhea is severe, especially in 
the painless diarrhea variant of IBS, small doses of loper-
amide, 2–4 mg every 4–6 h up to a maximum of 12 g/d, 
can be prescribed. These agents are less addictive than 
paregoric, codeine, or tincture of opium. In general, the 
intestines do not become tolerant of the antidiarrheal 
effect of opiates, and increasing doses are not required 
to maintain antidiarrheal potency. These agents are  
most useful if taken before anticipated stressful events 
that are known to cause diarrhea. However, not infre-
quently, a high dose of loperamide may cause cramping 
because of increases in segmenting colonic contractions. 
Another anti-diarrhea agent that may be used in IBS 
patients is the bile acid binder cholestyramine resin.
Antidepressant 
Drugs  In addition to their 
mood-elevating effects, antidepressant medications 
have several physiologic effects that suggest they may 
be beneficial in IBS. In IBS-D patients, the tricyclic anti-
depressant imipramine slows jejunal migrating motor 
complex transit propagation and delays orocecal and 
whole-gut transit, indicative of a motor inhibitory effect. 
Some studies also suggest that tricyclic agents may alter 
visceral afferent neural function.
A number of studies indicate that tricyclic anti-
depressants may be effective in some IBS patients. 
In a 2-month study of desipramine, abdominal pain 
improved in 86% of patients compared to 59% given 
placebo. Another study of desipramine in 28 IBS patients 
showed improvement in stool frequency, diarrhea,  
pain, and depression. When stratified according to the 
predominant symptoms, improvements were observed 
in IBS-D patients, with no improvement being noted 
in IBS-C patients. The beneficial effects of the tricyclic 
compounds in the treatment of IBS appear to be inde-
pendent of their effects on depression. The therapeutic 
benefits for the bowel symptoms occur faster and at a 
lower dosage. The efficacy of antidepressant agents 
in other chemical classes in the management of IBS is 
less well evaluated. In contrast to tricyclic agents, the 
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) paroxetine 
accelerates orocecal transit, raising the possibility that 
this drug class may be useful in IBS-C patients. The SSRI 
citalopram blunts perception of rectal distention and 
reduces the magnitude of the gastrocolonic response 
in healthy volunteers. A small placebo-controlled study 
SECTION III
Disorders of the Alimentary Tract
210
of citalopram in IBS patients reported reductions in 
pain. However, these findings could not be confirmed in 
another randomized controlled trial which showed that 
citalopram at 20 mg/day for 4 weeks was not superior to 
placebo in treating non-depressed IBS patients. Hence, 
the efficacy of SSRIs in the treatment of IBS needs fur-
ther confirmation.
Antiflatulence 
Therapy  The management of 
excessive gas is seldom satisfactory, except when there 
is obvious aerophagia or disaccharidase deficiency. 
Patients should be advised to eat slowly and not chew 
gum or drink carbonated beverages. Bloating may 
decrease if an associated gut syndrome such as IBS or 
constipation is improved. If bloating is accompanied 
by diarrhea and worsens after ingesting dairy products, 
fresh fruits, vegetables, or juices, further investigation 
or a dietary exclusion trial may be worthwhile. Avoid-
ing flatogenic foods, exercising, losing excess weight, 
and taking activated charcoal are safe but unproven 
remedies. Data regarding the use of surfactants such 
as simethicone are conflicting. Antibiotics may help 
in a subgroup of IBS patients with predominant symp-
toms of bloating. Beano, an over-the-counter oral 
β-glycosidase solution, may reduce rectal passage of 
gas without decreasing bloating and pain. Pancreatic 
enzymes reduce bloating, gas, and fullness during and 
after high-calorie, high-fat meal ingestion.
Modulation of Gut Flora  Antibiotic treatment 
benefits a subset of IBS patients. In a double-blind  
randomized placebo controlled study, neomycin dosed 
at 500 mg twice daily for 10 days was more effective 
than placebo at improving symptom scores among IBS 
patients. The non-absorbed oral antibiotic rifaximin  
is the most thoroughly studied antibiotic for the treat-
ment of IBS. Patients receiving rifaximin at a dose of  
400 mg three times daily experienced substantial 
improvement of global IBS symptoms over placebo. 
Rifaximin is the only antibiotic with demonstrated sus-
tained benefit beyond therapy cessation in IBS patients. 
The drug has a favorable safety and tolerability profile 
compared with systemic antibiotics. However, currently 
there is still insufficient data to recommend routine use 
of this antibiotic in the treatment of IBS.
Since altered colonic flora may contribute to the 
pathogenesis of IBS, this has led to great interest in 
using probiotics to naturally alter the flora. Bifidobacte-
rium infantis 35624 showed significant improvement in 
the composite score for abdominal pain, bloating/ 
distention, and/or bowel movement compared with  
placebo in two placebo-controlled trials. Currently, 
there are inadequate data to comment on the efficacy 
of other probiotics.
Serotonin Receptor Agonist and Antagonists 
Serotonin receptor antagonists have been evaluated as 
therapies for IBS-D. Serotonin acting on 5-HT3 receptors 
enhances the sensitivity of afferent neurons projecting 
from the gut. In humans, a 5-HT3 receptor antagonist 
such as alosetron reduces perception of painful vis-
ceral stimulation in IBS. It also induces rectal relaxation, 
increases rectal compliance, and delays colonic tran-
sit. Meta-analysis of 14 randomized controlled trials of 
alosetron or cilansetron showed that these antagonists 
are more effective than placebo in achieving global 
improvement in IBS symptoms and relief of abdominal 
pain and discomfort. These agents are more likely to 
cause constipation in IBS patients with diarrhea alter-
nating with constipation. 0.2% of patients using 5HT3 
antagonist developed ischemic colitis versus none in 
the control group. In postrelease surveillance, 84 cases 
of ischemic colitis were observed, including 44 cases 
that required surgery and 4 deaths. As a consequence, 
the medication was voluntarily withdrawn by the manu-
facturer in 2000. Alosetron has been reintroduced under 
a new risk-management program where patients have 
to sign a patient-physician agreement. This has signifi-
cantly limited its usage.
Novel 5-HT4 receptor agonists such as tegaserod 
exhibit prokinetic activity by stimulating peristalsis. In 
IBS patients with constipation, tegaserod accelerated 
intestinal and ascending colon transit. Clinical trials  
involving >4000 IBS-C patients reported reductions 
in discomfort and improvements in constipation and 
bloating, compared to placebo. Diarrhea is the major 
side effect. However, tegaserod has been withdrawn 
from the market; a meta-analysis revealed an increase in 
serious cardiovascular events.
Chloride Channel Activators  Lubiprostone is a 
bicyclic fatty acid that stimulates chloride channels in the 
apical membrane of intestinal epithelial cells. Chloride  
secretion induces passive movement of sodium  
and water into the bowel lumen and improves bowel 
function. Oral lubiprostone was effective in the treat-
ment of patients with constipation-predominant IBS in 
large phase II and phase III randomized double-blinded 
placebo-controlled multicenter trials. Responses were 
significantly greater in patients receiving lubiprostone 
8 μg twice daily for 3 months than in those receiv-
ing placebo. In general, the drug was quite well toler-
ated. The major side effects are nausea and diarrhea.  
Lubiprostone is a new class of compounds for treatment 
of chronic constipation with or without IBS.
SUMMARY  The treatment strategy of IBS depends 
on the severity of the disorder (Table 18-3). Most of 
the IBS patients have mild symptoms. They are usually 
 
CHAPTER 18
Irritable Bowel Syndrome
211
cared for in primary care practices, have little or no psy-
chosocial difficulties, and do not seek health care often. 
Treatment usually involves education, reassurance, 
and dietary/lifestyle changes. A smaller portion have 
moderate symptoms that are usually intermittent and  
correlate with altered gut physiology, e.g., worsened 
with eating or stress and relieved by ­defecation. Treat-
ments include gut-acting pharmacologic agents such as 
TABLE 18-3 
SPECTRUM OF SEVERITY IN IBS
MILD
MODERATE
SEVERE
Clinical Features
Prevalence
70%
25%
5%
Correlations with gut physiology
+++
++
+
Symptoms constant
0
+
+++
Psychosocial difficulties
0
+
+++
Health care issues
+
++
+++
Practice type
Primary
Specialty
Referral
TABLE 18-4
POSSIBLE DRUGS FOR A DOMINANT SYMPTOM IN IBS
SYMPTOM
DRUG
DOSE
Diarrhea
Loperamide
2–4 mg when necessary/maximum 12 g/d
Cholestyramine resin
4 g with meals
Alosetron∗
0.5–1 mg bid (for severe IBS, women)
Constipation
Psyllium husk
3–4 g bid with meals, then adjust
Methylcellulose
2 g bid with meals, then adjust
Calcium polycarbophil
1 g qd to qid
Lactulose syrup
10–20 g bid
70% sorbitol
15 mL bid
Polyethylene glycol 3350
17 g in 250 mL water qd
Lubiprostone (Amitiza)
24 mg bid
Magnesium hydroxide
30–60 mL qd
Abdominal pain
Smooth-muscle relaxant
qd to qid ac
Tricyclic antidepressants
Start 25–50 mg hs, then adjust
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
Begin small dose, increase as needed
∗Available only in the United States.
Source: Adapted from Longstreth et al.
antispasmodics, antidiarrheals, fiber supplements, and 
the newer gut serotonin modulators (Table 18-4). A 
small proportion of IBS patients have severe and refrac-
tory symptoms, are usually seen in referral centers, and 
frequently have constant pain and psychosocial difficul-
ties (Fig. 18-1). This group of patients is best managed 
with antidepressants and other psychological treat-
ments (Table 18-4).
 Susan L. Gearhart 
212
 DIVERTICULAR DISEASE 
 Incidence and epidemiology 
Among Western populations, diverticulosis of 
the colon affects nearly one-half of individuals 
older than age 60 years. Fortunately, only 20% 
of patients with diverticulosis develop symptomatic 
 disease. However, in the United States, diverticular 
 disease results in >200,000 hospitalizations annually, 
making it the fi fth most costly gastrointestinal disorder. 
The incidence of the disease is on the rise, mainly 
among young patients. The mean age at presentation of 
the disease is 59 years. Although the prevalence among 
females and males is similar, males tend to present at a 
younger age. Diverticulosis is rare in underdeveloped 
countries, where diets include more fi ber and roughage. 
However, shortly following migration to the United 
States, immigrants will develop diverticular disease at 
the same rate as U.S. natives. 
 Anatomy and pathophysiology 
 Two types of diverticula occur in the intestine: true 
and false (or pseudodiverticula). A true diverticulum is 
a saclike herniation of the entire bowel wall, whereas 
a pseudodiverticulum involves only a protrusion of the 
mucosa through the muscularis propria of the colon 
( Fig. 19-1 ) . The type of diverticulum affecting the 
colon is the pseudodiverticulum. The protrusion occurs 
at the point where the nutrient artery, or  vasa recti , pen-
etrates through the muscularis propria, resulting in a 
break in the integrity of the colonic wall. Diverticula 
commonly affect the sigmoid colon; only 5% of persons 
exhibit pancolonic diverticula. This anatomic restriction 
may be a result of the relative high-pressure zone within 
the muscular sigmoid colon. Thus, higher-amplitude 
 DIVERTICULAR DISEASE AND COMMON 
ANORECTAL DISORDERS 
 CHAPTER 19 
 FIGURE 19-1  
Gross and microscopic view of sigmoid diverticular 
disease. Arrows mark an inﬂ amed diverticulum with the 
diverticular wall made up only of mucosa. 

CHAPTER 19
Diverticular Disease and Common Anorectal Disorders
213
contractions combined with constipated, high-fat-­content 
stool within the sigmoid lumen results in the creation 
of these diverticula. Diverticulitis is inflammation of a 
diverticulum. The cause is not well understood and is 
probably multifactorial. The predominant theory is the 
­retention of particulate material within the diverticular 
sac and the formation of a fecalith. Consequently, the 
vasa recti is either compressed or eroded, leading to 
either perforation or bleeding.
Presentation, evaluation, and management 
of diverticular bleeding
Hemorrhage from a colonic diverticulum is the most 
common cause of hematochezia in patients >60 years, 
yet only 20% of patients with diverticulosis will have 
gastrointestinal bleeding. Patients at increased risk for 
bleeding tend to be hypertensive, have atherosclero­
sis, and regularly use nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory 
agents. Most bleeds are self-limited and stop spontane­
ously with bowel rest. The lifetime risk of rebleeding 
is 25%.
Localization of diverticular bleeding should include 
colonoscopy, which may be both diagnostic and thera­
peutic in the management of mild to moderate divertic­
ular bleeding. If the patient is stable, massive bleeding is 
best managed by angiography. Mesenteric angiography 
can localize the bleeding site and occlude the bleed­
ing vessel successfully with a coil in 80% of cases. 
The patient can then be followed closely with repeti­
tive colonoscopy, if necessary, looking for evidence of 
colonic ischemia. Alternatively, a segmental resection 
of the colon can be undertaken to eliminate the risk of 
further bleeding. This may be advantageous in patients 
on chronic blood thinners. However, with newer tech­
niques of highly selective coil embolization, the rate of 
colonic ischemia is <10% and the risk of acute rebleed­
ing is <25%. Long-term results (40 months) indicate 
that more than 50% of patients with acute diverticular 
bleeds have had definitive treatment with highly selec­
tive angiography.
As another alternative, a selective infusion of vaso­
pressin can be given to stop the hemorrhage, although 
this has been associated with significant complications, 
including myocardial infarction and intestinal ischemia. 
Furthermore, bleeding recurs in 50% of patients once 
the infusion is stopped. Localization studies indicate 
that bleeding as a result of colonic diverticulosis is more 
often seen from the right colon. For this reason, patients 
with presumed bleeding from diverticular disease 
requiring emergent surgery without localization should 
undergo a total abdominal colectomy. If the patient is 
unstable or has had a 6-unit bleed within 24 h, current 
recommendations are that surgery should be performed. 
In patients without severe comorbidities, surgical resec­
tion can be performed with a primary anastomosis. 
A higher anastomotic leak rate has been reported in 
patients who received >10 units of blood.
Presentation, evaluation, and staging 
of diverticulitis
Acute uncomplicated diverticulitis ­characteristically ­presents 
with fever, anorexia, left lower quadrant abdominal 
pain, and obstipation (Table 19-1). In <25% of cases, 
patients may present with generalized peritonitis indi­
cating the presence of a diverticular perforation. If a 
pericolonic abscess has formed, the patient may have 
abdominal distention and signs of localized peritonitis. 
Laboratory investigations will demonstrate a leukocy­
tosis. Rarely, a patient may present with an air-fluid 
level in the left lower quadrant on plain abdominal 
film. This is a giant diverticulum of the sigmoid colon 
and is managed with resection to avoid impending 
perforation.
The diagnosis of diverticulitis is best made on CT 
with the following findings: sigmoid diverticula, thick­
ened colonic wall >4 mm, and inflammation within 
the pericolic fat ± the collection of contrast material or 
fluid. In 16% of patients, an abdominal abscess may be 
present. Symptoms of irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) 
may mimic those of diverticulitis. Therefore, suspected 
diverticulitis that does not meet CT criteria or is not 
associated with a leukocytosis or fever is not diverticu­
lar disease. Other conditions that can mimic diverticu­
lar disease include an ovarian cyst, endometriosis, acute 
appendicitis, and pelvic inflammatory disease.
Barium enema or colonoscopy should not be per­
formed in the acute setting because of the higher risk of 
colonic perforation associated with insufflation or inser­
tion of barium-based contrast material under pressure. 
A sigmoid malignancy can masquerade as diverticular 
­disease. Therefore, a colonoscopy should be performed 
∼6 weeks after an attack of diverticular disease.
Complicated diverticular disease is defined as diverticu­
lar disease associated with an abscess or perforation and 
TABLE 19-1 
PRESENTATION OF DIVERTICULAR DISEASE
Uncomplicated Diverticular Disease—75%
Abdominal pain
Fever
Leukocytosis
Anorexia/obstipation
Complicated Diverticular Disease—25%
Abscess 16%
Perforation 10%
Stricture 5%
Fistula 2%
SECTION III
Disorders of the Alimentary Tract
214
less commonly with a fistula (Table 19-1). Perforated 
diverticular disease is staged using the Hinchey clas­
sification system (Fig. 19-2). This staging system was 
developed to predict outcomes following the surgi­
cal management of complicated diverticular disease. In 
complicated diverticular disease with fistula formation, 
common locations include cutaneous, vaginal, or vesicle 
fistulas. These conditions present with either passage of 
stool through the skin or vagina or the presence of air 
in the urinary stream (pneumaturia). Colovaginal fistulas 
are more common in women who have undergone a 
hysterectomy.
TREATMENT	
Diverticular Disease
MEDICAL MANAGEMENT  Asymptomatic diverti­
cular disease discovered on imaging studies or at 
the time of colonoscopy is best managed by diet 
­alterations. Patients should be instructed to eat a fiber-
enriched diet that includes 30 g of fiber each day. 
­Supplementary fiber products such as Metamucil, Fiber­
con, or Citrucel are useful. The incidence of complicated 
diverticular disease appears to be increased in patients 
Abscess
Feces
I
II
III
IV
FIGURE 19-2 
Hinchey classification of diverticulitis. Stage I: Perforated 
diverticulitis with a confined paracolic abscess. Stage II: 
­Perforated diverticulitis that has closed spontaneously with 
distant abscess formation. Stage III: Noncommunicating 
perforated diverticulitis with fecal peritonitis (the diverticular 
neck is closed off and therefore contrast will not freely expel 
on radiographic images). Stage IV: Perforation and free com­
munication with the peritoneum, resulting in fecal peritonitis.
TABLE 19-2
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF ANESTHESIOLOGISTS 
PHYSICAL STATUS CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM
P1
A normal healthy patient
P2
A patient with mild systemic disease
P3
A patient with severe systemic disease
P4
A patient with severe systemic disease that is 
a constant threat to life
P5
A moribund patient who is not expected to 
survive without the operation
P6
A declared brain-dead patient whose organs 
are being removed for donor purposes
who smoke. Therefore, patients should be encouraged 
to refrain from smoking. The historical recommendation 
to avoid eating nuts is not based on more than anec­
dotal data.
Symptomatic uncomplicated diverticular disease 
with confirmation of inflammation and infection within 
the colon should be treated initially with antibiotics 
and bowel rest. Nearly 75% of patients hospitalized for 
acute diverticulitis will respond to nonoperative treat­
ment with a suitable antimicrobial regimen. The current 
recommended antimicrobial coverage is trimethoprim/
sulfamethoxazole or ciprofloxacin and metronidazole 
­targeting aerobic gram-negative rods and anaerobic bac­
teria. Unfortunately, these agents do not cover entero­
cocci, and the addition of ampicillin to this regimen for 
nonresponders is recommended. Alternatively, single-
agent therapy with a third-generation penicillin such as IV 
piperacillin or oral penicillin/clavulanic acid may be effec­
tive. The usual course of antibiotics is 7–10 days. Patients 
should remain on a limited diet until their pain resolves.
For long-term medical management of uncompli­
cated diverticular disease, rifaximin (a poorly absorbed 
broad-spectrum antibiotic), when compared to fiber 
alone, is associated with 30% less frequent recurrent 
symptoms from uncomplicated diverticular disease. 
Furthermore, the use of probiotics has been shown to 
decrease the incidence of recurrent attacks. Culture 
data from patients on probiotics noted a decrease in 
the presence of Clostridium species and an increase in 
­Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium strains.
SURGICAL 
MANAGEMENT  Preoperative risk 
factors influencing postoperative mortality rates include 
higher American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) 
physical status class (Table 19-2) and preexisting organ 
failure. In patients who are low risk (ASA P1 and P2), sur­
gical therapy can be offered to those who do not rapidly 
improve on medical therapy. For uncomplicated diver­
ticular disease, studies indicate that medical therapy can 
be continued beyond two attacks without an increased 
 
CHAPTER 19
Diverticular Disease and Common Anorectal Disorders
215
risk of perforation requiring a colostomy. However, 
patients on immunosuppressive therapy, in chronic 
renal failure, or with a collagen-vascular disease have 
a fivefold greater risk of perforation during recurrent 
attacks. Surgical therapy is indicated in all low-surgical-
risk patients with complicated diverticular disease.
The goals of surgical management of diverticular 
disease include controlling sepsis, eliminating com­
plications such as fistula or obstruction, removing the 
diseased colonic segment, and restoring intestinal 
­continuity. These goals must be obtained while minimiz­
ing morbidity rate, length of hospitalization, and cost 
in addition to maximizing survival and quality of 
life. Table 19-3 lists the operations most commonly 
indicated based upon Hinchey classification and the 
predicted morbidity and mortality rates. Surgical objec­
tives include removal of the diseased sigmoid down to 
the rectosigmoid junction. Failure to do this may result 
in recurrent disease. The current options for uncom­
plicated diverticular disease include an open sigmoid 
resection or a laparoscopic sigmoid resection. The 
benefits of laparoscopic resection over open surgical 
­techniques include early discharge (by at least 1 day), 
less narcotic use, less postoperative complications, and 
an earlier return to work.
The options for the surgical management of com­
plicated diverticular disease (Fig. 19-3) include the 
following: (1) proximal diversion of the fecal stream 
with an ileostomy or colostomy and sutured omental 
patch with drainage, (2) resection with colostomy and 
mucous fistula or closure of distal bowel with formation 
of a Hartmann’s pouch, (3) resection with anastomosis 
(coloproctostomy), or (4) resection with anastomosis 
and diversion (coloproctostomy with loop ileostomy 
or colostomy). Laparoscopic techniques have been 
employed for complicated diverticular disease; however, 
higher conversion rates to open techniques have been 
reported.
Patients with Hinchey stages I and II disease are man­
aged with percutaneous drainage followed by resection 
with anastomosis about 6 weeks later. Percutaneous 
drainage is recommended for abscesses ≥5 cm with a 
well-defined wall that is accessible. Paracolic abscesses 
<5 cm in size may resolve with antibiotics alone. Con­
traindications to percutaneous drainage are no percu­
taneous access route, pneumoperitoneum, and fecal 
peritonitis. Urgent operative intervention is undertaken 
if patients develop generalized peritonitis, and most 
will need to be managed with a Hartmann’s proce­
dure. In selected cases, nonoperative therapy may be 
FIGURE 19-3 
Methods of surgical management of complicated diver­
ticular disease. (1) Drainage, omental pedicle graft, and 
proximal diversion. (2) Hartmann’s procedure. (3) Sigmoid 
resection with coloproctostomy. (4) Sigmoid resection with 
coloproctostomy and proximal diversion.
TABLE 19-3 
OUTCOME FOLLOWING SURGICAL THERAPY FOR 
COMPLICATED DIVERTICULAR DISEASE
HINCHEY 
STAGE
OPERATIVE 
PROCEDURE
ANASTOMOTIC 
LEAK RATE, %
OVERALL 
MORBIDITY 
RATE, %
I
Resection with 
primary 
anastomosis 
without 
diverting 
stoma
3.8
22
II
Resection 
with primary 
anastomosis 
+/− diversion
3.8
30
III
Hartmann’s 
procedure 
vs. diverting 
colostomy 
and omental 
pedal graft
—
0 vs. 6 
mortality
IV
Hartmann’s 
procedure 
vs. diverting 
colostomy 
and omental 
pedicle graft
—
6 vs. 2 
mortality
SECTION III
Disorders of the Alimentary Tract
216
­considered. In one nonrandomized study, nonoperative 
management of isolated paracolic abscesses (Hinchey 
stage I) was associated with only a 20% recurrence 
rate at 2 years. More than 80% of patients with distant 
abscesses (Hinchey stage II) required surgical resection 
for recurrent symptoms.
Hinchey stage III disease is managed with a ­Hartmann’s 
procedure or with primary anastomosis and proximal 
diversion. If the patient has significant comorbidities, 
making operative intervention risky, a limited procedure 
including intraoperative peritoneal lavage ­(irrigation), 
omental patch to the oversewn perforation, and proxi­
mal diversion of the fecal stream with either an ileos­
tomy or transverse colostomy can be performed. No 
anastomosis of any type should be attempted in 
Hinchey stage IV disease. A limited approach to these 
patients is associated with a decreased mortality rate.
Recurrent symptoms
Recurrent abdominal symptoms following surgi­
cal resection for diverticular disease occurs in 10% of 
patients. Recurrent diverticular disease develops in 
patients following inadequate surgical resection. A 
retained segment of diseased rectosigmoid colon is 
associated with twice the incidence of recurrence. IBS 
may also cause recurrence of initial symptoms. Patients 
undergoing surgical resection for presumed diverticuli­
tis and symptoms of abdominal cramping and irregular 
loose bowel movements consistent with IBS have func­
tionally poorer outcomes.
COMMON DISEASES OF
THE ANORECTUM
RECTAL PROLAPSE (PROCIDENTIA)
Incidence and epidemiology
Rectal prolapse is six times more common in women 
than in men. The incidence of rectal prolapse peaks in 
women >60 years. Women with rectal prolapse have 
a higher incidence of associated pelvic floor disorders 
including urinary incontinence, rectocele, cystocele, 
and enterocele. About 20% of children with rectal pro­
lapse will have cystic fibrosis. All children presenting 
with prolapse should undergo a sweat chloride test. Less 
common associations include Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, 
solitary rectal ulcer syndrome, congenital hypothyroid­
ism, and Hirschsprung’s disease.
Anatomy and pathophysiology
Rectal prolapse (procidentia) is a circumferential, full-
thickness protrusion of the rectal wall through the anal 
orifice. It is often associated with a redundant sigmoid 
colon, pelvic laxity, and a deep rectovaginal septum 
(pouch of Douglas). Initially, rectal prolapse was felt 
to be the result of early internal rectal intussusception, 
which occurs in the upper to mid rectum. This was 
considered to be the first step in an inevitable progres­
sion to full-thickness external prolapse. However, only 
1 of 38 patients with internal prolapse followed for 
>5 years developed full-thickness prolapse. Others have 
suggested that full-thickness prolapse is the result of 
damage to the nerve supply to the pelvic floor muscles 
or pudendal nerves from repeated stretching with strain­
ing to defecate. Damage to the pudendal nerves would 
weaken the pelvic floor muscles, including the external 
anal sphincter muscles. Bilateral pudendal nerve injury is 
more significantly associated with prolapse and inconti­
nence than unilateral injury.
Presentation and evaluation
In external prolapse, the majority of patient complaints 
include anal mass, bleeding per rectum, and poor peri­
anal hygiene. Prolapse of the rectum usually occurs fol­
lowing defecation and will spontaneously reduce or 
require the patient to manually reduce the prolapse. 
Constipation occurs in ∼30–67% of patients with rectal 
prolapse. Differing degrees of fecal incontinence occur 
in 50–70% of patients. Patients with internal rectal pro­
lapse will present with symptoms of both constipation 
and incontinence. Other associated findings include 
outlet obstruction (anismus) in 30%, colonic inertia in 
10%, and solitary rectal ulcer syndrome in 12%.
Office evaluation is best performed after the patient 
has been given an enema, which enables the prolapse 
to protrude. An important distinction should be made 
between full-thickness rectal prolapse and isolated 
mucosal prolapse associated with hemorrhoidal ­disease 
(Fig. 19-4). Mucosal prolapse is known for radial 
grooves rather than circumferential folds around the 
anus and is due to increased laxity of the connective tis­
sue between the submucosa and underlying muscle of 
the anal canal. The evaluation of prolapse should also 
include cystoproctography and colonoscopy. These 
examinations evaluate for associated pelvic floor disor­
ders and rule out a malignancy or a polyp as the lead 
point for prolapse. If rectal prolapse is associated with 
chronic constipation, the patient should undergo a 
defecating proctogram and a sitzmark study. This will 
evaluate for the presence of anismus or colonic inertia. 
Anismus is the result of attempting to defecate against 
a closed pelvic floor and is also known as nonrelaxing 
puborectalis. This can be seen when straightening of the 
rectum fails to occur on fluoroscopy while the patient 
is attempting to defecate. In colonic inertia, a sitzmark 
study will demonstrate retention of >20% of markers on 
abdominal x-ray 5 days after swallowing. For patients 
 
CHAPTER 19
Diverticular Disease and Common Anorectal Disorders
217
with fecal incontinence, endoanal ultrasound and 
manometric evaluation, including pudendal nerve test­
ing of their anal sphincter muscles, may be performed 
before surgery for prolapse (see “Fecal Incontinence,” 
below).
TREATMENT	
Rectal Prolapse
The medical approach to the management of ­rectal 
prolapse is limited and includes stool-bulking agents 
or fiber supplementation to ease the process of 
­evacuation. Surgical correction of rectal prolapse is 
the mainstay of therapy. Two approaches are com­
monly considered, transabdominal and transperineal. 
­Transabdominal approaches have been associated with 
lower recurrence rates, but some patients with signifi­
cant comorbidities are better served by a transperineal 
approach.
Common transperineal approaches include a trans­
anal 
proctectomy 
(Altmeier 
procedure), 
mucosal 
proctectomy (Delorme procedure), or placement of a 
Tirsch wire encircling the anus. The goal of the trans­
perineal approach is to remove the redundant recto­
sigmoid colon. Common transabdominal approaches 
include presacral suture or mesh rectopexy (Ripstein) 
with (Frykman-Goldberg) or without resection of the 
redundant sigmoid. Transabdominal procedures can 
be performed effectively with laparoscopic techniques 
without increased incidence of recurrence. The goal 
of the transabdominal approach is to restore normal 
anatomy by removing redundant bowel and reattach­
ing the supportive tissue of the rectum to the presacral 
fascia. The  final alternative is abdominal proctectomy 
with end-sigmoid colostomy. Colon resection, in gen­
eral, is reserved for patients with constipation and outlet 
obstruction. If total colonic inertia is present, as defined 
by a history of constipation and a positive sitzmark 
study, a subtotal colectomy with an ileosigmoid or rectal 
anastomosis may be required at the time of rectopexy.
Previously, the presence of internal rectal prolapse 
identified on imaging studies has been considered 
a nonsurgical disorder and biofeedback was recom­
mended. However, only one-third of patients will have 
successful resolution of symptoms from biofeedback. 
Two surgical procedures have been shown to be more 
effective than biofeedback. The STARR (stapled trans­
anal rectal resection) procedure (Fig. 19-5) is performed 
through the anus in patients with internal prolapse. A 
circular stapling device is inserted through the anus; 
the internal prolapse is identified and ligated with the 
stapling device. The Laparoscopic Ventral Rectopexy 
(LVR) (Fig. 19-6) is performed by creating an opening 
in the peritoneum on the left side of the rectosigmoid 
and carrying this opening down anterior on the rectum 
into the pouch of Douglas. No rectal mobilization is 
performed, thus avoiding any autonomic nerve injury. 
A
C
B
D
FIGURE 19-4 
Degree of rectal prolapse. Mucosal prolapse only (A, B, 
sagittal view). Full-thickness prolapse associated with redun­
dant rectosigmoid and deep pouch of Douglas (C, D, sagittal 
view).
FIGURE 19-5 
Stapled transanal rectal resection. Schematic of place­
ment of the circular stapling device.
SECTION III
Disorders of the Alimentary Tract
218
Mesh is secured to the anterior and lateral portion of the 
rectum, the vaginal fornix, and the sacral promontory, 
allowing for closure of the rectovaginal septum and 
correction of the internal prolapse. In both procedures, 
recurrence at 1 year was low (<10%) and symptoms 
improved in more than three-fourths of patients.
FECAL INCONTINENCE
Incidence and epidemiology
Fecal incontinence is the involuntary passage of fecal 
material >10 mL for at least 1 month. The prevalence 
of fecal incontinence in the United States is 0.5–11%. 
The majority of patients are women. A higher inci­
dence of incontinence is seen among parous women. 
One-half of patients with fecal incontinence also suffer 
from urinary incontinence. The majority of inconti­
nence is a result of obstetric injury to the pelvic floor, 
either while carrying a fetus or during the delivery. An 
anatomic sphincter defect may occur in up to 32% of 
women following childbirth regardless of visible dam­
age to the perineum. Risk factors at the time of deliv­
ery include prolonged labor, the use of forceps, and the 
need for an episiotomy. Medical conditions known to 
contribute to the development of fecal incontinence are 
listed in Table 19-4.
Anatomy and pathophysiology
The anal sphincter complex is made up of the internal 
and external anal sphincter. The internal sphincter 
is smooth muscle and a continuation of the ­circular 
fibers of the rectal wall. It is innervated by the intes­
tinal myenteric plexus and is therefore not under 
­voluntary control. The external anal sphincter is 
formed in continuation with the levator ani mus­
cles and is under voluntary control. The pudendal 
nerve ­supplies motor innervation to the external anal 
sphincter. Obstetric injury may result in tearing of the 
muscle fibers anteriorly at the time of the delivery. 
This results in an obvious anterior defect on endoanal 
ultrasound. Injury may also be the result of stretch­
ing of the pudendal nerves. The majority of patients 
who suffer from fecal incontinence following obstetric 
injury do so several years following the birth of their 
last child.
Presentation and evaluation
Patients may suffer with varying degrees of fecal incon­
tinence. Minor incontinence includes incontinence 
to flatus and occasional seepage of liquid stool. Major 
incontinence is frequent inability to control solid waste. 
As a result of fecal incontinence, patients suffer from 
poor perianal hygiene. Beyond the immediate prob­
lems associated with fecal incontinence, these patients 
are often withdrawn and suffer from depression. For 
this reason, quality-of-life measures have become an 
FIGURE 19-6 
Laparoscopic Ventral Rectopexy (LVR). To reduce the 
internal prolapse and close any rectovaginal septal defect, 
the pouch of Douglas is opened and mesh is secured to 
the anterolateral rectum, vaginal fornix, and sacrum. (From 
D’Hoore et al: Br J Surg 91:1500, 2004.)
TABLE 19-4
MEDICAL CONDITIONS THAT CONTRIBUTE TO 
SYMPTOMS OF FECAL INCONTINENCE
Neurologic Disorders
•  Dementia
•  Brain tumor
•  Stroke
•  Multiple sclerosis
•  Tabes dorsalis
•  Cauda equina lesions
Skeletal Muscle Disorders
•  Myasthenia gravis
•  Myopathies, muscular dystrophy
Miscellaneous
•  Hypothyroidism
•  Irritable bowel syndrome
•  Sedation
•  Severe diarrhea
 
CHAPTER 19
Diverticular Disease and Common Anorectal Disorders
219
important component in the evaluation of patients with 
fecal incontinence.
The evaluation of fecal incontinence should include 
a thorough history and physical examination, anal 
manometry, pudendal nerve terminal motor latency 
(PNTML), and endoanal ultrasound. Unfortunately, 
all of these investigations are user-dependent. Cen­
ters that care for patients with fecal incontinence will 
have an anorectal physiology laboratory that uses stan­
dardized methods of evaluating anorectal physiology. 
Anal manometry measures resting and squeeze pres­
sures within the anal canal using an intraluminal water-
perfused catheter. Pudendal nerve studies evaluate the 
function of the nerves innervating the anal canal using a 
finger electrode placed in the anal canal. Stretch injuries 
to these nerves will result in a delayed response of the 
sphincter muscle to a stimulus, indicating a prolonged 
latency. Finally, ultrasound will evaluate the extent 
of the injury to the sphincter muscles before surgical 
repair. Only PNTML has been shown to consistently 
predict outcome following surgical intervention.
Rarely does a pelvic floor disorder exist alone. The 
majority of patients with fecal incontinence will have a 
degree of urinary incontinence. Similarly, fecal inconti­
nence is a part of the spectrum of pelvic organ prolapse. 
For this reason, patients may present with symptoms 
of obstructed defecation as well as fecal incontinence. 
Careful evaluation including cinedefecography should 
be performed to search for other associated defects. Sur­
gical repair of incontinence without attention to other 
associated defects may decrease the success of the repair.
TREATMENT	
Fecal Incontinence
The “gold standard” for the treatment of fecal inconti­
nence with an isolated sphincter defect is overlapping 
sphincteroplasty. The external anal sphincter muscle and 
scar tissue as well as any identifiable internal sphincter 
muscle are dissected free from the surrounding adipose 
and connective tissue and then an overlapping repair 
is performed in an attempt to rebuild the muscular 
ring and restore its function. Other newer approaches 
include radio frequency therapy to the anal canal to 
aid in the development of collagen fibers and provide 
tensile strength to the sphincter muscles. Sacral nerve 
stimulation and the artificial bowel sphincter are both 
adaptations of procedures developed for the manage­
ment of urinary incontinence. Sacral nerve stimulation 
is ideally suited for patients with intact but weak anal 
sphincters. A temporary nerve stimulator is placed on 
the third sacral nerve. If there is at least a 50% improve­
ment in symptoms, a permanent nerve stimulator 
is placed under the skin. The artificial bowel sphinc­
ter is a cuff and reservoir apparatus that allows for 
manual inflation of a cuff placed around the anus, 
increasing anal tone. This allows the patient to manually 
close off the anal canal until defecation is necessary.
Long-term results following overlapping sphinctero­
plasty show about a 50% failure rate over 5 years. Poorer 
outcome has been seen in patients with prolonged 
PNTML. Long-term results for sacral stimulation have 
been promising; however, the indications for this proce­
dure are presently limited in the United States. Unfortu­
nately, the artificial bowel sphincter has been associated 
with a 30% infection rate.
HEMORRHOIDAL DISEASE
Incidence and epidemiology
Symptomatic hemorrhoids affect >1 million individu­
als in the Western world per year. The prevalence of 
hemorrhoidal disease is not selective for age or sex. 
However, age is known to have a deleterious effect on 
the anal canal. The prevalence of hemorrhoidal disease 
is less in underdeveloped countries. The typical low-
fiber, high-fat Western diet is associated with constipa­
tion and straining and the development of symptomatic 
hemorrhoids.
Anatomy and pathophysiology
Hemorrhoidal cushions are a normal part of the anal 
canal. The vascular structures contained within this tis­
sue aid in continence by preventing damage to the 
sphincter muscle. Three main hemorrhoidal complexes 
traverse the anal canal—the left lateral, the right ante­
rior, and the right posterior. Engorgement and strain­
ing leads to prolapse of this tissue into the anal canal. 
Over time, the anatomic support system of the hem­
orrhoidal complex weakens, exposing this tissue to 
the outside of the anal canal where it is susceptible to 
injury. Hemorrhoids are commonly classified as internal 
or external. Although small external cushions do exist, 
the standard classification of hemorrhoidal disease is 
based on the progression of the disease from their nor­
mal internal location to the prolapsing external position 
(Table 19-5).
Presentation and evaluation
Patients commonly present to a physician for two reasons: 
bleeding and protrusion. Pain is less common than with 
fissures and, if present, is described as a dull ache from 
engorgement of the hemorrhoidal tissue. Severe pain 
may indicate a thrombosed hemorrhoid. Hemorrhoidal 
bleeding is described as bright red blood seen either in 
the toilet or upon wiping. Occasional patients can pres­
ent with significant bleeding, which may be a cause of 
SECTION III
Disorders of the Alimentary Tract
220
anemia; however, the presence of a colonic neoplasm 
must be ruled out. Patients who present with a protrud­
ing mass complain about inability to maintain perianal 
hygiene and are often concerned about the presence of 
a malignancy.
The diagnosis of hemorrhoidal disease is made on 
physical examination. Inspection of the perianal region 
for evidence of thrombosis or excoriation is performed, 
followed by a careful digital examination. Anoscopy 
is performed paying particular attention to the known 
position of hemorrhoidal disease. The patient is asked 
to strain. If this is difficult for the patient, the maneuver 
can be performed while sitting on a toilet. The physi­
cian is notified when the tissue prolapses. It is impor­
tant to differentiate the circumferential appearance of a 
full-thickness rectal prolapse from the radial nature of 
prolapsing hemorrhoids (see “Rectal Prolapse,” above). 
The stage and location of the hemorrhoidal complexes 
are defined.
TREATMENT	
Hemorrhoidal Disease
The treatment for bleeding hemorrhoids is based upon 
the stage of the disease (Table 19-5). In all patients 
with bleeding, the possibility of other causes must be 
­considered. In young patients without a family history 
of colorectal cancer, the hemorrhoidal disease may be 
treated first and a colonoscopic examination performed 
if the bleeding continues. Older patients who have not 
had colorectal cancer screening should undergo colo­
noscopy or flexible sigmoidoscopy.
With rare exceptions, the acutely thrombosed hemor­
rhoid can be excised within the first 72 h by performing 
TABLE 19-5 
THE STAGING AND TREATMENT OF HEMORRHOIDS
STAGE
DESCRIPTION OF 
CLASSIFICATION
TREATMENT
I
Enlargement 
with bleeding
Fiber supplementation 
Cortisone suppository 
Sclerotherapy
II
Protrusion with 
spontaneous 
reduction
Fiber supplementation 
Cortisone suppository
III
Protrusion 
requiring 
manual 
reduction
Fiber supplementation 
Cortisone suppository 
Banding Operative 
hemorrhoidectomy (stapled 
or traditional)
IV
Irreducible 
protrusion
Fiber supplementation 
Cortisone suppository 
Operative hemorrhoidectomy
an elliptical excision. Sitz baths, fiber, and stool softeners 
are prescribed. Additional therapy for bleeding hem­
orrhoids includes banding, sclerotherapy, excisional 
hemorrhoidectomy, and stapled hemorrhoidectomy. 
­Sensation begins at the dentate line; therefore, banding 
or sclerotherapy can be performed without discomfort 
in the office. Bands are placed around the engorged tis­
sue, causing ischemia and fibrosis. This aids in fixing the 
tissue proximally in the anal canal. Patients may com­
plain of a dull ache for 24 h following band application. 
During sclerotherapy, 1–2 mL of a sclerosant (usually 
sodium tetradecyl sulfate) is injected using a 25-gauge 
needle into the submucosa of the hemorrhoidal com­
plex. Care must be taken not to inject the anal canal 
­circumferentially, or stenosis may occur. The sutured 
and stapled hemorrhoidectomies are equally effective 
in the treatment of symptomatic third- and fourth-
degree hemorrhoids. However, because the sutured 
hemorrhoidectomy involves the removal of redundant 
tissue down to the anal verge, unpleasant anal skin tags 
are removed as well. The stapled hemorrhoidectomy 
is associated with less discomfort; however, this pro­
cedure does not remove anal skin tags. No procedures 
on hemorrhoids should be done in patients who are 
immunocompromised or who have active proctitis. Fur­
thermore, emergent hemorrhoidectomy for bleeding 
hemorrhoids is associated with a higher complication 
rate.
Acute complications associated with the treat­
ment of hemorrhoids include pain, infection, recurrent 
bleeding, and urinary retention. Care should be taken 
to place bands properly and to avoid overhydration 
in patients undergoing operative hemorrhoidectomy. 
Late complications include fecal incontinence as a 
result of injury to the sphincter during the dissection. 
Anal stenosis may develop from overzealous excision, 
with loss of mucosal skin bridges for reepithelialization. 
Finally, an ectropion (prolapse of rectal mucosa from 
the anal canal) may develop. Patients with an ectropion 
complain of a “wet” anus as a result of inability to pre­
vent soiling once the rectal mucosa is exposed below 
the dentate line.
ANORECTAL ABSCESS
Incidence and epidemiology
The development of a perianal abscess is more com­
mon in men than women by a ratio of 3:1. The peak 
incidence is in the third to fifth decade of life. Perianal 
pain associated with the presence of an abscess accounts 
for 15% of office visits to a colorectal surgeon. The dis­
ease is more prevalent in immunocompromised patients 
such as those with diabetes, hematologic disorders, or 
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and persons who are 
 
CHAPTER 19
Diverticular Disease and Common Anorectal Disorders
221
HIV. positive. These disorders should be considered in 
patients with recurrent perianal infections.
Anatomy and pathophysiology
An anorectal abscess is an abnormal fluid-containing 
cavity in the anorectal region. Anorectal abscess results 
from an infection involving the glands surrounding the 
anal canal. Normally, these glands release mucus into 
the anal canal, which aids in defecation. When stool 
accidentally enters the anal glands, the glands become 
infected and an abscess develops. Anorectal abscesses are 
perianal in 40–50% of patients, ischiorectal in 20–25%, 
intersphincteric in 2–5%, and supralevator in 2.5% 
(Fig. 19-7).
Presentation and evaluation
Perianal pain and fever are the hallmarks of an abscess. 
Patients may have difficulty voiding and have blood in 
the stool. A prostatic abscess may present with similar 
complaints, including dysuria. Patients with a prostatic 
abscess will often have a history of recurrent sexually 
transmitted diseases. On physical examination, a large 
fluctuant area is usually readily visible. Routine labo­
ratory evaluation shows an elevated white blood cell 
count. Diagnostic procedures are rarely necessary unless 
evaluating a recurrent abscess. A CT scan or MRI has 
an accuracy of 80% in determining incomplete drain­
age. If there is a concern about the presence of IBD, 
a rigid or flexible sigmoidoscopic examination may be 
done at the time of drainage to evaluate for inflamma­
tion within the rectosigmoid region. A more complete 
evaluation for Crohn’s disease would include a full 
colonoscopy and small-bowel series.
TREATMENT	
Anorectal Abscess
Office drainage of an uncomplicated anorectal abscess 
may suffice. A small incision close to the anal verge 
is made and a Mallenkot drain is advanced into the 
abscess cavity. For patients who have a complicated 
abscess or who are diabetic or immunocompromised, 
drainage should be performed in an operating room 
under anesthesia. These patients are at greater risk for 
developing necrotizing fasciitis. The course of antibi­
otics is controversial but should be at least 2 weeks in 
patients who are immunocompromised or have pros­
thetic heart valves, artificial joints, diabetes, or IBD.
FISTULA IN ANO
Incidence and epidemiology
The incidence and prevalence of fistulating perianal dis­
ease parallels the incidence of anorectal abscess. Some 
30–40% of abscesses will give rise to fistula in ano. 
While the majority of the fistulas are cryptoglandular 
in origin, 10% are associated with IBD, tuberculosis, 
malignancy, and radiation.
Anatomy and pathophysiology
A fistula in ano is defined as a communication of an 
abscess cavity with an identifiable internal open­
ing within the anal canal. This identifiable opening is 
most commonly located at the dentate line where the 
anal glands enter the anal canal. Patients experiencing 
continuous drainage following the treatment of a peri­
anal abscess likely have a fistula in ano. These fistulas 
are classified by their relationship to the anal sphincter 
muscles, with 70% being intersphincteric, 23% trans­
sphincteric, 5% suprasphincteric, and 2% extrasphinc­
teric (Fig. 19-7).
Presentation and evaluation
A patient with a fistula in ano will complain of ­constant 
drainage from the perianal region. The drainage may 
increase with defecation. Perianal hygiene is difficult to 
maintain. Examination under anesthesia is the best way 
to evaluate a fistula. At the time of the examination, 
anoscopy is performed to look for an internal opening. 
Diluted hydrogen peroxide will aid in identifying such 
an opening. In lieu of anesthesia, MRI with an endoanal 
coil will also identify tracts in 80% of the cases. After 
drainage of an abscess with insertion of a ­Mallenkot 
catheter, a fistulagram through the catheter can be 
obtained in search of an occult fistula tract. Goodsall’s 
rule states that a posterior external fistula will enter the 
anal canal in the posterior midline, whereas an anterior 
fistula will enter at the nearest crypt. A fistula exiting 
1
1
2
2
3
3
4
4
Fistula
tracts
Abscesses
Intersphincteric
Intersphincteric
Trans-sphincteric
Suprasphincteric
Extrasphincteric
Supralevator
Ischiorectal
Perianal
FIGURE 19-7 
Common locations of anorectal abscess (left) and fistula 
in ano (right).
SECTION III
Disorders of the Alimentary Tract
222
>3 cm from the anal verge may have a complicated 
upward extension and may not obey Goodsall’s rule.
TREATMENT	
Fistula In Ano
A newly diagnosed draining fistula is best managed 
with placement of a seton, a vessel loop or silk tie 
placed through the fistula tract, which maintains the 
tract open and quiets down the surrounding inflam­
mation that occurs from repeated blockage of the 
tract. Once the inflammation is less, the exact relation­
ship of the fistula tract to the anal sphincters can be 
­ascertained. A simple fistulotomy can be performed 
for intersphincteric and low (less than one-third of the 
muscle) transsphincteric fistulas without compromising 
continence. For a higher transsphincteric fistula, an ano­
rectal advancement flap in combination with a drainage 
catheter or fibrin glue may be used. Very long (>2 cm) 
and narrow tracts respond better to fibrin glue than 
shorter tracts. Simple ligation of the internal fistula tract 
(LIFT procedure) has also been used in the management 
of simple fistula with good success.
Patients should be maintained on stool-bulking 
agents, nonnarcotic pain medication, and sitz baths fol­
lowing surgery for a fistula. Early complications from 
these procedures include urinary retention and bleed­
ing. Later complications are rare (<10%) and include 
temporary and permanent incontinence. Recurrence 
following fistulotomy is 0–18% and following anorectal 
advancement flap and the LIFT procedure is 20–30%.
ANAL FISSURE
Incidence and epidemiology
Anal fissures occur at all ages but are more common in 
the third through the fifth decades. A fissure is the most 
common cause of rectal bleeding in infancy. The preva­
lence is equal in males and females. It is associated with 
constipation, diarrhea, infectious etiologies, perianal 
trauma, and Crohn’s disease.
Anatomy and pathophysiology
Trauma to the anal canal occurs following defecation.
This injury occurs in the anterior or, more commonly, 
the posterior anal canal. Irritation caused by the trauma 
to the anal canal results in an increased resting pres­
sure of the internal sphincter. The blood supply to 
the sphincter and anal mucosa enters laterally. There­
fore, increased anal sphincter tone results in a relative 
ischemia in the region of the fissure and leads to poor 
healing of the anal injury. A fissure that is not in the 
posterior or anterior position should raise suspicion for 
other causes, including tuberculosis, syphilis, Crohn’s 
disease, and malignancy.
Presentation and evaluation
A fissure can be easily diagnosed on history alone. 
The classic complaint is pain, which is strongly associ­
ated with defecation and is relentless. The bright red 
­bleeding that can be associated with a fissure is less 
extensive than that associated with hemorrhoids. On 
examination, most fissures are located in either the pos­
terior or anterior position. A lateral fissure is worrisome 
as it may have a less benign nature, and systemic disor­
ders should be ruled out. A chronic fissure is indicated 
by the presence of a hypertrophied anal papilla at the 
proximal end of the fissure and a sentinel pile or skin 
tag at the distal end. Often the circular fibers of the 
hypertrophied internal sphincter are visible within the 
base of the fissure. If anal manometry is performed, ele­
vation in anal resting pressure and a sawtooth deformity 
with paradoxical contractions of the sphincter muscles 
are pathognomonic.
TREATMENT	
Anal Fissure
The management of the acute fissure is conservative. 
Stool softeners for those with constipation, increased 
dietary fiber, topical anesthetics, glucocorticoids, and 
sitz baths are prescribed and will heal 60–90% of ­fissures. 
Chronic fissures are those present for >6 weeks. These 
can be treated with modalities aimed at decreasing 
the anal canal resting pressure including nifedipine or 
nitroglycerin ointment applied three times a day, and 
botulinum toxin type A, up to 20 units, injected into the 
internal sphincter on each side of the fissure. Surgical 
management includes anal dilatation and lateral internal 
sphincterotomy. Usually, one-third of the internal sphinc­
ter muscle is divided; it is easily identified because it is 
hypertrophied. Recurrence rates from medical therapy 
are higher, but this is offset by a risk of incontinence fol­
lowing sphincterotomy. Lateral internal sphincterotomy 
may lead to incontinence more commonly in women.
Acknowledgment
We would like to thank Cory Sandore for providing some 
illustrations for this chapter. Gregory Bulkley, MD, contributed 
to this chapter in the 16th edition.
 Susan L. Gearhart 
 INTESTINAL ISCHEMIA 
 INCIDENCE AND EPIDEMIOLOGY 
 Intestinal ischemia is an uncommon vascular disease 
associated with a high mortality. It is categorized 
according to etiology: (1) arterioocclusive mesenteric 
ischemia (AOMI), (2) nonocclusive mesenteric isch-
emia (NOMI), and (3) mesenteric venous thrombo-
sis (MVT). Acute intestinal ischemia is more common 
than its counterpart, chronic arterial ischemia. Risk fac-
tors for acute arterial ischemia include atrial fi brillation, 
recent myocardial infarction, valvular heart disease, and 
recent cardiac or vascular catheterization. The increased 
incidence of intestinal ischemia seen in Western coun-
tries parallels the incidence of atherosclerosis and the 
aging population. With the exception of strangulated 
small-bowel obstruction, ischemic colitis is the most 
common form of acute ischemia and the most preva-
lent gastrointestinal disease complicating cardiovascu-
lar surgery. The incidence of ischemic colitis following 
elective aortic repair is 5–9%, and the incidence triples 
in patients following emergent repair. Other less com-
mon forms of intestinal ischemia include chronic mes-
enteric angina associated with atherosclerotic disease 
and MVT. The latter is associated with the presence of 
a hypercoagulable state including protein C or S defi -
ciency, antithrombin III defi ciency, polycythemia vera, 
and carcinoma. 
 ANATOMY AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY 
 Intestinal ischemia occurs when insuffi cient perfu-
sion to intestinal tissue produces ischemic tissue injury. 
The blood supply to the intestines is depicted in 
 Fig. 20-1 . To prevent ischemic injury, extensive col-
lateralization occurs between major mesenteric trunks 
and branches of the mesenteric arcades  ( Table 20-1 ) . 
Collateral vessels within the small bowel are numerous 
 MESENTERIC VASCULAR INSUFFICIENCY 
 CHAPTER 20 
Left Phrenic a.
Right Phrenic a.
Marginal a.
Arch of
Riolan
Aorta
IIA
Pancreatico-
duodenal a.
Griffiths'
point
Sudeck's
point
SMA
IMA
Hemorrhoidal aa.
Superior
Middle
Inferior
Celiac trunk
Splenic a.
 FIGURE 20-1  
Blood supply to the intestines includes the celiac artery, 
superior mesenteric artery (SMA), inferior mesenteric artery 
(IMA), and branches of the internal iliac artery (IIA). Griffi ths’ 
and Sudeck’s points, indicated by shaded areas, are water-
shed areas within the colonic blood supply and common 
locations for ischemia. 
and meet within the duodenum and the bed of the 
 pancreas. Collateral vessels within the colon meet at 
the splenic fl exure and descending/sigmoid colon. 
These areas, which are inherently at risk for decreased 
blood fl ow, are known as  Grifﬁ ths’ point and  Sudeck’s 
223
SECTION III
Disorders of the Alimentary Tract
224
point, respectively, and are the most common loca­
tions for colonic ischemia (Fig. 20-1, shaded areas). The 
splanchnic circulation can receive up to 30% of the car­
diac output. Protective responses to prevent intestinal 
ischemia include abundant collateralization, autoregula­
tion of blood flow, and the ability to increase oxygen 
extraction from the blood.
Occlusive ischemia is a result of disruption of blood 
flow by an embolus or progressive thrombosis in a 
major artery supplying the intestine. Emboli origi­
nate from the heart in >75% of cases and lodge pref­
erentially just distal to the origin of the middle colic 
artery from the superior mesenteric artery. Progressive 
thrombosis of at least two of the major vessels sup­
plying the intestine is required for the development 
of chronic intestinal angina. Nonocclusive ischemia is 
disproportionate mesenteric vasoconstriction (arterio­
lar vasospasm) in response to a severe physiologic stress 
such as dehydration or shock. If left untreated, early 
mucosal stress ulceration will progress to full-thickness 
injury.
PRESENTATION, EVALUATION, 
AND MANAGEMENT
Intestinal ischemia remains one of the most ­challenging 
diagnoses. The mortality rate is >50%. The most 
­significant indicator of survival is the timeliness of diag­
nosis and treatment. An overview of diagnosis and man­
agement of each form of intestinal ischemia is given in 
Table 20-2.
Acute mesenteric ischemia resulting from arterial 
embolus or thrombosis presents with severe acute, non­
remitting abdominal pain strikingly out of proportion to 
the physical findings. Associated symptoms may include 
nausea and vomiting, transient diarrhea, and bloody 
stools. With the exception of minimal abdominal dis­
tention and hypoactive bowel sounds, early abdominal 
examination is unimpressive. Later findings will dem­
onstrate peritonitis and cardiovascular collapse. In the 
evaluation of acute intestinal ischemia, routine labo­
ratory tests should be obtained, including complete 
blood count, serum chemistry, coagulation profile, arte­
rial blood gas, amylase, lipase, lactic acid, blood type 
and cross match, and cardiac enzymes. Regardless of 
the need for urgent surgery, emergent admission to a 
monitored bed or intensive care unit is recommended 
for resuscitation and further evaluation. If the diagnosis 
of intestinal ischemia is being considered, consultation 
with a surgical service is necessary.
Other diagnostic modalities that may be useful in 
diagnosis but should not delay surgical therapy include 
electrocardiogram (ECG), abdominal radiographs, CT, 
and mesenteric angiography. More recently, mesentery 
duplex scanning and visible light spectroscopy during 
colonoscopy have been demonstrated to be beneficial. 
The ECG may demonstrate an arrhythmia, indicat­
ing the possible source of the emboli. A plain abdomi­
nal film may show evidence of free intraperitoneal air, 
indicating a perforated viscus and the need for emergent 
exploration. Earlier features of intestinal ischemia seen 
on abdominal radiographs include bowel-wall edema, 
known as “thumbprinting.” If the ischemia progresses, 
air can be seen within the bowel wall (pneumatosis intes­
tinalis) and within the portal venous system. Other fea­
tures include calcifications of the aorta and its tributaries, 
indicating atherosclerotic disease. With the administra­
tion of oral and IV contrast, dynamic CT with three-
dimensional reconstruction is a highly sensitive test for 
intestinal ischemia. In acute embolic disease, mesenteric 
angiography is best performed intraoperatively. A mes­
enteric duplex scan demonstrating a high peak velocity 
of flow in the superior mesenteric artery (SMA) is asso­
ciated with an ∼80% positive predictive value of mes­
enteric ischemia. More significantly, a negative duplex 
scan virtually precludes the diagnosis of mesenteric isch­
emia. Duplex imaging serves as a screening test; further 
investigations with angiography are needed. Endoscopic 
techniques using visible light spectroscopy can be used 
in the diagnosis of chronic ischemia.
The “gold standard” for the diagnosis and manage­
ment of acute arterial occlusive disease is laparotomy. 
Surgical exploration should not be delayed if suspi­
cion of acute occlusive mesenteric ischemia is high or 
TABLE 20-1
COLLATERAL ARTERIAL INTESTINAL BLOOD FLOW
INVOLVED CIRCULATION
MESENTERIC ARTERY
ADJOINING ARTERY
COLLATERAL ARTERY
Systemic
Celiac
Descending aorta
Phrenic
Systemic
IMA
Hypogastric
Middle ­hemorrhoidal
Mesenteric
Celiac
SMA
Superior/inferior pancreaticoduodenal
Mesenteric
SMA
IMA
Arch of Riolan
Mesenteric
SMA
Celiac/IMA
Intramesenteric
Mesenteric
SMA
IMA
Marginal
Abbreviations: IMA, inferior mesenteric artery; SMA, superior mesenteric artery.

CHAPTER 20
Mesenteric Vascular Insufficiency
225
evidence of clinical deterioration or frank peritoni­
tis is present. The goal of operative exploration is to 
resect compromised bowel and restore blood supply. 
Intraoperative or preoperative arteriography and sys­
temic heparinization may assist the vascular surgeon 
in restoring blood supply to the compromised bowel. 
The entire length of the small and large bowel begin­
ning at the ligament of Treitz should be evaluated. The 
pattern of intestinal ischemia may indicate the level of 
arterial occlusion. In the case of SMA occlusion where 
the embolus usually lies just proximal to the origin of 
the middle colic artery, the proximal jejunum is often 
spared while the remainder of the small bowel to the 
transverse colon will be ischemic. The surgical manage­
ment of acute mesenteric ischemia of the small bowel is 
attempted embolectomy via intraoperative angiography 
or arteriotomy. Although more commonly applied to 
chronic disease, acute thrombosis may be managed with 
angioplasty, with or without endovascular stent place­
ment. If this is unsuccessful, a bypass from the aorta to 
the superior mesenteric artery is performed.
Nonocclusive or vasospastic mesenteric ischemia pres­
ents with generalized abdominal pain, anorexia, bloody 
stools, and abdominal distention. Often these patients 
are obtunded, and physical findings may not assist in 
the diagnosis. The presence of a leukocytosis, metabolic 
acidosis, elevated amylase or creatinine phosphokinase 
levels, and/or lactic acidosis are useful in support of the 
diagnosis of advanced intestinal ischemia; however, these 
markers may not be indicative of either reversible isch­
emia or frank necrosis. Investigational markers for intes­
tinal ischemia include D-dimer, glutathione S-transferase, 
platelet-activating factor (PAF), and mucosal pH moni­
toring. Regardless of the need for urgent surgery, emer­
gent admission to a monitored bed or intensive care unit 
is recommended for resuscitation and further evaluation. 
Early manifestations of intestinal ischemia include fluid 
sequestration within the bowel wall leading to a loss of 
interstitial volume. Aggressive fluid resuscitation may be 
necessary. To optimize oxygen delivery, nasal O2 and 
blood transfusions may be given. Broad-spectrum antibi­
otics should be given to provide sufficient coverage for 
enteric pathogens, including gram-negative and anaero­
bic organisms. Frequent monitoring of the patient’s vital 
signs, urine output, blood gases, and lactate levels is para­
mount, as is frequent abdominal examination. All vaso­
constricting agents should be avoided; fluid resuscitation 
is the intervention of choice to maintain hemodynamics.
TABLE 20-2
OVERVIEW OF THE MANAGEMENT OF ACUTE INTESTINAL ISCHEMIA
CONDITION
KEY TO EARLY 
DIAGNOSIS
TREATMENT OF 
UNDERLYING CAUSE
TREATMENT OF
SPECIFIC LESION
TREATMENT OF SYSTEMIC 
CONSEQUENCES
Arterial 
embolus
Early laparotomy
Anticoagulation
Cardioversion
Proximal thrombectomy
Aneurysmectomy
Laparotomy
Embolectomy
Vascular bypass
Assess viability and 
resect dead bowel
Ensure hydration
Give antibiotics
Reverse acidosis
Optimize oxygen delivery
Support cardiac output
Treat other embolic sites
Avoid vasoconstrictors
Arterial 
thrombosis
Duplex ultrasound
Angiography
Anticoagulation
Hydration
Endovascular stent
Endarterectomy/
thrombectomy or 
vascular bypass
Assess viability and 
resect dead bowel
Give antibiotics
Reverse acidosis
Optimize oxygen delivery
Support cardiac output
Avoid vasoconstrictors
Venous 
thrombosis
Spiral CT
Anticoagulation
Massive hydration
Anticoagulation ± 
laparotomy/ 
thrombectomy/
portasystemic shunt
Assess viability and 
resect dead bowel
Give antibiotics
Reverse acidosis
Optimize oxygen delivery
Support cardiac output
Avoid vasoconstrictors
Nonocclusive 
mesenteric 
ischemia
Vasospasm:
Angiography
Hypoperfusion:
Spiral CT or 
colonoscopy
Ensure hydration
Support cardiac output
Avoid vasoconstrictors
Ablate renin-angiotensin 
axis
Vasospasm
  Intraarterial 
  vasodilators
Hypoperfusion
  Delayed laparotomy
Assess viability and 
resect dead bowel
Ensure hydration
Give antibiotics
Reverse acidosis
Optimize oxygen delivery
Support cardiac output
Avoid vasoconstrictors
Source: Modified from GB Bulkley, in JL Cameron (ed): Current Surgical Therapy, 2nd ed. Toronto, BC Decker, 1986.
SECTION III
Disorders of the Alimentary Tract
226
If ischemic colitis is a concern, colonoscopy should 
be performed to assess the integrity of the colon 
mucosa. Visualization of the rectosigmoid region may 
demonstrate decreased mucosal integrity, associated 
more commonly with nonocclusive mesenteric isch­
emia, or, on occasion, occlusive disease as a result of 
acute loss of inferior mesenteric arterial flow following 
aortic surgery. Ischemia of the colonic mucosa is graded 
as mild with minimal mucosal erythema or as moderate 
with pale mucosal ulcerations and evidence of exten­
sion to the muscular layer of the bowel wall. Severe isch­
emic colitis presents with severe ulcerations resulting in 
black or green discoloration of the mucosa, consistent 
with full-thickness bowel-wall necrosis. The degree of 
reversibility can be predicted from the mucosal find­
ings: Mild erythema is nearly 100% reversible, moderate 
∼50%, and frank necrosis is simply dead bowel. Follow-
up colonoscopy can be performed to rule out progres­
sion of ischemic colitis.
Laparotomy for nonocclusive mesenteric ischemia is 
warranted for signs of peritonitis or worsening endoscopic 
findings and if the patient’s condition does not improve 
with aggressive resuscitation. Ischemic colitis is optimally 
treated with resection of the ischemic bowel and forma­
tion of a proximal stoma. Primary anastomosis should not 
be performed in patients with acute intestinal ischemia.
Patients with MVT may present with a gradual or 
sudden onset. Symptoms include vague abdominal pain, 
nausea, and vomiting. Examination findings include 
abdominal distention with mild to moderate tender­
ness and signs of dehydration. The diagnosis of mesen­
teric thrombosis is frequently made on abdominal spiral 
CT with oral and IV contrast. Findings on CT include 
bowel-wall thickening and ascites. Intravenous con­
trast will demonstrate a delayed arterial phase and clot 
within the superior mesenteric vein. The goal of man­
agement is to optimize hemodynamics and correct elec­
trolyte abnormalities with massive fluid resuscitation. 
Intravenous antibiotics as well as anticoagulation should 
be initiated. If laparotomy is performed and MVT is 
­suspected, heparin anticoagulation is immediately initi­
ated and compromised bowel is resected. Of all acute 
intestinal disorders, mesenteric venous insufficiency is 
associated with the best prognosis.
Chronic intestinal ischemia presents with intesti­
nal angina or abdominal pain associated with need for 
increased blood flow to the intestine. Patients report 
abdominal cramping and pain following ingestion 
of a meal. Weight loss and chronic diarrhea may also 
be noted. Abdominal pain without weight loss is not 
chronic mesenteric angina. Physical examination will 
often reveal the presence of an abdominal bruit as well 
as other manifestations of atherosclerosis. Duplex ultra­
sound evaluation of the mesenteric vessels has gained in 
popularity. In the absence of obesity and an increased 
bowel gas pattern, the radiologist may be able to iden­
tify flow disturbances within the vessels or the lack of a 
vasodilation response to feeding. This tool is frequently 
used as a screening test for patients with symptoms sug­
gestive of chronic mesenteric ischemia. The gold stan­
dard for confirmation of mesenteric arterial occlusion 
is mesenteric angiography. Evaluation with mesenteric 
angiography allows for identification and possible inter­
vention for the treatment of thrombus within the vessel 
lumen and will also evaluate the patency of remaining 
mesenteric vessels. The use of mesenteric angiogra­
phy may be limited in the presence of renal failure or 
contrast allergy. Magnetic resonance angiography is 
an alternative if the administration of contrast dye is 
contraindicated.
The management of chronic intestinal ischemia 
includes medical management of atherosclerotic disease 
by lipid-lowering medications, exercise, and cessation of 
smoking. A full cardiac evaluation should be performed 
before intervention. Newer endovascular procedures 
may avoid an operative intervention in selected patient 
populations. Angioplasty with endovascular stenting in 
the treatment of chronic mesenteric ischemia is asso­
ciated with an 80% long-term success rate. In patients 
requiring surgical exploration, the approach used is 
determined by the mesenteric angiogram. The entire 
length of the small and large bowel should be evalu­
ated, beginning at the ligament of Treitz. Restoration 
of blood flow at the time of laparotomy is accomplished 
with mesenteric bypass.
Determination of intestinal viability intraoperatively 
in patients with suspected intestinal ischemia can be chal­
lenging. After revascularization, the bowel wall should 
be observed for return of a pink color and peristalsis. 
­Palpation of major arterial vessels can be performed as 
well as applying a doppler flowmeter to the antimesen­
teric border of the bowel wall, but neither is a definitive 
indicator of viability. In equivocal cases, 1 g of IV sodium 
fluorescein is administered and the pattern of bowel 
reperfusion is observed under ultraviolet illumination 
with a standard (3600 A) Wood’s lamp. An area of non­
fluorescence >5 mm in diameter suggests nonviability. If 
doubt persists, reexploration performed 24–48 h follow­
ing surgery will allow demarcation of nonviable bowel. 
Primary intestinal anastomosis in patients with ischemic 
bowel is always worrisome, and reanastomosis should be 
deferred to the time of second-look laparotomy.
Acknowledgments
We thank Cory Sandore for providing some illustrations for 
this chapter. Gregory Bulkley contributed to this chapter in the 
16th edition.
 William Silen 
227
 ETIOLOGY AND CLASSIFICATION 
 In 75% of patients, acute intestinal obstruction results 
from adhesive bands or internal hernias secondary to pre-
vious abdominal surgery or from external hernias. The 
incidence of acute intestinal obstruction requiring  hospital 
admission within the fi rst few postoperative weeks is 
5–25%, and 10–50% of these patients will require surgi-
cal intervention. The incidence of postoperative intestinal 
obstruction may be lower following laparoscopic surgery 
than open procedures. However, the laparoscopic gas-
tric bypass procedure may be associated with an unex-
pected high rate of intestinal obstruction, with a higher 
reoperative rate. Other causes of intestinal obstruction 
not related to previous abdominal surgery include lesions 
 intrinsic to the wall of the intestine, e.g., diverticulitis, car-
cinoma, and regional enteritis; and luminal obstruction, 
e.g., gallstone obstruction, intussusception. 
 Two other conditions that must be differentiated 
from acute intestinal obstruction include  adynamic ileus
and  primary intestinal pseudo-obstruction . Adynamic ileus 
is mediated via the hormonal component of the sym-
pathoadrenal system and may occur after any peritoneal 
insult; its severity and duration will be dependent to 
some degree on the type of peritoneal injury. Hydro-
chloric acid, colonic contents, and pancreatic enzymes 
are among the most irritating to the peritoneum, 
whereas blood and urine are less so. Adynamic ileus 
occurs to some degree after any abdominal operation. 
Retroperitoneal hematoma, particularly associated with 
vertebral fracture, may cause severe adynamic ileus, and 
the latter may occur with other retroperitoneal condi-
tions, such as ureteral calculus or severe pyelonephritis. 
Thoracic diseases, including lower-lobe pneumonia, 
fractured ribs, and myocardial infarction, frequently 
produce adynamic ileus, as do electrolyte disturbances, 
particularly potassium depletion. Finally, intestinal 
ischemia, whether from vascular occlusion or intesti-
nal distention itself, may perpetuate an adynamic ileus. 
Intestinal pseudo-obstruction is a chronic motility disor-
der that frequently mimics mechanical obstruction. This 
condition is often exacerbated by narcotic use. 
 PATHOPHYSIOLOGY 
 Distention of the intestine is caused by the accumulation 
of gas and fl uid proximal to and within the obstructed 
segment. Between 70 and 80% of intestinal gas consists 
of swallowed air, and because this is composed mainly 
of nitrogen, which is poorly absorbed from the intesti-
nal lumen, removal of air by continuous gastric suction 
is a useful adjunct in the treatment of intestinal distention. 
The accumulation of fl uid proximal to the obstructing 
mechanism results not only from ingested fl uid, swal-
lowed saliva, gastric juice, and biliary and pancreatic 
secretions but also from interference with normal sodium 
and water transport. During the fi rst 12–24 h of obstruc-
tion, a marked depression of fl ux from lumen to blood of 
sodium and water occurs in the distended proximal intes-
tine. After 24 h, sodium and water move into the lumen, 
contributing further to the distention and fl uid losses. 
Intraluminal pressure rises from a normal of 2–4 cmH 2 O 
to 8–10 cmH 2 O. The loss of fl uids and electrolytes may 
be extreme, and unless replacement is prompt, hypovo-
lemia, renal insuffi ciency, and shock may result. Vom-
iting, accumulation of fl uids within the lumen, and the 
sequestration of fl uid into the edematous intestinal wall 
and peritoneal cavity as a result of impairment of venous 
return from the intestine all contribute to massive loss of 
fl uid and electrolytes. 
 A “closed loop” is the most feared complication of 
acute intestinal obstruction. Closed-loop obstruction 
results when the lumen is occluded at two points by a 
single mechanism such as a fascial hernia or adhesive 
band, thus producing a closed loop, the blood supply 
of which is also often occluded by the hernia or band. 
During peristalsis, when a “closed loop” is present, pres-
sures reach 30–60 cmH 2 O. Strangulation of the closed 
 ACUTE INTESTINAL OBSTRUCTION 
 CHAPTER 21 
loop is common in association with marked distention 
proximal to the involved loop. A form of closed-loop 
obstruction is encountered when complete obstruction of 
the colon exists in the presence of a competent ileoce­
cal valve (85% of individuals). Although the blood sup­
ply of the colon is not entrapped within the obstructing 
mechanism, distention of the cecum is extreme because 
of its greater diameter (Laplace’s law), and impairment of 
the intramural blood supply is considerable, with conse­
quent gangrene of the cecal wall. Once impairment of 
blood supply to the gastrointestinal tract occurs, bacterial 
invasion supervenes, and peritonitis develops. The sys­
temic effects of extreme distention include elevation of 
the ­diaphragm with restricted ventilation and subsequent 
atelectasis. Venous return via the inferior vena cava may 
also be impaired.
SYMPTOMS
Mechanical intestinal obstruction is characterized by cramping 
midabdominal pain, which tends to be more severe the 
higher the obstruction. The pain occurs in paroxysms, 
and the patient is relatively comfortable in the inter­
vals between the pains. Audible borborygmi are often 
noted by the patient simultaneously with the paroxysms 
of pain. The pain may become less severe as distention 
progresses, probably because motility is impaired in the 
edematous intestine. When strangulation is present, the 
pain is usually more localized and may be steady and 
severe without a colicky component, a fact that often 
causes delay in diagnosis of obstruction. Vomiting is 
almost invariable, and it is earlier and more profuse the 
higher the obstruction. The vomitus initially contains 
bile and mucus and remains as such if the obstruction 
is high in the intestine. With low ileal obstruction, the 
vomitus becomes feculent, i.e., orange-brown in color 
with a foul odor, which results from the overgrowth 
of bacteria proximal to the obstruction. Hiccups (sin­
gultus) are common. Obstipation and failure to pass gas 
by rectum are invariably present when the obstruction 
is complete, although some stool and gas may be passed 
­spontaneously or after an enema shortly after onset 
of the complete obstruction. Diarrhea is occasionally 
observed in partial obstruction. Blood in the stool is rare 
but does occur in cases of intussusception.
In adynamic ileus as well as colonic pseudo-obstruction, 
colicky pain is absent and only discomfort from disten­
tion is evident. Vomiting may be frequent but is rarely 
profuse. Complete obstipation may or may not occur. 
Singultus (hiccups) is common.
PHYSICAL FINDINGS
Abdominal distention is the hallmark of all forms of 
intestinal obstruction. It is least marked in cases of 
obstruction high in the small intestine and most marked 
in colonic obstruction. In early obstruction of the small 
and large intestine, tenderness and rigidity are usually 
minimal; the temperature is rarely >37.8°C (100°F). 
The appearance of shock, tenderness, rigidity, and fever 
indicates that contamination of the peritoneum with 
infected intestinal content has occurred. Hernial orifices 
should always be carefully examined for the presence of 
a mass. Auscultation may reveal loud, high-pitched bor­
borygmi coincident with colicky pain, but this finding 
is often absent late in strangulating or nonstrangulating 
obstruction. A quiet abdomen does not eliminate the 
possibility of obstruction, nor does it necessarily estab­
lish the diagnosis of adynamic ileus. The presence of a 
palpable abdominal mass usually signifies a closed-loop 
strangulating small-bowel obstruction; the tense fluid-
filled loop is the palpable lesion.
LABORATORY AND X-RAY FINDINGS
Laboratory and radiographic studies are used to help 
differentiate the two important clinical aspects of this 
disorder: strangulation vs. nonstrangulation and par­
tial vs. complete obstruction. Leukocytosis, with shift 
to the left, usually occurs when strangulation is pres­
ent, but a normal white blood cell count does not 
exclude strangulation. Elevation of the serum amylase 
level is encountered occasionally in all forms of intes­
tinal obstruction. Radiographic images demonstrating 
distention of fluid- and gas-filled loops of small intes­
tine usually arranged in a “stepladder” pattern with 
air-fluid levels and an absence or paucity of colonic 
gas are pathognomonic for small-bowel obstruction. 
Complete obstruction is suggested when passage of gas 
or stool per rectum has ceased and when gas is absent 
in the distal intestine by x-ray. A general haze due to 
peritoneal fluid and sometimes a “coffee bean”–shaped 
mass are seen in strangulating closed loop obstruction. 
A thin barium upper gastrointestinal series may help to 
differentiate partial from complete obstruction. How­
ever, thick barium given by mouth should be avoided 
when the obstruction is considered to be high grade 
or complete since retained barium sulfate may become 
inspissated and either make an incomplete obstruction 
complete or be aspirated into the tracheobronchial tree. 
CT is the most commonly used modality to evalu­
ate patients for intestinal obstruction but differentiat­
ing adynamic ileus, partial obstruction, and complete 
obstruction may be difficult (Fig. 21-1). The sensitivity 
and specificity of CT for strangulating obstruction are 
low (50 and 80%, respectively).
Common causes of colonic obstruction can be seen 
on abdominal radiographic series. These films may 
demonstrate a “bird’s beak” sign when a sigmoid vol­
vulus has occurred or an enlarged cecum when a cecal 
SECTION III
Disorders of the Alimentary Tract
228

CHAPTER 21
Acute Intestinal Obstruction
229
torsion or bascule is present. Colonic obstruction with 
a competent ileocecal valve is easily recognized because 
distention with gas is mainly confined to the colon. 
Gastrografin enema may help in demonstrating a com­
plete colonic obstruction. Furthermore, barium should 
never be given by mouth to a patient with a possible colonic 
obstruction until that possibility has been excluded.
TREATMENT	
Acute Intestinal Obstruction
SMALL-INTESTINAL OBSTRUCTION  The over­
all mortality rate for obstruction of the small intestine is 
about 10%. While the mortality rate for nonstrangulating 
obstruction is 5–8%, the mortality rate for a strangulating 
obstruction ranges from 20 to 75%. Since strangulating 
small-bowel obstruction is always complete, surgical inter­
ventions should always be undertaken in such patients 
after suitable preparation. Before operating, fluid and 
electrolyte balance should be restored and decompres­
sion instituted by means of a nasogastric tube. Replace­
ment of potassium is especially important because intake 
is nil and losses in vomitus are large. A long intestinal tube 
is not indicated. Operative intervention may be under­
taken successfully by laparoscopic techniques with a 
decreased incidence of wound complications. However, 
laparoscopic lysis of adhesions is associated with a longer 
operative time and higher conversion to open rate when 
compared to other laparoscopic procedures. Alterna­
tively, lysis of adhesions can be achieved through an open 
abdominal incision. In general, >50% of adhesions that 
occur are found at the previous incision site. Purely non­
operative therapy is safe only in the presence of incom­
plete obstruction and is best used in patients without 
increasing abdominal pain or leukocytosis. The overall 
recurrence of small-bowel obstruction is 16%. Population-
based studies show that although the surgical manage­
ment of small-bowel obstruction is associated with longer 
hospital stays, the rate of readmission for obstruction is 
lower. However, regardless of treatment type, following 
the index admission, only 20% of patients required read­
mission within a 5-year follow-up period.
COLONIC OBSTRUCTION  The mortality rate 
for colonic obstruction is about 20%. As in small-
bowel obstruction, nonoperative treatment is con­
traindicated unless the obstruction is incomplete. 
Incomplete obstruction can be treated with colono­
scopic decompression and placement of a metallic 
stent if a malignant lesion is present. The success rate 
approaches 90% depending on the location of the 
obstruction, with left-sided lesions being more suc­
cessfully stented than right-sided lesions. In general, 
the colonic stent is considered to be a temporary solu­
tion or a “bridge to surgery,” which allows for colonic 
preparation 
before 
surgical 
intervention. When 
obstruction is complete, early operation is manda­
tory, especially when the ileocecal valve is competent, 
because of the concern for cecal perforation. Cecal 
perforation is more likely if the cecal diameter is >10 
cm on plain abdominal film.
FIGURE 21-1
CT with oral and intravenous contrast demonstrating 
(A) evidence of small-bowel dilatation with air-fluid levels 
consistent with a small-bowel obstruction; (B) a partial small-
bowel obstruction from an incarcerated ventral hernia (arrow); 
and (C) decompressed bowel seen distal to the hernia (arrow).
SECTION III
Disorders of the Alimentary Tract
230
Decisions regarding the operative management 
of colonic obstruction are based on the cause of the 
obstruction and the patient’s overall well-being. For 
obstruction on the left side of the colon, operative man­
agement strategies include either decompression by 
cecostomy or transverse colostomy or resection with 
end-colostomy 
formation 
(Hartmann’s 
procedure). 
­Primary resection of obstructing left-sided lesions with 
on-table washout of the colon has also been accom­
plished safely. For a lesion of the right or transverse 
colon, primary resection and anastomosis can be per­
formed safely because distention of the ileum with con­
sequent discrepancy in size and hazard in suture are 
usually not present. Furthermore, the bacterial and stool 
content is less on the right side of the colon, decreasing 
the chance of infection.
ADYNAMIC 
ILEUS  This type of ileus usually 
responds to nonoperative decompression and treat­
ment of the primary disease. The prognosis is usually 
good. Correction of electrolyte abnormalities should 
be instituted (i.e., potassium, magnesium). Success­
ful decompression of a colonic ileus has been accom­
plished by repetitive colonoscopy. Neostigmine is 
also effective in cases of colonic ileus that have not 
responded to other conservative treatment. Rarely, 
adynamic colonic distention may become so great that 
cecostomy is required if cecal gangrene is feared.
 William Silen 
231
 ACUTE APPENDICITIS 
 INCIDENCE AND EPIDEMIOLOGY 
 
With more than 250,000 appendectomies per-
formed annually, appendicitis is the most com-
mon abdominal surgical emergency in the United 
States. The peak incidence of acute appendicitis is in the 
second and third decades of life; it is relatively rare at the 
extremes of age. However, perforation is more common 
in infancy and in the elderly, during which periods mor-
tality rates are highest. Males and females are equally 
affected, except between puberty and age 25, when males 
predominate in a 3:2 ratio. The incidence of appendicitis 
has remained stable in the United States over the last 
30 years, while the incidence of appendicitis is much 
lower in underdeveloped countries, especially parts of 
Africa, and in lower socioeconomic groups. The mortal-
ity rate in the United States decreased eightfold between 
1941 and 1970 but has remained at <1 per 100,000 since 
then. 
 PATHOGENESIS 
 Appendicitis is believed to occur as a result of appendiceal 
luminal obstruction. Obstruction is most  commonly 
caused by a fecalith, which results from accumulation 
and inspissation of fecal matter around vegetable fi bers. 
Enlarged lymphoid follicles associated with viral infec-
tions (e.g., measles), inspissated barium, worms (e.g., 
pinworms,  Ascaris , and  Taenia ), and tumors (e.g., carci-
noid or carcinoma) may also obstruct the lumen. Other 
common pathologic fi ndings include appendiceal ulcer-
ation. The cause of the ulceration is unknown, although 
a viral etiology has been postulated. Infection with  Yer-
sinia organisms may cause the disease, since high com-
plement fi xation antibody titers have been found in up 
to 30% of cases of proven appendicitis. Luminal bacte-
ria multiply and invade the appendiceal wall as venous 
engorgement and subsequent arterial compromise result 
from the high intraluminal pressures. Finally, gangrene 
and perforation occur. If the process evolves slowly, 
adjacent organs such as the terminal ileum, cecum, and 
omentum may wall off the appendiceal area so that a 
localized abscess will develop, whereas rapid progres-
sion of vascular impairment may cause perforation with 
free access to the peritoneal cavity. Subsequent rupture 
of primary appendiceal abscesses may produce fi stulas 
between the appendix and bladder, small intestine, sig-
moid, or cecum. Occasionally, acute appendicitis may 
be the fi rst manifestation of Crohn’s disease. 
 While chronic infection of the appendix with tuber-
culosis, amebiasis, and actinomycosis may occur, a  useful 
clinical aphorism states that  chronic appendiceal inﬂ amma-
tion is not usually the cause of prolonged abdominal pain of 
weeks’ or months’ duration . In contrast, recurrent acute 
appendicitis does occur, often with complete resolution 
of infl ammation and symptoms between attacks. Recur-
rent acute appendicitis may also occur if a long appendi-
ceal stump is left after initial appendectomy. 
 CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS 
 The sequence of abdominal discomfort and anorexia 
associated with acute appendicitis is pathognomonic. 
The pain is described as being located in the periumbili-
cal region initially and then migrating to the right lower 
quadrant. This classic sequence of symptoms occurs 
in only 66% of patients. The differential diagnoses for 
periumbilical and right lower quadrant pain is listed in 
Table 22-1 . The periumbilical abdominal pain is of the 
visceral type, resulting from distention of the appendi-
ceal lumen. This pain is carried on slow-conducting C 
fi bers and is usually poorly localized in the periumbili-
cal or epigastric region. In general, this visceral pain is 
mild, often cramping and usually lasting 4–6 h, but it 
may not be noted by stoic individuals. As infl amma-
tion spreads to the parietal peritoneal surfaces, the pain 
 ACUTE APPENDICITIS AND PERITONITIS 
 CHAPTER 22 
SECTION III
Disorders of the Alimentary Tract
232
becomes somatic, steady, and more severe and aggra­
vated by motion or cough. Parietal afferent nerves are 
A delta fibers, which are fast-conducting and ­unilateral. 
These fibers localize the pain to the right lower ­quadrant. 
Anorexia is very common; a hungry patient almost 
invariably does not have acute appendicitis. Nausea 
and vomiting occur in 50–60% of cases, but vomiting 
is usually self-limited. Change in bowel habit is of lit­
tle diagnostic value, since any or no alteration may be 
observed, although the presence of diarrhea caused by 
an inflamed appendix in juxtaposition to the sigmoid 
may cause diagnostic difficulties. Urinary frequency 
and dysuria occur if the appendix lies adjacent to the 
bladder.
Physical findings vary with time after onset of the 
illness and according to the location of the appen­
dix, which may be situated deep in the pelvic cul-de-
sac; in the right lower quadrant in any relation to the 
peritoneum, cecum, and small intestine; in the right 
upper quadrant (especially during pregnancy); or even 
in the left lower quadrant. The diagnosis cannot be estab­
lished unless tenderness can be elicited. While tenderness is 
sometimes absent in the early visceral stage of the dis­
ease, it ultimately always develops and is found in any 
location corresponding to the position of the appendix. 
Typically, tenderness to palpation will often occur at 
McBurney’s point, anatomically located on a line one-
third of the way between the anterior iliac spine and the 
umbilicus. Abdominal tenderness may be completely 
absent if a retrocecal or pelvic appendix is present, in 
which case the sole physical finding may be ­tenderness 
in the flank or on rectal or pelvic examination. Referred 
rebound tenderness is often present and is most likely 
to be absent early in the illness. Flexion of the right 
TABLE 22-1 
THE ANATOMIC ORIGIN OF PERIUMBILICAL 
AND RIGHT LOWER QUADRANT PAIN IN THE 
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF APPENDICITIS
Periumbilical
Appendicitis
Small-bowel obstruction
Gastroenteritis
Mesenteric ischemia
Right Lower Quadrant
Gastrointestinal causes
  Appendicitis
  Inflammatory bowel 
  disease
  Right-sided diverticulitis
  Gastroenteritis
  Inguinal hernia
Gynecologic causes
  Ovarian tumor/torsion
  Pelvic inflammatory
  disease
Renal causes
  Pyelonephritis
  Perinephritic abscess
  Nephrolithiasis
hip and guarded movement by the patient are due to 
parietal peritoneal involvement. Hyperesthesia of the 
skin of the right lower quadrant and a positive psoas or 
obturator sign are often late findings and are rarely of 
diagnostic value.
The temperature is usually normal or slightly ele­
vated [37.2°–38°C (99°–100.5°F)], but a temperature 
>38.3°C (101°F) should suggest perforation. Tachycardia 
is commensurate with the elevation of the ­temperature. 
­Rigidity and tenderness become more marked as the 
disease progresses to perforation and localized or diffuse 
peritonitis. Distention is rare unless severe diffuse peri­
tonitis has developed. A mass may develop if localized 
perforation has occurred but will not usually be detect­
able before 3 days after onset. Earlier presence of a mass 
suggests carcinoma of the cecum or Crohn’s disease. 
­Perforation is rare before 24 h after onset of symptoms, 
but the rate may be as high as 80% after 48 h.
Although moderate leukocytosis of 10,000–18,000 
cells/μL is frequent (with a concomitant left shift), 
the absence of leukocytosis does not rule out acute 
­appendicitis. Leukocytosis of >20,000 cells/μL sug­
gests probable perforation. Anemia and blood in the 
stool suggest a primary diagnosis of carcinoma of the 
cecum, especially in elderly individuals. The urine may 
contain a few white or red blood cells without bacte­
ria if the appendix lies close to the right ureter or blad­
der. ­Urinalysis is most useful in excluding genitourinary 
conditions that may mimic acute appendicitis.
Radiographs are rarely of value except when an 
opaque fecalith (5% of patients) is observed in the right 
lower quadrant (especially in children). Consequently, 
abdominal films are not routinely obtained unless other 
conditions such as intestinal obstruction or ureteral cal­
culus may be present. The diagnosis may also be estab­
lished by the ultrasonic demonstration of an enlarged 
and thick-walled appendix. Ultrasound is most useful to 
exclude ovarian cysts, ectopic pregnancy, or tuboovar­
ian abscess. Several studies have recently demonstrated 
the benefit of contrast-enhanced or nonenhanced CT 
over ultrasound and plain radiographs in the diagnosis 
of acute appendicitis. The findings on CT will include a 
thickened appendix with periappendiceal stranding and 
often the presence of a fecalith (Figs. 22-1 and 22-2). 
The reported positive predictive value of CT is 95–97% 
and the overall accuracy is 90–98%. Furthermore, non­
visualization of the appendix on CT is associated with 
the findings of a normal appendix 98% of the time. 
Free peritoneal air is uncommon, even in perforated 
appendicitis.
While the typical historic sequence and physical 
findings are present in 50–60% of cases, a wide variety 
of atypical patterns of disease are encountered, espe­
cially at the age extremes and during pregnancy. Infants 
under 2  years of age have a 70–80% incidence of 

CHAPTER 22
Acute Appendicitis and Peritonitis
233
perforation and generalized peritonitis. This is thought 
to be the result of a delay in diagnosis. Any infant or 
child with diarrhea, vomiting, and abdominal pain is 
highly suspect. Fever is much more common in this 
age group, and abdominal distention is often the only 
physical finding. In the elderly, pain and tenderness are 
often blunted, and thus the diagnosis is also frequently 
delayed and leads to a 30% incidence of perforation in 
patients older than age 70 years. Elderly patients often 
present initially with a slightly painful mass (a primary 
FIGURE 22-1
CT with oral and intravenous contrast of acute ­appendicitis. 
There is thickening of the wall of the appendix and periap­
pendiceal stranding (arrow).
FIGURE 22-2
Appendiceal fecolith (arrow).
appendiceal abscess) or with adhesive intestinal obstruc­
tion 5 or 6 days after a previously undetected perforated 
appendix.
Appendicitis occurs about once in every 500–2000 
pregnancies and is the most common extrauterine con­
dition requiring abdominal operation. The diagno­
sis may be missed or delayed because of the frequent 
occurrence of mild abdominal discomfort and nausea 
and vomiting during pregnancy, and because of the 
gradual shift of the appendix from the right lower quad­
rant to the right upper quadrant during the second and 
third trimester of pregnancy. Appendicitis tends to be 
most common during the second trimester. The diag­
nosis is best made with ultrasound, which is 80% accu­
rate; however, if perforation has already occurred, the 
accuracy of ultrasound decreases to 30%. Early interven­
tion is warranted because the incidence of fetal loss with 
a normal appendix is 1.5%. With perforation, the inci­
dence of fetal loss is 20–35%.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Acute appendicitis has been labeled the masquerader, and 
the diagnosis is often more difficult to make in young 
females. Obtaining a good history, including sexual 
activity and the presence of a vaginal discharge, will 
help differentiate acute appendicitis from pelvic inflam­
matory disease (PID). The presence of a malodorous 
vaginal discharge and gram-negative intracellular dip­
lococci are pathognomonic for PID. Pain on move­
ment of the cervix is also more specific for PID but may 
occur in appendicitis if perforation has occurred or if 
the appendix lies adjacent to the uterus or adnexa. Rup­
ture of a graafian follicle (mittelschmerz) occurs at midcy­
cle and will produce pain and tenderness more diffuse 
and usually of a less severe degree than in appendicitis. 
Rupture of a corpus luteum cyst is identical clinically to 
rupture of a graafian follicle but develops about the time 
of menstruation. The presence of an adnexal mass, evi­
dence of blood loss, and a positive pregnancy test help 
differentiate ruptured tubal pregnancy. Twisted ovarian cyst 
and endometriosis are occasionally difficult to distinguish 
from appendicitis. In all these female conditions, ultra­
sonography and laparoscopy may be of great value.
Acute mesenteric lymphadenitis and acute gastroenteritis 
are the diagnoses usually given when enlarged, slightly 
reddened lymph nodes at the root of the mesentery and 
a normal appendix are encountered at operation in a 
patient who usually has right lower quadrant ­tenderness. 
Retrospectively, these patients may have had a higher 
temperature, diarrhea, more diffuse pain and abdomi­
nal tenderness, and a lymphocytosis. Between cramps, 
the abdomen is completely relaxed. Children seem 
to be affected more frequently than adults. Some of 
these patients have infection with Y. pseudotuberculosis 
or Y. enterocolitica, in which case the diagnosis can be 
SECTION III
Disorders of the Alimentary Tract
234
established by culture of the mesenteric nodes or by 
serologic titers (Chap. 159). In Salmonella gastroenteri­
tis, the abdominal findings are similar, although the pain 
may be more severe and more localized, and fever and 
chills are common. The occurrence of similar ­symptoms 
among other members of the family may be ­helpful. 
Regional enteritis (Crohn’s disease) is usually ­associated 
with a more prolonged history, often with previ­
ous exacerbations regarded as episodes of gastroenteri­
tis unless the diagnosis has been established previously. 
Often an inflammatory mass is palpable. In addition, 
acute cholecystitis, perforated ulcer, acute pancreatitis, 
acute diverticulitis, strangulating intestinal obstruction, 
ureteral calculus, and pyelonephritis may present diag­
nostic difficulties.
TREATMENT	
Acute Appendicitis
If the diagnosis is in question, 4–6 h of observation with 
serial abdominal exams is always more beneficial than 
harmful. Antibiotics should not be administered when 
the diagnosis is in question, since they will only mask the 
perforation. The treatment of presumed acute appendi­
citis is early operation and appendectomy as soon as the 
patient can be prepared. Appendectomy is frequently 
accomplished laparoscopically and is associated with 
less postoperative narcotic use and earlier discharge. It 
is acceptable to have a 15–20% incidence of a normal 
appendix at the time of appendectomy to avoid perfora­
tion. The use of early laparoscopy instead of close clinical 
observation has not shown a clinical benefit in the man­
agement of patients with nonspecific abdominal pain.
A different approach is indicated if a palpable mass is 
found 3–5 days after the onset of symptoms. This find­
ing usually represents the presence of a phlegmon or 
abscess, and complications from attempted surgical 
excision are frequent. Such patients treated with broad-
spectrum antibiotics, drainage of abscesses >3 cm, 
­parenteral fluids, and bowel rest usually show resolu­
tion of symptoms within 1 week. Interval appendectomy 
can be performed safely 6–12 weeks later. A randomized 
clinical trial has demonstrated that antibiotics alone can 
effectively treat acute, nonperforated appendicitis in 
86% of male patients. However, antibiotics alone were 
associated with a higher recurrence rate than when fol­
lowed by surgical intervention. If the mass enlarges or 
the patient becomes more toxic, the abscess should be 
drained. Free perforation is associated with generalized 
peritonitis and its complications, including subphrenic, 
pelvic, or other abscesses, and can be avoided by early 
diagnosis. The mortality rate for nonperforated appen­
dicitis is 0.1%, little more than the risk of general anes­
thesia; for perforated appendicitis, mortality is 3% (and 
can reach 15% in the elderly).
ACUTE PERITONITIS
Peritonitis is an inflammation of the peritoneum; 
it may be localized or diffuse in location, acute or 
chronic in natural history, and infectious or ­aseptic 
in pathogenesis. Acute peritonitis is most often 
­infectious and is usually related to a perforated ­viscus 
(and called secondary peritonitis). When no intraab­
dominal source is identified, infectious peritonitis is 
called ­primary or spontaneous. Acute peritonitis is asso­
ciated with decreased intestinal motor activity, result­
ing in distention of the intestinal lumen with gas and 
fluid ­(adynamic ileus). The accumulation of fluid in 
the bowel together with the lack of oral intake leads 
to rapid intravascular volume depletion with effects on 
cardiac, renal, and other systems.
ETIOLOGY
Infectious agents gain access to the peritoneal cavity 
through a perforated viscus, a penetrating wound of 
the abdominal wall, or external introduction of a for­
eign object that is or becomes infected (e.g., a chronic 
peritoneal dialysis catheter). In the absence of immune 
compromise, host defenses are capable of eradicating 
small contaminations. The conditions that most com­
monly result in the introduction of bacteria into the 
peritoneum are ruptured appendix, ruptured diver­
ticulum, perforated peptic ulcer, incarcerated her­
nia, gangrenous gall bladder, volvulus, bowel infarc­
tion, cancer, inflammatory bowel disease, or intestinal 
obstruction. However, a wide range of mechanisms 
may play a role (Table 22-2). Bacterial peritonitis can 
also occur in the apparent absence of an intraperito­
neal source of bacteria (primary or spontaneous bacte­
rial peritonitis). This condition occurs in the setting of 
ascites and liver cirrhosis in 90% of the cases, usually 
in patients with ascites with low protein concentra­
tion (<1 g/L) (Chap. 308). Bacterial peritonitis is 
­discussed in detail in Chap. 127.
Aseptic peritonitis may be due to peritoneal irritation 
by abnormal presence of physiologic fluids (e.g., gastric 
juice, bile, pancreatic enzymes, blood, or urine) or ster­
ile foreign bodies (e.g., surgical sponges or instruments, 
starch from surgical gloves) in the peritoneal cavity or 
as a complication of rare systemic diseases such as lupus 
erythematosus, porphyria, or familial Mediterranean 
fever (Chap. 330). Chemical irritation of the perito­
neum is greatest for acidic gastric juice and pancreatic 
enzymes. Secondary bacterial infection is common in 
chemical peritonitis.
CLINICAL FEATURES
The cardinal manifestations of peritonitis are acute 
abdominal pain and tenderness, usually with fever. 
 
CHAPTER 22
Acute Appendicitis and Peritonitis
235
The location of the pain depends on the underly­
ing cause and whether the inflammation is localized or 
generalized. Localized peritonitis is most common in 
TABLE 22-2
CONDITIONS LEADING TO SECONDARY
BACTERIAL PERITONITIS
Perforations of bowel
  Trauma, blunt or 
  penetrating
  Inflammation
  Appendicitis
  Diverticulitis
  Peptic ulcer disease
  Inflammatory bowel
  disease
  Iatrogenic
  Endoscopic perforation
  Anastomotic leaks
  Catheter perforation
  Vascular
  Embolus
  Ischemia
  Obstructions
  Adhesions
  Strangulated hernias
  Volvulus
  Intussusception
  Neoplasms
  Ingested foreign body,
  toothpick, fish bone
Perforations or leaking of 
other organs
  Pancreas—pancreatitis
  Gallbladder—cholecystitis
  Urinary bladder—trauma,
  rupture
  Liver—bile leak after
  biopsy
  Fallopian tubes—salpingitis
  Bleeding into the
  peritoneal cavity
Disruption of integrity of 
peritoneal cavity
  Trauma
  Continuous ambulatory
  peritoneal dialysis
  (indwelling catheter)
  Intraperitoneal
  chemotherapy
  Perinephric abscess
  Iatrogenic—postoperative,
  foreign body
uncomplicated appendicitis and diverticulitis, and physi­
cal findings are limited to the area of inflammation. 
Generalized peritonitis is associated with widespread 
inflammation and diffuse abdominal tenderness and 
rebound. Rigidity of the abdominal wall is common 
in both localized and generalized peritonitis. Bowel 
sounds are usually but not always absent. Tachycardia, 
hypotension, and signs of dehydration are common. 
Leukocytosis and marked acidosis are common labora­
tory findings. Plain abdominal films may show dilation 
of large and small bowel with edema of the bowel wall. 
Free air under the diaphragm is associated with a per­
forated viscus. CT and/or ultrasonography can identify 
the presence of free fluid or an abscess. When ascites is 
present, diagnostic paracentesis with cell count (>250 
neutrophils/μL is usual in peritonitis), protein and lac­
tate dehydrogenase levels, and culture is essential. In 
elderly and immunosuppressed patients, signs of perito­
neal irritation may be more difficult to detect.
THERAPY AND PROGNOSIS
Treatment relies on rehydration, correction of electro­
lyte abnormalities, antibiotics, and surgical correction 
of the underlying defect. Mortality rates are <10% for 
uncomplicated peritonitis associated with a perforated 
ulcer or ruptured appendix or diverticulum in an other­
wise healthy person. Mortality rates of ≥40% have been 
reported for elderly people, those with underlying ill­
nesses, and when peritonitis has been present for >48 h.
This page intentionally left blank 
INFECTIONS OF THE
ALIMENTARY TRACT
SECTION IV
 Regina C. LaRocque  I   Edward T. Ryan  I   Stephen B. Calderwood 
238
 
Ranging from a mild annoyance to a devastat-
ing dehydrating illness, acute diarrheal disease 
is a leading cause of illness globally, with an 
estimated 4.6 billion episodes worldwide per year. 
 Diarrheal disease ranks second only to lower respiratory 
infection as the most common infectious cause of death 
worldwide. Among children <5 years old, diarrheal 
disease is a particularly important cause of death. Every 
year nearly 2 million children in this age group die of 
diarrheal disease; the majority of these young children 
are impoverished and live in resource-poor areas. By 
contributing to malnutrition and thereby reducing 
resistance to other infectious agents, diarrheal disease is 
also an indirect factor in a far greater burden of disease. 
 The wide range of clinical manifestations of acute 
gastrointestinal illnesses is matched by the wide variety 
of infectious agents involved, including viruses, bacte-
ria, and parasitic pathogens  ( Table 23-1 ) . This chapter 
discusses factors that enable gastrointestinal pathogens 
to cause disease, reviews host defense mechanisms, and 
delineates an approach to the evaluation and treatment 
of patients presenting with acute diarrhea. Individual 
organisms causing acute gastrointestinal illnesses are dis-
cussed in detail in subsequent chapters. 
 PATHOGENIC MECHANISMS 
 Enteric pathogens have developed a variety of tactics to 
overcome host defenses. Understanding the virulence 
factors employed by these organisms is important in the 
diagnosis and treatment of clinical disease. 
 Inoculum size 
 The number of microorganisms that must be ingested 
to cause disease varies considerably from species to 
species. For  Shigella , enterohemorrhagic  Escherichia coli , 
 Giardia lamblia , or  Entamoeba , as few as 10–100 bacte-
ria or cysts can produce infection, while 10 5 −10 8  Vibrio 
cholerae organisms must be ingested orally to cause dis-
ease. The infective dose of  Salmonella varies widely, 
depending on the species, host, and food vehicle. 
The ability of organisms to overcome host defenses 
has important implications for transmission;  Shigella , 
enterohemorrhagic  E. coli ,  Entamoeba , and  Giardia can 
spread by person-to-person contact, whereas under 
some circumstances  Salmonella may have to grow in 
food for several hours before reaching an effective 
infectious dose. 
 Adherence 
 Many organisms must adhere to the gastrointestinal 
mucosa as an initial step in the pathogenic process; 
thus, organisms that can compete with the normal 
bowel fl ora and colonize the mucosa have an impor-
tant advantage in causing disease. Specifi c cell-surface 
proteins involved in attachment of bacteria to intestinal 
cells are important virulence determinants.  V. cholerae , for 
example, adheres to the brush border of small- intestinal 
enterocytes via specifi c surface adhesins, including the 
toxin-coregulated pilus and other accessory coloni-
zation factors. Enterotoxigenic  E. coli , which causes 
watery diarrhea, produces an adherence protein called 
 colonization factor antigen that is necessary for coloniza-
tion of the upper small intestine by the organism prior 
to the production of enterotoxin. Enteropathogenic 
 E. coli , an agent of diarrhea in young children, and 
enterohemorrhagic  E. coli , which causes hemorrhagic 
colitis and the hemolytic-uremic syndrome, produce 
virulence determinants that allow these organisms to 
attach to and efface the brush border of the intestinal 
epithelium. 
 ACUTE INFECTIOUS DIARRHEAL DISEASES 
AND BACTERIAL FOOD POISONING 
 CHAPTER 23 

CHAPTER 23
Acute Infectious Diarrheal Diseases and Bacterial Food Poisoning
239
Toxin production
The production of one or more exotoxins is important in 
the pathogenesis of numerous enteric organisms. Such 
toxins include enterotoxins, which cause watery diar­
rhea by acting directly on secretory mechanisms in the 
intestinal mucosa; cytotoxins, which cause destruction of 
mucosal cells and associated inflammatory ­diarrhea; and 
neurotoxins, which act directly on the central or peripheral 
nervous system.
The prototypical enterotoxin is cholera toxin, a 
­heterodimeric protein composed of one A and five B 
subunits. The A subunit contains the enzymatic activity 
of the toxin, while the B subunit pentamer binds holo­
toxin to the enterocyte surface receptor, the ganglio­
side GM1. After the binding of holotoxin, a fragment of 
the A subunit is translocated across the eukaryotic cell 
membrane into the cytoplasm, where it catalyzes the 
ADP-ribosylation of a GTP-binding protein and causes 
persistent activation of adenylate cyclase. The end result 
is an increase of cyclic AMP in the intestinal mucosa, 
which increases Cl− secretion and decreases Na+ absorp­
tion, leading to a loss of fluid and the production of 
diarrhea.
Enterotoxigenic strains of E. coli may produce a 
protein called heat-labile enterotoxin (LT) that is similar 
to cholera toxin and causes secretory diarrhea by the 
same mechanism. Alternatively, enterotoxigenic strains 
of E. coli may produce heat-stable enterotoxin (ST), one 
form of which causes diarrhea by activation of guanyl­
ate cyclase and elevation of intracellular cyclic GMP. 
TABLE 23-1 
GASTROINTESTINAL PATHOGENS CAUSING ACUTE DIARRHEA
MECHANISM
LOCATION
ILLNESS
STOOL FINDINGS
EXAMPLES OF PATHOGENS INVOLVED
Noninflammatory 
(enterotoxin)
Proximal 
small bowel
Watery
diarrhea
No fecal leukocytes; 
mild or no increase in 
fecal lactoferrin
Vibrio cholerae, enterotoxigenic 
­Escherichia coli (LT and/or ST), 
­enteroaggregative E. coli, ­Clostridium 
­perfringens, Bacillus cereus, 
­Staphylococcus aureus, Aeromonas 
hydrophila, Plesiomonas shigelloides, 
rotavirus, norovirus, enteric adenoviruses, 
Giardia lamblia, Cryptosporidium spp., 
Cyclospora spp., microsporidia
Inflammatory 
(invasion or 
­cytotoxin)
Colon or 
distal small 
bowel
Dysentery or 
inflammatory 
diarrhea
Fecal polymorpho­
nuclear leukocytes; 
substantial increase 
in fecal lactoferrin
Shigella spp., Salmonella spp., 
­Campylobacter jejuni, enterohemorrhagic 
E. coli, enteroinvasive E. coli, Yersinia 
enterocolitica, Listeria monocytogenes, 
Vibrio parahaemolyticus, Clostridium 
­difficile, A. hydrophila, P. shigelloides, 
­Entamoeba histolytica, Klebsiella oxytoca
Penetrating
Distal small 
bowel
Enteric fever
Fecal mononuclear 
leukocytes
Salmonella typhi, Y. enterocolitica
Abbreviations: LT, heat-labile enterotoxin; ST, heat-stable enterotoxin.
Source: After Steiner and Guerrant.
Some enterotoxigenic strains of E. coli produce both 
LT and ST.
Bacterial cytotoxins, in contrast, destroy intesti­
nal mucosal cells and produce the syndrome of dysen­
tery, with bloody stools containing inflammatory cells. 
Enteric pathogens that produce such cytotoxins include 
Shigella dysenteriae type 1, Vibrio parahaemolyticus, and 
Clostridium difficile. S. dysenteriae type 1 and Shiga toxin–
producing strains of E. coli produce potent cytotoxins 
and have been associated with outbreaks of hemorrhagic 
colitis and hemolytic-uremic syndrome.
Neurotoxins are usually produced by bacteria outside 
the host and therefore cause symptoms soon after inges­
tion. Included are the staphylococcal and Bacillus cereus 
toxins, which act on the central nervous system to pro­
duce vomiting.
Invasion
Dysentery may result not only from the production 
of cytotoxins but also from bacterial invasion and 
destruction of intestinal mucosal cells. Infections due 
to ­Shigella and enteroinvasive E. coli are characterized 
by the organisms’ invasion of mucosal epithelial cells, 
intraepithelial multiplication, and subsequent spread 
to adjacent cells. Salmonella causes inflammatory diar­
rhea by ­invasion of the bowel mucosa but generally is 
not associated with the destruction of enterocytes or 
the full clinical syndrome of dysentery. Salmonella typhi 
and ­Yersinia enterocolitica can penetrate intact intestinal 
mucosa, multiply intracellularly in Peyer’s patches and 
SECTION IV
Infections of the Alimentary Tract
240
intestinal lymph nodes, and then disseminate through 
the bloodstream to cause enteric fever, a syndrome 
characterized by fever, headache, relative bradycardia, 
abdominal pain, splenomegaly, and leukopenia.
HOST DEFENSES
Given the enormous number of microorganisms 
ingested with every meal, the normal host must ­combat 
a constant influx of potential enteric pathogens. Studies of 
infections in patients with alterations in defense mecha­
nisms have led to a greater understanding of the ­variety 
of ways in which the normal host can protect itself 
against disease.
Normal flora
The large numbers of bacteria that normally inhabit the 
intestine act as an important host defense by prevent­
ing colonization by potential enteric pathogens. Per­
sons with fewer intestinal bacteria, such as infants who 
have not yet developed normal enteric colonization or 
patients receiving antibiotics, are at significantly greater 
risk of developing infections with enteric pathogens. 
The composition of the intestinal flora is as important as 
the number of organisms present. More than 99% of the 
normal colonic flora is made up of anaerobic bacteria, 
and the acidic pH and volatile fatty acids produced by 
these organisms appear to be critical elements in resis­
tance to colonization.
Gastric acid
The acidic pH of the stomach is an important bar­
rier to enteric pathogens, and an increased frequency 
of infections due to Salmonella, G. lamblia, and a vari­
ety of helminths has been reported among patients who 
have undergone gastric surgery or are achlorhydric for 
some other reason. Neutralization of gastric acid with 
antacids, proton pump inhibitors, or H2 blockers—a 
common practice in the management of hospitalized 
patients—similarly increases the risk of enteric coloniza­
tion. In addition, some microorganisms can survive the 
extreme acidity of the gastric environment; rotavirus, 
for example, is highly stable to acidity.
Intestinal motility
Normal peristalsis is the major mechanism for clearance 
of bacteria from the proximal small intestine. When 
intestinal motility is impaired (e.g., by treatment with 
opiates or other antimotility drugs, anatomic abnor­
malities, or hypomotility states), the frequency of bacte­
rial overgrowth and infection of the small bowel with 
enteric pathogens is increased. Some patients whose 
treatment for Shigella infection consists of diphenoxylate 
hydrochloride with atropine (Lomotil) experience pro­
longed fever and shedding of organisms, while patients 
treated with opiates for mild Salmonella gastroenteritis 
have a higher frequency of bacteremia than those not 
treated with opiates.
Immunity
Both cellular immune responses and antibody produc­
tion play important roles in protection from enteric 
infections. Humoral immunity to enteric pathogens 
consists of systemic IgG and IgM as well as secretory 
IgA. The mucosal immune system may be the first line 
of defense against many gastrointestinal pathogens. The 
binding of bacterial antigens to the luminal surface of 
M cells in the distal small bowel and the subsequent 
presentation of antigens to subepithelial lymphoid tis­
sue lead to the proliferation of sensitized lymphocytes. 
These lymphocytes circulate and populate all of the 
mucosal tissues of the body as IgA-secreting plasma 
cells.
Genetic determinants
Host genetic variation influences susceptibility to diar­
rheal diseases. People with blood group O show 
increased susceptibility to disease due to V. cholerae, 
­Shigella, E. coli O157, and norovirus. Polymorphisms in 
genes encoding inflammatory mediators have been asso­
ciated with the outcome of infection with enteroaggre­
gative E. coli, enterotoxin-producing E. coli, Salmonella, 
C. difficile, and V. cholerae.
APPROACH TO THE
PATIENT	
Infectious Diarrhea or Bacterial
	
Food Poisoning
The approach to the patient with possible infectious diar­
rhea or bacterial food poisoning is shown in Fig. 23-1.
HISTORY  The answers to questions with high 
discriminating value can quickly narrow the range 
of potential causes of diarrhea and help determine 
whether treatment is needed. Important elements of 
the narrative history are detailed in Fig. 23-1.
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION  The examination of 
patients for signs of dehydration provides essential 
information about the severity of the diarrheal illness 
and the need for rapid therapy. Mild dehydration is indi­
cated by thirst, dry mouth, decreased axillary sweat, 
decreased urine output, and slight weight loss. Signs 
of moderate dehydration include an orthostatic fall 
in blood pressure, skin tenting, and sunken eyes (or, in 
infants, a sunken fontanelle). Signs of severe dehydra­
tion include lethargy, obtundation, feeble pulse, hypo­
tension, and frank shock.
 
CHAPTER 23
Acute Infectious Diarrheal Diseases and Bacterial Food Poisoning
241
FIGURE 23-1 
Clinical algorithm for the approach to patients with 
community-acquired infectious diarrhea or bacterial 
food poisoning. Key to superscripts: 1. Diarrhea lasting 
>2 weeks is generally defined as chronic; in such cases, 
many of the causes of acute diarrhea are much less likely, 
and a new spectrum of causes needs to be considered. 
2. Fever often implies invasive disease, although fever and 
diarrhea may also result from infection outside the gastrointes­
tinal tract, as in malaria. 3. Stools that contain blood or mucus 
indicate ulceration of the large bowel. Bloody stools without 
fecal leukocytes should alert the laboratory to the possibil­
ity of infection with Shiga toxin–producing enterohemorrhagic 
Escherichia coli. Bulky white stools suggest a ­small-intestinal 
process that is causing malabsorption. Profuse “rice-water” 
stools suggest cholera or a similar toxigenic process. 4. 
­Frequent stools over a given period can provide the first warn­
ing of impending dehydration. 5. Abdominal pain may be 
most severe in inflammatory processes like those due to Shi­
gella, Campylobacter, and necrotizing toxins. Painful abdomi­
nal muscle cramps, caused by electrolyte loss, can develop 
in severe cases of cholera. Bloating is common in giardiasis.
An appendicitis-like syndrome should prompt a culture for 
Yersinia enterocolitica with cold enrichment. 6. ­Tenesmus 
(painful rectal spasms with a strong urge to defecate but 
little passage of stool) may be a feature of cases with proc­
titis, as in shigellosis or amebiasis. 7. Vomiting implies 
an acute infection (e.g., a toxin-mediated illness or food 
­poisoning) but can also be prominent in a variety of sys­
temic illnesses (e.g., malaria) and in intestinal obstruction. 
8. Asking patients whether anyone else they know is sick is 
a more efficient means of identifying a common source than 
is constructing a list of recently eaten foods. If a common 
source seems likely, specific foods can be investigated. See 
text for a discussion of bacterial food poisoning. 9. Current 
antibiotic therapy or a recent history of treatment suggests 
Clostridium difficile diarrhea (Chap. 129). Stop antibiotic 
treatment if possible and consider tests for C. difficile ­toxins. 
Antibiotic use may increase the risk of other infections, such 
as ­salmonellosis. 10. See text (and Chap. 123) for a dis­
cussion of traveler’s diarrhea. (After Steiner and Guerrant; 
RL Guerrant, DA Bobak: N Engl J Med 325:327, 1991; with 
­permission.)
Obtain stool to be examined for WBCs
 (and, if >10 days, for parasites)
and
  
Resolution
Continued illness
Continue
  symptomatic therapy
  (Table 128-5);
  further evaluation
   if no resolution
Specific antiparasitic therapy
Consider: Empirical
  antimicrobial therapy
    (Table 128-5)
Culture for: Shigella,
  Salmonella, C. jejuni
Consider:
  C.difficile cytotoxin
Assess:
  Duration (>1 day)
  Severity (see text)
Symptomatic therapy
Oral rehydration therapy
  (see Table 128-5)
Noninflammatory
  (no WBCs; see
  Table 128-1)
Inflammatory (WBCs;
    see Table 128-1)
Examine stool for parasites
Diarrhea, Nausea, or Vomiting
Obtain history:
  Duration1
  Fever2
  Appearance of stool3
  Frequency of bowel
    movements4
  Abdominal pain5
Tenesmus6
Vomiting7
Common source8
Antibiotic use9
Travel10
Yes
No
SECTION IV
Infections of the Alimentary Tract
242
DIAGNOSTIC APPROACH  After the severity of 
illness is assessed, the clinician must distinguish 
between inflammatory and noninflammatory disease. 
Using the history and epidemiologic features of the 
case as guides, the clinician can then rapidly evaluate 
the need for further efforts to define a specific etiol­
ogy and for therapeutic intervention. Examination of 
a stool sample may supplement the narrative history. 
Grossly bloody or mucoid stool suggests an inflamma­
tory process. A test for fecal leukocytes (preparation of 
a thin smear of stool on a glass slide, addition of a drop 
of methylene blue, and examination of the wet mount) 
can suggest inflammatory disease in patients with diar­
rhea, although the predictive value of this test is still 
debated. A test for fecal lactoferrin, which is a marker 
of fecal leukocytes, is more sensitive and is available in 
latex agglutination and enzyme-linked immunosorbent 
assay formats. Causes of acute infectious diarrhea, cat­
egorized as inflammatory and noninflammatory, are 
listed in Table 23-1.
POST-DIARRHEA 
COMPLICATIONS  Chronic 
complications may follow the resolution of an acute diar­
rheal episode. The clinician should inquire about prior 
diarrheal illness if the conditions listed in Table 23-2 are 
observed.
TABLE 23-2 
POST-DIARRHEA COMPLICATIONS OF ACUTE 
INFECTIOUS DIARRHEAL ILLNESS
COMPLICATION
COMMENTS
Chronic diarrhea
•  Lactase deficiency
•  Small-bowel bacterial 
overgrowth
•  Malabsorption syn­
dromes (tropical and 
celiac sprue)
Occurs in ∼1% of travelers 
with acute diarrhea
•  Protozoa account for ∼1/3 
of cases
Initial presentation or 
exacerbation of inflam­
matory bowel disease
May be precipitated by 
­traveler’s diarrhea
Irritable bowel syndrome
Occurs in ∼10% of travelers 
with traveler’s diarrhea
Reactive arthritis (formerly 
known as Reiter’s
syndrome)
Particularly likely after infec­
tion with invasive organ­
isms (Shigella, Salmonella, 
­Campylobacter, Yersinia)
Hemolytic-ure­
mic ­syndrome 
­(hemolytic ­anemia, 
­thrombocytopenia, and 
renal failure)
Follows infection with Shiga 
toxin–producing bacteria 
(Shigella dysenteriae type 1 
and enterohemorrhagic 
Escherichia coli)
Guillain-Barré syndrome
Particularly likely after
Campylobacter infection
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Travel history
Of the several million people who travel from 
temperate industrialized countries to tropical 
regions of Asia, Africa, and Central and South America 
each year, 20–50% experience a sudden onset of abdomi­
nal cramps, anorexia, and watery diarrhea; thus traveler’s 
diarrhea is the most common travel-related infectious 
illness (Chap. 123). The time of onset is usually 3 days 
to 2 weeks after the traveler’s arrival in a resource-poor 
area; most cases begin within the first 3–5 days. The ill­
ness is generally self-limited, lasting 1–5 days. The high 
rate of diarrhea among travelers to underdeveloped areas 
is related to the ingestion of contaminated food or water.
The organisms that cause traveler’s diarrhea vary 
­considerably with location (Table 23-3), as does the pat­
tern of antimicrobial resistance. In all areas, enterotoxi­
genic and enteroaggregative strains of E. coli are the most 
common isolates from persons with the classic secretory 
traveler’s diarrhea syndrome. Infection with Campylobacter 
jejuni is especially common in areas of Asia.
Location
Day-care centers have particularly high attack rates of 
enteric infections. Rotavirus is most common among 
children <2 years old, with attack rates of 75–100% 
among those exposed. G. lamblia is more common 
among older children, with somewhat lower attack 
rates. Other common organisms, often spread by fecal-
oral contact, are Shigella, C. jejuni, and Cryptosporidium. 
A characteristic feature of infection among children 
attending day-care centers is the high rate of secondary 
cases among family members.
Similarly, hospitals are sites in which enteric ­infections 
are concentrated. Diarrhea is one of the most common 
manifestations of nosocomial infections. C. difficile is the 
predominant cause of nosocomial diarrhea among adults 
in the United States. Klebsiella oxytoca has been identi­
fied as a cause of antibiotic-associated hemorrhagic 
colitis. Viral pathogens, especially rotavirus, can spread 
rapidly in pediatric wards. Enteropathogenic E. coli has 
been associated with outbreaks of diarrhea in nurseries 
for newborns. One-third of elderly patients in chronic-
care institutions develop a significant diarrheal illness 
each year; more than one-half of these cases are caused 
by cytotoxin-producing C. difficile. Antimicrobial 
therapy can predispose to pseudomembranous ­colitis 
by altering the normal colonic flora and allowing the 
­multiplication of C. difficile (Chap. 129).
Age
Globally, most morbidity and mortality from enteric 
pathogens involves children <5 years of age. Breast-fed 
 
CHAPTER 23
Acute Infectious Diarrheal Diseases and Bacterial Food Poisoning
243
TABLE 23-3 
CAUSES OF TRAVELER’S DIARRHEA
ETIOLOGIC AGENT
APPROXIMATE 
PERCENTAGE 
OF CASES
COMMENTS
BACTERIA
50–75
Enterotoxigenic 
Escherichia coli
10–45
Single most
important agent
Enteroaggregative 
E. coli
5–35
Emerging enteric 
pathogen with 
worldwide
distribution
Campylobacter 
jejuni
5–25
More common
in Asia
Shigella
0–15
Major cause of
dysentery
Salmonella
0–15
Others
0–5
Including 
­Aeromonas, 
­Plesiomonas, and 
Vibrio cholerae
VIRUSES
0–20
Norovirus
0–10
Associated with 
cruise ships
Rotavirus
0–5
Particularly common 
among children
PARASITES
0–10
Giardia lamblia
0–5
Affects hikers and 
campers who drink 
from freshwater 
streams; contami­
nates water
supplies in Russia
Cryptosporidium
0–5
Resistant to chlorine 
treatment
Entamoeba
histolytica
<1
Cyclospora
<1
OTHER
0–10
Acute food 
­poisoninga
0–5
No pathogen 
identified
10–50
a For etiologic agents, see Table 23-4.
Source: After Hill et al.
infants are protected from contaminated food and water 
and derive some protection from maternal antibodies, but 
their risk of infection rises dramatically when they begin 
to eat solid foods. Exposure to rotavirus is universal, 
with most children experiencing their first infection in 
the first or second year of life. Older children and adults 
are more commonly infected with norovirus. Other 
organisms with higher attack rates among children than 
among adults include enterotoxigenic, enteropathogenic, 
and enterohemorrhagic E. coli; Shigella;C. jejuni; and 
G. lamblia.
Host immune status
Immunocompromised hosts are at elevated risk 
of acute and chronic infectious diarrhea. Individu­
als with defects in cell-mediated immunity (including 
those with AIDS) are at particularly high risk of inva­
sive enteropathies, including salmonellosis, listeriosis, 
and cryptosporidiosis. Individuals with hypogamma­
globulinemia are at particular risk of C. difficile colitis 
and giardiasis. Patients with cancer are more likely to 
develop C. difficile infection as a result of chemother­
apy and frequent hospitalizations. Infectious diarrhea 
can be life-threatening in immunocompromised hosts, 
with complications including bacteremia and metastatic 
seeding of infection. Furthermore, dehydration may 
compromise renal function and increase the toxicity of 
­immunosuppressive drugs.
Bacterial food poisoning
If the history and the stool examination indicate a non­
inflammatory etiology of diarrhea and there is evidence 
of a common-source outbreak, questions concerning 
the ingestion of specific foods and the time of onset of 
the diarrhea after a meal can provide clues to the bacte­
rial cause of the illness. Potential causes of bacterial food 
poisoning are shown in Table 23-4.
Bacterial disease caused by an enterotoxin elabo­
rated outside the host, such as that due to Staphylo­
coccus aureus or B. cereus, has the shortest incubation 
period (1–6 h) and generally lasts <12 h. Most cases 
of staphylococcal food poisoning are caused by con­
tamination from infected human carriers. Staphylo­
cocci can multiply at a wide range of temperatures; 
thus, if food is left to cool slowly and remains at room 
temperature after cooking, the organisms will have 
the opportunity to form enterotoxin. Outbreaks fol­
lowing picnics where potato salad, mayonnaise, and 
cream pastries have been served offer classic exam­
ples of staphylococcal food poisoning. Diarrhea, nau­
sea, vomiting, and abdominal cramping are common, 
while fever is less so.
B. cereus can produce either a syndrome with a short 
incubation period—the emetic form, mediated by a staph­
ylococcal type of enterotoxin—or one with a longer 
incubation period (8–16 h)—the diarrheal form, caused by 
an enterotoxin resembling E. coli LT, in which diarrhea 
and abdominal cramps are characteristic but vomiting is 
uncommon. The emetic form of B. cereus food poisoning 
is associated with contaminated fried rice; the organism is 
common in uncooked rice, and its heat-resistant spores 
survive boiling. If cooked rice is not refrigerated, the 
SECTION IV
Infections of the Alimentary Tract
244
spores can germinate and produce toxin. Frying before 
serving may not destroy the preformed, heat-stable toxin.
Food poisoning due to Clostridium perfringens also 
has a slightly longer incubation period (8–14 h) and 
results from the survival of heat-resistant spores in 
inadequately cooked meat, poultry, or legumes. After 
ingestion, toxin is produced in the intestinal tract, 
causing moderately severe abdominal cramps and 
diarrhea; vomiting is rare, as is fever. The illness is 
­self-limited, rarely lasting >24 h.
Not all food poisoning has a bacterial cause. Nonbac­
terial agents of short-incubation food poisoning include 
capsaicin, which is found in hot peppers, and a variety 
of toxins found in fish and shellfish (Chap. 396).
LABORATORY EVALUATION
Many cases of noninflammatory diarrhea are self-limited 
or can be treated empirically, and in these instances the 
clinician may not need to determine a specific etiology. 
Potentially pathogenic E. coli cannot be distinguished 
from normal fecal flora by routine culture, and tests 
to detect enterotoxins are not available in most clini­
cal laboratories. In situations in which cholera is a con­
cern, stool should be cultured on selective media such 
as thiosulfate–citrate–bile salts–sucrose (TCBS) or tel­
lurite-taurocholate-gelatin (TTG) agar. A latex agglu­
tination test has made the rapid detection of rotavirus 
in stool practical for many laboratories, while reverse-
transcriptase polymerase chain reaction and specific 
TABLE 23-4 
BACTERIAL FOOD POISONING
INCUBATION PERIOD, ORGANISM
SYMPTOMS
COMMON FOOD SOURCES
1–6 h
Staphylococcus aureus
Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea
Ham, poultry, potato or egg salad,
mayonnaise, cream pastries
Bacillus cereus
Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea
Fried rice
8–16 h
Clostridium perfringens
Abdominal cramps, diarrhea (vomiting rare)
Beef, poultry, legumes, gravies
B. cereus
Abdominal cramps, diarrhea (vomiting rare)
Meats, vegetables, dried beans, cereals
>16 h
Vibrio cholerae
Watery diarrhea
Shellfish, water
Enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli
Watery diarrhea
Salads, cheese, meats, water
Enterohemorrhagic E. coli
Bloody diarrhea
Ground beef, roast beef, salami, raw 
milk, raw vegetables, apple juice
Salmonella spp.
Inflammatory diarrhea
Beef, poultry, eggs, dairy products
Campylobacter jejuni
Inflammatory diarrhea
Poultry, raw milk
Shigella spp.
Dysentery
Potato or egg salad, lettuce, raw
vegetables
Vibrio parahaemolyticus
Dysentery
Mollusks, crustaceans
antigen enzyme immunoassays have been developed for 
the identification of norovirus. Stool specimens should 
be examined by immunofluorescence-based rapid 
assays or (less sensitive) standard microscopy for Giardia 
cysts or Cryptosporidium if the level of clinical suspicion 
regarding the involvement of these organisms is high.
All patients with fever and evidence of inflamma­
tory disease acquired outside the hospital should have 
stool cultured for Salmonella, Shigella, and ­Campylobacter. 
Salmonella and Shigella can be selected on ­MacConkey 
agar as non-lactose-fermenting (colorless) colonies or 
can be grown on Salmonella-Shigella agar or in selenite 
enrichment broth, both of which inhibit most organ­
isms except these pathogens. Evaluation of nosocomial 
diarrhea should initially focus on C. difficile; stool cul­
ture for other pathogens in this setting has an extremely 
low yield and is not cost-effective. Toxins A and B 
produced by pathogenic strains of C. difficile can be 
detected by rapid enzyme immunoassays and latex 
agglutination tests (Chap. 129). Isolation of C. jejuni 
requires inoculation of fresh stool onto selective growth 
medium and incubation at 42°C in a microaerophilic 
atmosphere. In many laboratories in the United States, 
E. coli O157:H7 is among the most common patho­
gens isolated from visibly bloody stools. Strains of this 
enterohemorrhagic serotype can be identified in spe­
cialized laboratories by serotyping but also can be 
identified presumptively in hospital laboratories as lac­
tose-fermenting, indole-positive colonies of ­sorbitol 
nonfermenters (white colonies) on sorbitol MacConkey 
plates. If the clinical presentation suggests the possibility 
 
CHAPTER 23
Acute Infectious Diarrheal Diseases and Bacterial Food Poisoning
245
of intestinal amebiasis, stool should be examined by 
a rapid antigen detection assay or by (less sensitive) 
microscopy.
TREATMENT	
Infectious Diarrhea or Bacterial
	
Food Poisoning
In many cases, a specific diagnosis is not necessary 
or not available to guide treatment. The clinician 
can proceed with the information obtained from the 
history, stool examination, and evaluation of dehy­
dration severity. Empirical regimens for the treat­
ment of traveler’s diarrhea are listed in Table 23-5.
The mainstay of treatment is adequate rehydration. 
The treatment of cholera and other dehydrating diar­
rheal diseases was revolutionized by the promotion 
of oral rehydration solution (ORS), the efficacy of 
which depends on the fact that glucose-facilitated 
TABLE 23-5 
TREATMENT OF TRAVELER’S DIARRHEA ON THE BASIS OF CLINICAL FEATURESa
CLINICAL SYNDROME
SUGGESTED THERAPY
Watery diarrhea (no blood in stool, no fever), 1 or 
2 unformed stools per day without distressing 
enteric symptoms
Oral fluids (oral rehydration solution, Pedialyte, Lytren, or flavored min­
eral water) and saltine crackers
Watery diarrhea (no blood in stool, no fever), 1 or 
2 unformed stools per day with distressing enteric 
symptoms
Bismuth subsalicylate (for adults): 30 mL or 2 tablets (262 mg/tablet) 
every 30 min for 8 doses; or loperamideb: 4 mg initially followed by
2 mg after passage of each unformed stool, not to exceed 8 tablets 
(16 mg) per day (prescription dose) or 4 caplets (8 mg) per day
(over-the-counter dose); drugs can be taken for 2 days
Watery diarrhea (no blood in stool, no distressing 
abdominal pain, no fever), >2 unformed stools
per day
Antibacterial drugc plus (for adults) loperamideb (see dose above)
Dysentery (passage of bloody stools) or fever 
(>37.8°C)
Antibacterial drugc
Vomiting, minimal diarrhea
Bismuth subsalicylate (for adults; see dose above)
Diarrhea in infants (<2 years old)
Fluids and electrolytes (oral rehydration solution, Pedialyte, Lytren); 
continue feeding, especially with breast milk; seek medical attention 
for moderate dehydration, fever lasting >24 h, bloody stools, or
diarrhea lasting more than several days
aAll patients should take oral fluids (Pedialyte, Lytren, or flavored mineral water) plus saltine crackers. If diarrhea becomes moderate or severe, if 
fever persists, or if bloody stools or dehydration develops, the patient should seek medical attention.
bLoperamide should not be used by patients with fever or dysentery; its use may prolong diarrhea in patients with infection due to Shigella or 
other invasive organisms.
cThe recommended antibacterial drugs are as follows:
Travel to high-risk country other than Thailand:
Adults: (1) A fluoroquinolone such as ciprofloxacin, 750 mg as a single dose or 500 mg bid for 3 days; levofloxacin, 500 mg as a single dose or 
500 mg qd for 3 days; or norfloxacin, 800 mg as a single dose or 400 mg bid for 3 days. (2) Azithromycin, 1000 mg as a single dose or 500 mg 
qd for 3 days. (3) Rifaximin, 200 mg tid or 400 mg bid for 3 days (not recommended for use in dysentery).
Children: Azithromycin, 10 mg/kg on day 1, 5 mg/kg on days 2 and 3 if diarrhea persists. Alternative agent: furazolidone, 7.5 mg/kg per day in 
four divided doses for 5 days.
Travel to Thailand (with risk of fluoroquinolone-resistant Campylobacter):
Adults: Azithromycin (at above dose for adults). Alternative agent: a fluoroquinolone (at above doses for adults).
Children: Same as for children traveling to other areas (see above).
Source: After Hill et al.
absorption of sodium and water in the small intes­
tine remains intact in the presence of cholera toxin. 
The use of ORS has reduced ­mortality rates for chol­
era from >50% (in untreated cases) to <1%. A number 
of ORS formulas have been used. Initial preparations 
were based on the treatment of patients with cholera 
and included a solution containing 3.5 g of sodium 
chloride, 2.5 g of sodium bicarbonate, 1.5 g of potas­
sium chloride, and 20 g of glucose (or 40 g of sucrose) 
per liter of water. Such a preparation can still be used 
for the treatment of severe cholera. Many causes of 
secretory diarrhea, however, are associated with less 
electrolyte loss than occurs in cholera; beginning in 
2002, the World Health Organization recommended 
a “reduced-osmolarity/reduced-salt” ORS that is bet­
ter tolerated and more effective than classic ORS. 
This preparation contains 2.6 g of sodium chloride, 
2.9 g of trisodium citrate, 1.5 g of potassium chloride, 
SECTION IV
Infections of the Alimentary Tract
246
and 13.5 g of glucose (or 27 g of sucrose) per liter of 
water. ORS formulations containing rice or cereal as 
the carbohydrate source may be even more effec­
tive than glucose-based solutions. Patients who are 
severely dehydrated or in whom vomiting precludes 
the use of oral therapy should receive IV solutions 
such as Ringer’s lactate.
Although most secretory forms of traveler’s diarrhea 
(usually due to enterotoxigenic or enteroaggregative 
E. coli or to Campylobacter) can be treated effectively 
with rehydration, bismuth subsalicylate, or antiperi­
staltic agents, antimicrobial agents can shorten the 
duration of illness from 3–4 days to 24–36 h. Changes 
in diet have not been shown to have an impact on the 
duration of illness, while the efficacy of probiotics con­
tinues to be debated. Most individuals who present 
with dysentery (bloody diarrhea and fever) should be 
treated empirically with an antimicrobial agent (e.g., a 
fluoroquinolone or a macrolide) pending microbiologic 
analysis of stool. Individuals with shigellosis should be 
treated with a 3- to 7-day course. Individuals with Cam­
pylobacter infection often benefit from antimicrobial 
treatment as well. Because of increasing resistance of 
Campylobacter to fluoroquinolones, especially in parts 
of Asia, a macrolide antibiotic such as erythromycin or 
azithromycin may be preferred for this infection.
Treatment of salmonellosis must be tailored to the 
individual patient. Since administration of antimi­
crobial agents often prolongs intestinal colonization 
with Salmonella, these drugs are usually reserved for 
individuals at high risk of complications from dissemi­
nated salmonellosis, such as young children, patients 
with prosthetic devices, elderly patients, and immu­
nocompromised persons. Antimicrobial agents should 
not be administered to individuals (especially chil­
dren) in whom enterohemorrhagic E. coli infection is 
suspected. Laboratory studies of enterohemorrhagic
E. coli strains have demonstrated that a number of anti­
biotics induce replication of Shiga toxin–producing lamb­
doid bacteriophages, thereby significantly increasing 
toxin production by these strains. Clinical studies have 
supported these laboratory results, and antibiotics 
may increase by twentyfold the risk of hemolytic-ure­
mic syndrome and renal failure during enterohemor­
rhagic E. coli infection. A clinical clue in the diagnosis 
of the latter infection is bloody diarrhea with low fever 
or none at all.
PROPHYLAXIS
Improvements in hygiene to limit fecal-oral spread of 
enteric pathogens will be necessary if the prevalence of 
diarrheal diseases is to be significantly reduced in devel­
oping countries. Travelers can reduce their risk of diar­
rhea by eating only hot, freshly cooked food; by avoiding 
raw vegetables, salads, and unpeeled fruit; and by drinking 
only boiled or treated water and avoiding ice. Historically, 
few travelers to tourist destinations adhere to these dietary 
restrictions. Bismuth subsalicylate is an inexpensive agent 
for the prophylaxis of traveler’s diarrhea; it is taken at a 
dosage of 2 tablets (525 mg) four times a day. Treatment 
appears to be effective and safe for up to 3 weeks, but 
adverse events such as temporary darkening of the tongue 
and tinnitus can occur. A meta-analysis suggests that pro­
biotics may lessen the likelihood of traveler’s diarrhea by 
∼15%. Prophylactic antimicrobial agents, although effec­
tive, are not generally recommended for the prevention of 
traveler’s diarrhea except when travelers are immunosup­
pressed or have other underlying illnesses that place them 
at high risk for morbidity from gastrointestinal infection. 
The risk of side effects and the possibility of developing 
an infection with a drug-resistant organism or with more 
harmful, invasive bacteria make it more reasonable to insti­
tute an empirical short course of treatment if symptoms 
develop. If prophylaxis is indicated, the nonabsorbed anti­
biotic rifaximin can be considered for use in regions such 
as Latin America and Africa, where noninvasive E. coli pre­
dominates as the cause of traveler’s diarrhea. Rifaximin is 
not effective against invasive enteropathogens.
The possibility of exerting a major impact on the 
worldwide morbidity and mortality associated with 
diarrheal diseases has led to intense efforts to develop 
effective vaccines against the common bacterial and 
viral enteric pathogens. An effective rotavirus vaccine is 
currently available. Vaccines against S. typhi and V. chol­
erae are also available, although the protection they offer 
is incomplete and/or short lived. At present, there is no 
effective commercially available vaccine against Shigella, 
enterotoxigenic E. coli, Campylobacter, nontyphoidal 
­Salmonella, norovirus, or intestinal parasites.
Acknowledgments
The substantial contributions of Joan R. Butterton, MD, 
an author of this chapter in previous editions, are gratefully 
acknowledged.
 Dale N. Gerding  I   Stuart Johnson 
247
 DefInItIon 
 Clostridium diffi cile infection (CDI) is a unique colonic 
disease that is acquired almost exclusively in associa-
tion with antimicrobial use and the consequent disrup-
tion of the normal colonic fl ora. The most commonly 
diagnosed diarrheal illness acquired in the hospital, CDI 
results from the ingestion of spores of  C. diffi cile that 
vegetate, multiply, and secrete toxins, causing diarrhea 
and pseudomembranous colitis (PMC). 
 etIoloGy AnD ePIDeMIoloGy 
 C. diffi cile is an obligately anaerobic, gram-positive, 
spore-forming bacillus whose spores are found widely in 
nature, particularly in the environment of hospitals and 
chronic-care facilities. CDI occurs most frequently in 
hospitals and nursing homes where the level of antimi-
crobial use is high and the environment is contaminated 
by  C. diffi cile spores. 
 Clindamycin, ampicillin, and cephalosporins were the 
fi rst antibiotics associated with CDI. The second- and 
third-generation cephalosporins, particularly cefotaxime, 
ceftriaxone, cefuroxime, and ceftazidime, are agents fre-
quently responsible for this condition, and the fl uoroqui-
nolones (ciprofl oxacin, levofl oxacin, and moxifl oxacin) 
are the most recent drug class to be implicated in hospital 
outbreaks. Penicillin/β-lactamase-inhibitor combinations 
such as ticarcillin/clavulanate and piperacillin/tazobactam 
pose signifi cantly less risk. However, all antibiotics, includ-
ing vancomycin and metronidazole (the agents most 
commonly used to treat CDI), have been found to carry 
a risk of subsequent CDI. Rare cases are reported in 
patients without prior antibiotic exposure. 
 C. diffi cile is acquired exogenously, most frequently 
in the hospital or nursing home, and is carried in the 
stool of symptomatic and asymptomatic patients. The 
rate of fecal colonization is often ≥20% among adult 
patients hospitalized for >1 week; in contrast, the rate 
is 1–3% among community residents. Community-onset 
CDI without recent hospitalization probably accounts 
for ≤10% of all cases. The risk of  C. diffi cile acquisition 
increases in proportion to length of hospital stay. Asymp-
tomatic fecal carriage of  C. diffi cile in healthy neonates 
is very common, with rates often exceeding 50% dur-
ing the fi rst 6 months of life, but associated disease in 
this population is rare. Spores of  C. diffi cile are found on 
environmental surfaces (where the organism can persist 
for months) and on the hands of hospital personnel who 
fail to practice good hand hygiene. Hospital epidemics 
of CDI have been attributed to a single  C. diffi cile strain 
and to multiple strains present simultaneously. Other 
identifi ed risk factors for CDI include older age, greater 
severity of underlying illness, gastrointestinal surgery, use 
of electronic rectal thermometers, enteral tube feeding, 
and antacid treatment. Use of proton pump inhibitors 
may be a risk factor, but this risk is probably modest, 
and no fi rm data have implicated these agents in patients 
who are not already receiving antibiotics. 
 PAtholoGy AnD PAthoGenesIs 
 Spores of toxigenic  C. diffi cile are ingested, survive gas-
tric acidity, germinate in the small bowel, and colonize 
the lower intestinal tract, where they elaborate two large 
toxins: toxin A (an enterotoxin) and toxin B (a cytotoxin). 
These toxins initiate processes resulting in the disrup-
tion of epithelial-cell barrier function, diarrhea, and 
pseudomembrane formation. Toxin A is a potent neu-
trophil chemoattractant, and both toxins glucosylate the 
GTP-binding proteins of the Rho subfamily that regu-
late the actin cell cytoskeleton. Data from studies using 
molecular disruption of toxin genes in isogenic mutants 
suggest that toxin B is the essential virulence factor; this 
 CLOSTRIDIUM DIFFICILE INFECTION, 
INCLUDING PSEUDOMEMBRANOUS COLITIS 
 CHAPTER 24 
SECTION IV
Infections of the Alimentary Tract
248
possibility, if confirmed, might account for the occur-
rence of clinical disease caused by toxin A–negative 
strains. Disruption of the cytoskeleton results in loss of 
cell shape, adherence, and tight junctions, with conse-
quent fluid leakage. A third toxin, binary toxin CDT, 
was previously found in only ∼6% of strains but is pres-
ent in all isolates of the newly recognized epidemic 
strain (see “Global Considerations,” below); this toxin is 
related to C. perfringens iota toxin. Its role in the patho-
genesis of CDI has not yet been defined.
The pseudomembranes of PMC are confined to 
the colonic mucosa and initially appear as 1- to 2-mm 
whitish-yellow plaques. The intervening mucosa appears 
unremarkable, but, as the disease progresses, the pseudo-
membranes coalesce to form larger plaques and become 
confluent over the entire colon wall (Fig. 24-1). The 
whole colon is usually involved, but 10% of patients 
have rectal sparing. Viewed microscopically, the pseu-
domembranes have a mucosal attachment point and 
contain necrotic leukocytes, fibrin, mucus, and cellular 
debris. The epithelium is eroded and necrotic in focal 
areas, with neutrophil infiltration of the mucosa.
Patients colonized with C. difficile were initially 
thought to be at high risk for CDI. However, four 
prospective studies have shown that colonized patients 
actually have a decreased risk of subsequent CDI. 
At least three events are proposed as essential for the 
Figure 24-1
Autopsy specimen showing confluent pseudomembranes 
covering the cecum of a patient with pseudomembranous 
colitis. Note the sparing of the terminal ileum (arrow).
development of CDI (Fig. 24-2). Exposure to antimi-
crobial agents is the first event and establishes susceptibil-
ity to C. difficile infection. The second event is exposure 
to toxigenic C. difficile. Given that the majority of 
patients do not develop CDI after the first two events, 
a third event is clearly essential for its occurrence. Can-
didate third events include exposure to a C. difficile 
strain of particular virulence, exposure to antimicrobial 
agents especially likely to cause CDI, and an inadequate 
host immune response. The host anamnestic serum 
IgG antibody response to toxin A of C. difficile is the 
most likely third event that determines which patients 
develop diarrhea and which patients remain asymptom-
atic. The majority of humans first develop antibody to C. 
difficile toxins when colonized asymptomatically during 
the first year of life. Infants are thought not to develop 
symptomatic CDI because they lack suitable mucosal 
toxin receptors that develop later in life. In adulthood, 
serum levels of IgG antibody to toxin A increase more 
in response to infection in individuals who become 
asymptomatic carriers than in those who develop CDI. 
For persons who develop CDI, increasing levels of anti-
toxin A during treatment correlate with a lower risk of 
recurrence of CDI. A clinical trial using monoclonal 
antibodies to both toxin A and toxin B in addition to 
standard therapy showed rates of recurrence lower than 
those obtained with placebo plus standard therapy.
Pathogenesis model for C. difficile enteric disease
Antimicrobial(s)
Hospitalization
CDI
Asymptomatic
C. difficile
colonization
Acquisition of a toxigenic strain of C. difficile and failure to mount
an anamnestic toxin A antibody response result in CDI.
C. difficile
acquisition
C. difficile
acquisition
Figure 24-2
Pathogenesis model for hospital-acquired Clostridium 
difficile infection (CDI). At least three events are integral to 
C. difficile pathogenesis. Exposure to antibiotics establishes 
susceptibility to infection. Once susceptible, the patient may 
acquire nontoxigenic (nonpathogenic) or toxigenic strains of 
C. difficile as a second event. Acquisition of toxigenic C. difficile 
may be followed by asymptomatic colonization or CDI, depend-
ing on one or more additional events, including an inadequate 
host anamnestic IgG response to C. difficile toxin A.
 
CHAPTER 24
Clostridium difficile Infection, Including Pseudomembranous Colitis
249
Global Considerations
Rates and severity of CDI in the United States, 
Canada, and Europe have increased markedly 
since the year 2000. Rates in U.S. hospitals tri-
pled between 2000 and 2005. Hospitals in Montreal, 
Quebec, have reported rates four times higher than the 
1997 baseline, with directly attributable mortality of 
6.9% (increased from 1.5%). An epidemic strain, vari-
ously known as toxinotype III, REA type BI, PCR 
ribotype 027, and pulsed-field type NAP1, is thought to 
account for much of the increase in incidence and has 
been found in North America, Europe, and Asia. The 
epidemic organism is characterized by (1) an ability to 
produce 16–23 times as much toxin A and toxin B as 
control strains in vitro; (2) the presence of a third toxin 
(binary toxin CDT); and (3) high-level resistance to all 
fluoroquinolones. New strains have been and will prob-
ably continue to be implicated in outbreaks; their emer-
gence may be explained in part by patterns of antibiotic 
use, particularly in hospitals.
Clinical Manifestations
Diarrhea is the most common manifestation caused by 
C. difficile. Stools are almost never grossly bloody and 
range from soft and unformed to watery or mucoid in 
consistency, with a characteristic odor. Patients may 
have as many as 20 bowel movements per day. Clinical 
and laboratory findings include fever in 28% of cases, 
abdominal pain in 22%, and leukocytosis in 50%. When 
adynamic ileus (which is seen on x-ray in ∼20% of 
cases) results in cessation of stool passage, the diagnosis 
of CDI is frequently overlooked. A clue to the presence 
of unsuspected CDI in these patients is unexplained leu-
kocytosis, with ≥15,000 white blood cells (WBCs)/μL. 
Such patients are at high risk for complications of C. difficile 
infection, particularly toxic megacolon and sepsis.
C. difficile diarrhea recurs after treatment in ∼15–30% 
of cases, and this figure may be increasing. Recurrences 
may represent either relapses due to the same strain or 
reinfections with a new strain. Susceptibility to recur-
rence of clinical CDI is likely a result of continued dis-
ruption of the normal fecal flora caused by the antibiotic 
used to treat CDI.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of CDI is based on a combination of 
clinical criteria: (1) diarrhea (≥3 unformed stools per 
24 h for ≥2 days) with no other recognized cause plus 
(2) toxin A or B detected in the stool, toxin-producing 
C. difficile detected in the stool by polymerase chain 
reaction (PCR) or culture, or pseudomembranes seen in 
the colon. PMC is a more advanced form of CDI and is 
visualized at endoscopy in only ∼50% of patients with 
diarrhea who have a positive stool culture and toxin 
assay for C. difficile (Table 24-1). Endoscopy is a rapid 
Table 24-1 
Relative Sensitivity and Specificity of Diagnostic Tests for Clostridium difficile Infection (CDI)
Type of Test
Relative 
Sensitivitya
Relative 
Specificitya
Comment
Stool culture for 
C. difficile
++++
+++
Most sensitive test; specificity of ++++ if the C. difficile isolate
tests positive for toxin; with clinical data, is diagnostic of CDI; 
turnaround time too slow for practical use
Cell culture cytotoxin 
test on stool
+++
++++
With clinical data, is diagnostic of CDI; highly specific but 
not as sensitive as stool culture; slow turnaround time
Enzyme immunoassay 
for toxin A or toxins A 
and B in stool
++ to +++
+++
With clinical data, is diagnostic of CDI; rapid results, but 
not as sensitive as stool culture or cell culture cytotoxin test
Enzyme immunoassay 
for C. difficile common 
antigen in stool
+++ to ++++
+++
Detects glutamate dehydrogenase found in toxigenic and 
nontoxigenic strains of C. difficile and other stool organisms;
more sensitive and less specific than enzyme immunoassay 
for toxins; rapid results
PCR for C. difficile 
toxin B gene in stool
++++
++++
Detects toxigenic C. difficile in stool; newly approved for clinical
testing, but appears to be more sensitive than enzyme 
immunoassay toxin testing and at least as specific
Colonoscopy or  
sigmoidoscopy
+
++++
Highly specific if pseudomembranes are seen; insensitive 
compared with other tests
aAccording to both clinical and test-based criteria.
Note: ++++, >90%; +++, 71–90%; ++, 51–70%; +, ∼50%.
SECTION IV
Infections of the Alimentary Tract
250
diagnostic tool in seriously ill patients with suspected 
PMC and an acute abdomen, but a negative result in 
this examination does not rule out CDI.
Despite the array of tests available for C. difficile and 
its toxins (Table 24-1), no single test has high sensitiv-
ity, high specificity, and rapid turnaround. Most labora-
tory tests for toxins, including enzyme immunoassays 
(EIAs), lack sensitivity. However, testing of multiple 
additional stool specimens is not recommended. PCR 
assays have now been approved for diagnostic testing 
and appear to be both rapid and sensitive while retain-
ing high specificity. Empirical treatment is appropriate if 
CDI is strongly suspected on clinical grounds. Testing of 
asymptomatic patients is not recommended except for 
epidemiologic study purposes. In particular, so-called 
tests of cure following treatment are not recommended 
because many patients continue to harbor the organism 
and toxin after diarrhea has ceased and test results do 
not always predict recurrence of CDI. Thus these results 
should not be used to restrict placement of patients in 
long-term-care or nursing home facilities.
Treatment	
Clostridium difficile Infection
Primary CDI  When possible, discontinuation of 
any ongoing antimicrobial administration is recom-
mended as the first step in treatment of CDI. Earlier 
studies indicated that 15–23% of patients respond to 
this simple measure. However, with the advent of the 
current epidemic strain and the associated rapid clinical 
deterioration of some patients, prompt initiation of spe-
cific CDI treatment has become the standard. General 
treatment guidelines include hydration and the avoid-
ance of antiperistaltic agents and opiates, which may 
mask symptoms and possibly worsen disease. Neverthe-
less, antiperistaltic agents have been used safely with 
vancomycin or metronidazole for mild to moderate CDI.
All drugs, particularly vancomycin, should be given 
orally if possible. When IV metronidazole is admin-
istered, fecal bactericidal drug concentrations are 
achieved during acute diarrhea, and CDI treatment 
has been successful; however, in the presence of ady-
namic ileus, IV metronidazole treatment of PMC has 
failed. In previous randomized trials, diarrhea response 
rates to oral therapy with vancomycin or metronida-
zole were ≥94%, but four recent observational stud-
ies found that response rates for metronidazole had 
declined to 62–78%. Although the mean time to resolu-
tion of diarrhea is 2–4 days, the response to metroni-
dazole may be much slower. Treatment should not be 
deemed a failure until a drug has been given for at 
least 6 days. On the basis of data for shorter courses of 
vancomycin, it is recommended that metronidazole and 
vancomycin be given for at least 10 days, although 
no controlled comparisons are available. Metronida-
zole is not approved for this indication by the U.S. Food 
and Drug Administration (FDA), but most patients with 
mild to moderate illness respond to 500 mg given by 
mouth three times a day for 10 days; extension of the 
treatment period may be needed for slow responders. 
In addition to the reports of increases in metronidazole  
failures, a prospective, randomized, double-blind,  
placebo-controlled study has demonstrated the superi-
ority of vancomycin over metronidazole for treatment of 
severe CDI. The severity assessment score in that study 
included age as well as laboratory parameters (elevated 
temperature, low albumin level, or elevated WBC count), 
documentation of PMC by endoscopy, or treatment 
of CDI in the intensive care unit. Although a validated 
severity score is not yet available, it is important to ini-
tiate treatment with oral vancomycin for patients who 
appear seriously ill, particularly if they have a high WBC 
count (>15,000/μL) or a creatinine level that is ≥1.5 times 
higher than the premorbid value (Table 24-2). Small 
randomized trials of nitazoxanide, bacitracin, rifaximin, 
and fusidic acid for treatment of CDI have been con-
ducted. While these drugs have not yet been extensively 
studied, shown to be superior, or approved by the FDA 
for this indication, they provide potential alternatives to 
vancomycin and metronidazole.
Recurrent CDI  Overall, ∼15–30% of patients 
experience recurrences of CDI, either as relapses 
caused by the original organism or as reinfections fol-
lowing treatment. Recurrence rates are higher among 
patients ≥65 years old, those who continue to take 
antibiotics while being treated for CDI, and those who 
remain in the hospital after the initial episode of CDI. 
Patients who have a first recurrence of CDI have a high 
rate of second recurrence (33–65%). In the first recur-
rence, re-treatment with metronidazole is comparable 
to treatment with vancomycin (Table 24-2). Recurrent 
disease, once thought to be relatively mild, has now 
been documented to pose a significant (11%) risk of 
serious complications (shock, megacolon, perfora-
tion, colectomy, or death within 30 days). There is no 
standard treatment for multiple recurrences, but long 
or repeated metronidazole courses should be avoided 
because of potential neurotoxicity. Approaches include 
the administration of vancomycin followed by the yeast 
Saccharomyces boulardii; the administration of vanco-
mycin followed by a synthetic fecal bacterial enema; 
and the intentional colonization of the patient with a 
nontoxigenic strain of C. difficile. None of these biother-
apeutic approaches has been approved by the FDA for 
use in the United States. Other strategies include (1) the 
use of vancomycin in tapering doses or with pulse dos-
ing every other day for 2–8 weeks and (2) sequential 
treatment with vancomycin (125 mg four times daily for 
 
CHAPTER 24
Clostridium difficile Infection, Including Pseudomembranous Colitis
251
Table 24-2 
Recommendations for the Treatment of Clostridium difficile Infection (CDI)
Clinical Setting
Treatment(s)
Comments
Initial episode, mild to 
moderate
Oral metronidazole (500 mg tid × 10–14 d)
Initial episode, severe
Oral vancomycin (125 mg qid × 10–14 d)
Indicators of severe disease may include leukocyto-
sis (≥15,000 white blood cells/μL) and a creatinine 
level ≥ 1.5 times the premorbid value.
Initial episode, severe 
complicated or 
fulminant
Vancomycin (500 mg PO or via nasogastric 
tube) plus metronidazole (500 mg IV q8h) 
plus consider
Rectal instillation of vancomycin (500 mg 
in 100 mL of normal saline as a retention 
enema q6–8h)
Severe complicated or fulminant CDI is defined as 
severe CDI with the addition of hypotension, shock, 
ileus, or toxic megacolon. The duration of treatment  
may need to be >2 weeks and is dictated by 
response. Consider using IV tigecycline (50 mg 
q12h after a 100-mg loading dose) in place of 
metronidazole.
First recurrence
Same as for initial episode
Second recurrence
Vancomycin in tapered/pulsed regimen
Typical taper/pulse regimen: 125 mg qid ×10–14 d, 
then bid × 1 week, then daily × 1 week, then 
q2–3d for 2–8 weeks
Multiple recurrences
Consider the following options:
•  Repeat vancomycin taper/pulse
•  Vancomycin (500 mg qid × 10 d) plus
Saccharomyces boulardii (500 mg
bid × 28 d)
•  Vancomycin (125 mg qid × 10–14 d); then 
stop vancomycin and start rifaximin 
(400 mg bid × 2 weeks)
•  Nitazoxanide (500 mg bid × 10 d)
•  Fecal transplantation
•  IV immunoglobulin (400 mg/kg)
The only controlled study of treatment for recurrent 
CDI used S. boulardii and showed borderline
significance compared with placebo.
10–14 days) followed by rifaximin (400 mg twice daily 
for 14 days). IV immunoglobulin, which has also been 
used with some success, presumably provides antibod-
ies to C. difficile toxins.
Severe Complicated or Fulminant 
CDI  Fulminant (rapidly progressive and severe) CDI 
presents the most difficult treatment challenge. Patients 
with fulminant disease often do not have diarrhea, and 
their illness mimics an acute surgical abdomen. Sep-
sis (hypotension, fever, tachycardia, leukocytosis) may 
result from severe CDI. An acute abdomen (with or with-
out toxic megacolon) may include signs of obstruction, 
ileus, colon-wall thickening, and ascites on abdominal 
CT, often with peripheral-blood leukocytosis (≥20,000 
WBCs/μL). With or without diarrhea, the differential 
diagnosis of an acute abdomen, sepsis, or toxic megaco-
lon should include CDI if the patient has received anti-
biotics in the past 2 months. Cautious sigmoidoscopy 
or colonoscopy to visualize PMC and an abdominal CT 
examination are the best diagnostic tests in patients 
without diarrhea.
Medical management of fulminant CDI is suboptimal 
because of the difficulty of delivering metronidazole or 
vancomycin to the colon by the oral route in the pres-
ence of ileus (Table 24-2). The combination of vancomy-
cin (given via nasogastric tube and by retention enema) 
plus IV metronidazole has been used with some success 
in uncontrolled studies, as has IV tigecycline in small-
scale uncontrolled studies. Surgical colectomy may 
be life-saving if there is no response to medical man-
agement. If possible, colectomy should be performed 
before the serum lactate level reaches 5 mmol/L. The 
incidence of fulminant CDI requiring colectomy appears 
to be increasing in the evolving epidemic.
Prognosis
The mortality rate attributed to CDI, previously found 
to be 0.6–3.5%, has reached 6.9% in recent outbreaks 
and is progressively higher with increasing age. Most 
patients recover, but recurrences are common.
Prevention and Control
Strategies for the prevention of CDI are of two types: 
those aimed at preventing transmission of the organism 
SECTION IV
Infections of the Alimentary Tract
252
to the patient and those aimed at reducing the risk of 
CDI if the organism is transmitted. Transmission of 
C. difficile in clinical practice has been prevented by 
gloving of personnel, elimination of the use of contami-
nated electronic thermometers, and use of hypochlorite 
(bleach) solution for environmental decontamination of 
patients’ rooms. Hand hygiene is critical; hand washing 
is recommended in CDI outbreaks because alcohol 
hand gels are not sporicidal. CDI outbreaks have been 
best controlled by restricting the use of specific antibiot-
ics, such as clindamycin and second- and third-generation 
cephalosporins. Outbreaks of CDI due to clindamycin-
resistant strains have resolved promptly when clindamy-
cin use is restricted.
 Miriam J. Baron  I   Dennis L. Kasper 
253
 Intraperitoneal infections generally arise because a nor-
mal anatomic barrier is disrupted. This disruption may 
occur when the appendix, a diverticulum, or an ulcer 
ruptures; when the bowel wall is weakened by ischemia, 
tumor, or infl ammation (e.g., in infl ammatory bowel 
disease); or with adjacent infl ammatory processes, such 
as pancreatitis or pelvic infl ammatory disease, in which 
enzymes (in the former case) or organisms (in the latter) 
may leak into the peritoneal cavity. Whatever the incit-
ing event, once infl ammation develops and organisms 
usually contained within the bowel or another organ 
enter the normally sterile peritoneal space, a predictable 
series of events takes place. Intraabdominal infections 
occur in two stages: peritonitis and—if the patient sur-
vives this stage and goes untreated—abscess formation. 
The types of microorganisms predominating in each 
stage of infection are responsible for the pathogenesis of 
disease. 
 PerItonItIs 
 Peritonitis is a life-threatening event that is often 
accompanied by bacteremia and sepsis syndrome 
( Chap. 271 ). The peritoneal cavity is large but is divided 
into compartments. The upper and lower peritoneal 
cavities are divided by the transverse mesocolon; the 
greater omentum extends from the transverse meso-
colon and from the lower pole of the stomach to line 
the lower peritoneal cavity. The pancreas, duodenum, 
and ascending and descending colon are located in 
the anterior retroperitoneal space; the kidneys, ureters, 
and adrenals are found in the posterior retroperitoneal 
space. The other organs, including liver, stomach, gall-
bladder, spleen, jejunum, ileum, transverse and sigmoid 
colon, cecum, and appendix, are within the peritoneal 
cavity. The cavity is lined with a serous membrane that 
can serve as a conduit for fl uids—a property exploited 
in peritoneal dialysis  ( Fig. 25-1 ) . A small amount of 
serous fl uid is normally present in the peritoneal space, 
with a protein content (consisting mainly of albumin) 
of <30 g/L and <300 white blood cells (WBCs, gener-
ally mononuclear cells) per microliter. In bacterial infec-
tions, leukocyte recruitment into the infected peritoneal 
cavity consists of an early infl ux of polymorphonuclear 
leukocytes (PMNs) and a prolonged subsequent phase 
of mononuclear cell migration. The phenotype of the 
infi ltrating leukocytes during the course of infl amma-
tion is regulated primarily by resident-cell chemokine 
synthesis. 
 PriMary (SPontaneoUS)
bacterial PeritonitiS 
 Peritonitis is either primary (without an apparent source 
of contamination) or secondary. The types of organisms 
found and the clinical presentations of these two pro-
cesses are different. In adults, primary bacterial perito-
nitis (PBP) occurs most commonly in conjunction with 
cirrhosis of the liver (frequently the result of alcohol-
ism). However, the disease has been reported in adults 
with metastatic malignant disease, postnecrotic cirrhosis, 
chronic active hepatitis, acute viral hepatitis, congestive 
heart failure, systemic lupus erythematosus, and lymph-
edema as well as in patients with no underlying disease.
Although PBP virtually always develops in patients 
with preexisting ascites, it is, in general, an uncommon 
event, occurring in ≤10% of cirrhotic patients. The 
cause of PBP has not been established defi nitively but 
is believed to involve hematogenous spread of organ-
isms in a patient in whom a diseased liver and altered 
portal circulation result in a defect in the usual fi ltration 
function. Organisms multiply in ascites, a good medium 
for growth. The proteins of the complement cascade 
 INTRAABDOMINAL INFECTIONS
AND ABSCESSES 
 cHaPter 25 
SECTION IV
Infections of the Alimentary Tract
254
Figure 25-1
Diagram of the intraperitoneal spaces, showing the circula-
tion of fluid and potential areas for abscess formation. Some 
compartments collect fluid or pus more often than others. 
These compartments include the pelvis (the lowest portion), 
the subphrenic spaces on the right and left sides, and 
Morrison’s pouch, which is a posterosuperior extension of the 
subhepatic spaces and is the lowest part of the paraverte-
bral groove when a patient is recumbent. The falciform liga-
ment separating the right and left subphrenic spaces appears 
to act as a barrier to the spread of infection; consequently, it 
is unusual to find bilateral subphrenic collections. (Reprinted 
with permission from B Lorber [ed]: Atlas of Infectious Dis-
eases, vol VII: Intra-abdominal Infections, Hepatitis, and Gas-
troenteritis. Philadelphia, Current Medicine, 1996, p 1.13.)
have been found in peritoneal fluid, with lower lev-
els in cirrhotic patients than in patients with ascites of 
other etiologies. The opsonic and phagocytic properties 
of PMNs are diminished in patients with advanced liver 
disease.
The presentation of PBP differs from that of sec-
ondary peritonitis. The most common manifestation is 
fever, which is reported in up to 80% of patients. Ascites 
is found but virtually always predates infection. Abdom-
inal pain, an acute onset of symptoms, and peritoneal 
irritation during physical examination can be helpful 
diagnostically, but the absence of any of these findings 
does not exclude this often-subtle diagnosis. Nonlocalizing 
symptoms (such as malaise, fatigue, or encephalopathy) 
without another clear etiology should also prompt con-
sideration of PBP in a susceptible patient. It is vital to 
sample the peritoneal fluid of any cirrhotic patient 
with ascites and fever. The finding of >250 PMNs/μL 
is diagnostic for PBP, according to Conn (http://jac.
oxfordjournals.org/cgi/content/full/47/3/369). This criterion 
does not apply to secondary peritonitis (see below). The 
Left
subphrenic
Left
paracolic
Lesser sac
Right
subphrenic
Right
paracolic
Pelvic
Subhepatic
microbiology of PBP is also distinctive. While enteric 
gram-negative bacilli such as Escherichia coli are most 
commonly encountered, gram-positive organisms such 
as streptococci, enterococci, or even pneumococci are 
sometimes found. In PBP, a single organism is typically 
isolated; anaerobes are found less frequently in PBP than 
in secondary peritonitis, in which a mixed flora includ-
ing anaerobes is the rule. In fact, if PBP is suspected and 
multiple organisms including anaerobes are recovered 
from the peritoneal fluid, the diagnosis must be recon-
sidered and a source of secondary peritonitis sought.
The diagnosis of PBP is not easy. It depends on 
the exclusion of a primary intraabdominal source of 
infection. Contrast-enhanced CT is useful in identify-
ing an intraabdominal source for infection. It may be 
difficult to recover organisms from cultures of perito-
neal fluid, presumably because the burden of organisms 
is low. However, the yield can be improved if 10 mL 
of peritoneal fluid is placed directly into a blood cul-
ture bottle. Since bacteremia frequently accompanies 
PBP, blood should be cultured simultaneously. No spe-
cific radiographic studies are helpful in the diagnosis of 
PBP. A plain film of the abdomen would be expected 
to show ascites. Chest and abdominal radiography 
should be performed in patients with abdominal pain to 
exclude free air, which signals a perforation (Fig. 25-2).
Figure 25-2
Pneumoperitoneum. Free air under the diaphragm on an 
upright chest film suggests the presence of a bowel perfora-
tion and associated peritonitis. (Image courtesy of Dr. John 
Braver; with permission.)
 
CHAPTER 25
Intraabdominal Infectionsand Abscesses 
255
Treatment	
Primary Bacterial Peritonitis
Treatment for PBP is directed at the isolate from blood 
or peritoneal fluid. Gram’s staining of peritoneal fluid 
often gives negative results in PBP. Therefore, until cul-
ture results become available, therapy should cover 
gram-negative aerobic bacilli and gram-positive cocci. 
Third-generation cephalosporins such as cefotaxime 
(2 g q8h, administered IV) provide reasonable initial 
coverage in moderately ill patients. Broad-spectrum 
antibiotics, such as penicillin/β-lactamase inhibitor com-
binations (e.g., piperacillin/tazobactam, 3.375 g q6h 
IV for adults with normal renal function) or ceftriaxone 
(2 g q24h IV), are also options. Empirical coverage for 
anaerobes is not necessary. After the infecting organism 
is identified, therapy should be narrowed to target the 
specific pathogen. Patients with PBP usually respond 
within 72 h to appropriate antibiotic therapy. Antimicro-
bial treatment can be administered for as little as 5 days if 
rapid improvement occurs and blood cultures are nega-
tive, but a course of up to 2 weeks may be required for 
patients with bacteremia and for those whose improve-
ment is slow. Persistence of WBCs in the ascitic fluid 
after therapy should prompt a search for additional 
diagnoses.
Prevention
Primary prevention
One observational study raises the concern that proton 
pump inhibitor (PPI) therapy may increase the risk of 
PBP. No prospective studies have yet addressed whether 
avoidance of PPI therapy may prevent PBP.
Secondary prevention
PBP has a high rate of recurrence. Up to 70% of patients 
experience a recurrence within 1 year. Antibiotic pro-
phylaxis reduces this rate to <20% and improves short-
term survival rates. Prophylactic regimens for adults 
with normal renal function include fluoroquinolones 
(ciprofloxacin, 750 mg weekly; norfloxacin, 400 mg/d) 
or trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (one double-strength 
tablet daily). However, long-term administration of broad-
spectrum antibiotics in this setting has been shown to 
increase the risk of severe staphylococcal infections.
Secondary Peritonitis
Secondary peritonitis develops when bacteria con-
taminate the peritoneum as a result of spillage from 
an intraabdominal viscus. The organisms found almost 
always constitute a mixed flora in which facultative 
gram-negative bacilli and anaerobes predominate, espe-
cially when the contaminating source is colonic. Early 
in the course of infection, when the host response is 
directed toward containment of the infection, exudate 
containing fibrin and PMNs is found. Early death in this 
setting is attributable to gram-negative bacillary sepsis 
and to potent endotoxins circulating in the bloodstream 
(Chap. 271). Gram-negative bacilli, particularly E. coli, 
are common bloodstream isolates, but Bacteroides fragilis 
bacteremia also occurs. The severity of abdominal pain 
and the clinical course depend on the inciting process. 
The organisms isolated from the peritoneum also vary 
with the source of the initial process and the normal 
flora at that site. Secondary peritonitis can result primarily 
from chemical irritation and/or bacterial contamination. 
For example, as long as the patient is not achlorhydric, a 
ruptured gastric ulcer will release low-pH gastric con-
tents that will serve as a chemical irritant. The normal 
flora of the stomach comprises the same organisms found 
in the oropharynx (Chap. 164) but in lower numbers. 
Thus, the bacterial burden in a ruptured ulcer is negligi-
ble compared with that in a ruptured appendix. The nor-
mal flora of the colon below the ligament of Treitz con-
tains ∼1011 anaerobic organisms/g of feces but only 108 
aerobes/g; therefore, anaerobic species account for 99.9% 
of the bacteria. Leakage of colonic contents (pH 7–8) 
does not cause significant chemical peritonitis, but infec-
tion is intense because of the heavy bacterial load.
Depending on the inciting event, local symptoms 
may occur in secondary peritonitis—for example, epi-
gastric pain from a ruptured gastric ulcer. In appendi-
citis (Chap. 300), the initial presenting symptoms are 
often vague, with periumbilical discomfort and nausea 
followed in a number of hours by pain more localized 
to the right lower quadrant. Unusual locations of the 
appendix (including a retrocecal position) can compli-
cate this presentation further. Once infection has spread 
to the peritoneal cavity, pain increases, particularly with 
infection involving the parietal peritoneum, which is 
innervated extensively. Patients usually lie motionless, 
often with knees drawn up to avoid stretching the nerve 
fibers of the peritoneal cavity. Coughing and sneezing, 
which increase pressure within the peritoneal cavity, 
are associated with sharp pain. There may or may not 
be pain localized to the infected or diseased organ from 
which secondary peritonitis has arisen. Patients with 
secondary peritonitis generally have abnormal findings 
on abdominal examination, with marked voluntary and 
involuntary guarding of the anterior abdominal mus-
culature. Later findings include tenderness, especially 
rebound tenderness. In addition, there may be local-
ized findings in the area of the inciting event. In general, 
patients are febrile, with marked leukocytosis and a left 
shift of the WBCs to band forms.
While recovery of organisms from peritoneal fluid 
is easier in secondary than in primary peritonitis, a tap 
of the abdomen is rarely the procedure of choice in 
SECTION IV
Infections of the Alimentary Tract
256
secondary peritonitis. An exception is in cases involv-
ing trauma, where the possibility of a hemoperitoneum 
may need to be excluded early. Emergent studies (such 
as abdominal CT) to find the source of peritoneal con-
tamination should be undertaken if the patient is hemo-
dynamically stable; unstable patients may require surgi-
cal intervention without prior imaging.
Treatment	
Secondary Peritonitis
Treatment for secondary peritonitis includes early 
administration of antibiotics aimed particularly at aero-
bic gram-negative bacilli and anaerobes (see below). 
Mild to moderate disease can be treated with many 
drugs covering these organisms, including broad-
spectrum penicillin/β-lactamase inhibitor combinations 
(e.g., ticarcillin/clavulanate, 3.1 g q4–6h IV), cefoxitin 
(2 g q4–6h IV), or a combination of a fluoroquinolone 
(e.g., levofloxacin, 750 mg q24h IV) or a third-genera-
tion cephalosporin (e.g., ceftriaxone, 2 g q24h IV) plus 
metronidazole (500 mg q8h IV). Patients in intensive 
care units should receive imipenem (500 mg q6h IV), 
meropenem (1 g q8h IV), or combinations of drugs, 
such as ampicillin plus metronidazole plus ciprofloxacin. 
The role of enterococci and Candida spp. in mixed infec-
tions is controversial. Secondary peritonitis usually 
requires both surgical intervention to address the incit-
ing process and antibiotics to treat early bacteremia, to 
decrease the incidence of abscess formation and wound 
infection, and to prevent distant spread of infection. 
While surgery is rarely indicated in PBP in adults, it may 
be life-saving in secondary peritonitis. Recombinant 
human activated protein C has been shown to reduce 
mortality rates among patients with severe sepsis and 
may benefit some patients with secondary peritonitis.
Peritonitis may develop as a complication of abdomi-
nal surgeries. These infections may be accompanied by 
localizing pain and/or nonlocalizing symptoms such as 
fever, malaise, anorexia, and toxicity. As a nosocomial 
infection, postoperative peritonitis may be associated 
with organisms such as staphylococci, components of the 
gram-negative hospital microflora, and the microbes 
that cause PBP and secondary peritonitis, as described 
above.
Peritonitis in Patients 
Undergoing Capd
A third type of peritonitis arises in patients who are 
undergoing continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis 
(CAPD). Unlike PBP and secondary peritonitis, which 
are caused by endogenous bacteria, CAPD-associated 
peritonitis usually involves skin organisms. The patho-
genesis of infection is similar to that of intravascular 
device–related infection, in which skin organisms migrate 
along the catheter, which both serves as an entry point 
and exerts the effects of a foreign body. Exit-site or 
tunnel infection may or may not accompany CAPD-
associated peritonitis. Like PBP, CAPD-associated peri-
tonitis is usually caused by a single organism. Peritonitis 
is, in fact, the most common reason for discontinuation 
of CAPD. Improvements in equipment design, espe-
cially the Y-set connector, have resulted in a decrease 
from one case of peritonitis per 9 months of CAPD to 
one case per 24 months.
The clinical presentation of CAPD peritonitis resem-
bles that of secondary peritonitis in that diffuse pain 
and peritoneal signs are common. The dialysate is usu-
ally cloudy and contains >100 WBCs/μL, >50% of 
which are neutrophils. The most common organisms are 
Staphylococcus spp., which accounted for ∼45% of cases 
in one series. Historically, coagulase-negative staphylo-
coccal species were identified most commonly in these 
infections, but more recently these isolates have been 
decreasing in frequency. Staphylococcus aureus is more 
often involved among patients who are nasal carriers of 
the organism than among those who are not, and this 
organism is the most common pathogen in overt exit-
site infections. Gram-negative bacilli and fungi such 
as Candida spp. are also found. Vancomycin-resistant 
enterococci and vancomycin-intermediate S. aureus have 
been reported to produce peritonitis in CAPD patients. 
The finding of more than one organism in dialysate cul-
ture should prompt evaluation for secondary peritonitis. 
As with PBP, culture of dialysate fluid in blood culture 
bottles improves the yield. To facilitate diagnosis, several 
hundred milliliters of removed dialysis fluid should be 
concentrated by centrifugation before culture.
Treatment	
CAPD Peritonitis
Empirical therapy for CAPD peritonitis should be 
directed at S. aureus, coagulase-negative Staphylococ-
cus, and gram-negative bacilli until the results of cul-
tures are available. Guidelines issued in 2005 suggest 
that agents should be chosen on the basis of local 
experience with resistant organisms. In some centers, 
a first-generation cephalosporin such as cefazolin (for 
gram-positive bacteria) and a fluoroquinolone or a 
third-generation cephalosporin such as ceftazidime (for 
gram-negative bacteria) may be reasonable; in areas 
with high rates of infection with methicillin-resistant  
S. aureus, vancomycin should be used instead of cefazo-
lin, and gram-negative coverage may need to be broad-
ened. Broad coverage including vancomycin should be 
particularly considered for toxic patients and for those 
with exit-site infections. Loading doses are adminis-
tered intraperitoneally; doses depend on the dialysis 
 
CHAPTER 25
Intraabdominal Infectionsand Abscesses 
257
method and the patient’s renal function. Antibiotics 
are given either continuously (i.e., with each exchange) 
or intermittently (i.e., once daily, with the dose allowed 
to remain in the peritoneal cavity for at least 6 h). If the 
patient is severely ill, IV antibiotics should be added at 
doses appropriate for the patient’s degree of renal 
failure. The clinical response to an empirical treat-
ment regimen should be rapid; if the patient has not 
responded after 48–96 h of treatment, catheter removal 
should be considered.
Tuberculous Peritonitis
See Chap. 165.
Intraabdominal Abscesses
Intraperitoneal Abscesses
Abscess formation is common in untreated peritoni-
tis if overt gram-negative sepsis either does not develop 
or develops but is not fatal. In experimental models of 
abscess formation, mixed aerobic and anaerobic organ-
isms have been implanted intraperitoneally. Without 
therapy directed at anaerobes, animals develop intraab-
dominal abscesses. As in humans, these experimental 
abscesses may stud the peritoneal cavity, lie within the 
omentum or mesentery, or even develop on the surface 
of or within viscera such as the liver.
Pathogenesis and immunity
There is often disagreement about whether an abscess 
represents a disease state or a host response. In a sense, 
it represents both: while an abscess is an infection in 
which viable infecting organisms and PMNs are con-
tained in a fibrous capsule, it is also a process by which 
the host confines microbes to a limited space, thereby 
preventing further spread of infection. In any event, 
abscesses do cause significant symptoms, and patients 
with abscesses can be quite ill. Experimental work has 
helped to define both the host cells and the bacterial 
virulence factors responsible—most notably in the case 
of B. fragilis. This organism, although accounting for 
only 0.5% of the normal colonic flora, is the anaerobe 
most frequently isolated from intraabdominal infections, 
is especially prominent in abscesses, and is the most 
common anaerobic bloodstream isolate. On clinical 
grounds, therefore, B. fragilis appears to be uniquely vir-
ulent. Moreover, B. fragilis acts alone to cause abscesses 
in animal models of intraabdominal infection, whereas 
most other Bacteroides species must act synergistically 
with a facultative organism to induce abscess formation.
Of the several virulence factors identified in B. fragilis,
one is critical: the capsular polysaccharide complex 
(CPC) found on the bacterial surface. The CPC com-
prises at least eight distinct surface polysaccharides. 
Structural analysis of these polysaccharides has shown 
an unusual motif of oppositely charged sugars. Polysac-
charides having these zwitterionic characteristics, such as 
polysaccharide A (PSA), evoke a host response in the 
peritoneal cavity that localizes bacteria into abscesses. B. 
fragilis and PSA have been found to adhere to primary 
mesothelial cells in vitro; this adherence, in turn, stimu-
lates the production of tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α) 
and intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1) by 
peritoneal macrophages. Although abscesses character-
istically contain PMNs, the process of abscess induc-
tion depends on the stimulation of T lymphocytes by 
these unique zwitterionic polysaccharides. The stimu-
lated CD4+ T lymphocytes secrete leukoattractant 
cytokines and chemokines. The alternative pathway of 
complement and fibrinogen also participate in abscess 
formation.
While antibodies to the CPC enhance bloodstream 
clearance of B. fragilis, CD4+ T cells are critical in 
immunity to abscesses. When administered subcutane-
ously, B. fragilis PSA has immunomodulatory characteris-
tics and stimulates CD4+ T regulatory cells via an inter-
leukin (IL) 2–dependent mechanism to produce IL-10. 
IL-10 downregulates the inflammatory response, thereby 
preventing abscess formation.
Clinical presentation
Of all intraabdominal abscesses, 74% are intraperitoneal or 
retroperitoneal and are not visceral. Most intraperitoneal 
abscesses result from fecal spillage from a colonic source, 
such as an inflamed appendix. Abscesses can also arise 
from other processes. They usually form within weeks 
of the development of peritonitis and may be found in 
a variety of locations—from omentum to mesentery, pel-
vis to psoas muscles, and subphrenic space to a visceral 
organ such as the liver, where they may develop either 
on the surface of the organ or within it. Periappendiceal 
and diverticular abscesses occur commonly. Diverticu-
lar abscesses are least likely to rupture. Infections of the 
female genital tract and pancreatitis are also among the 
more common causative events. When abscesses occur 
in the female genital tract—either as a primary infection 
(e.g., tuboovarian abscess) or as an infection extending 
into the pelvic cavity or peritoneum—B. fragilis figures 
prominently among the organisms isolated. B. fragilis is 
not found in large numbers in the normal vaginal flora. 
For example, it is encountered less commonly in pel-
vic inflammatory disease and endometritis without an 
associated abscess. In pancreatitis with leakage of dam-
aging pancreatic enzymes, inflammation is prominent. 
Therefore, clinical findings such as fever, leukocytosis, 
and even abdominal pain do not distinguish pancreatitis 
SECTION IV
Infections of the Alimentary Tract
258
itself from complications such as pancreatic pseudocyst, 
pancreatic abscess (Chap. 313), or intraabdominal collec-
tions of pus. Especially in cases of necrotizing pancreatitis, 
in which the incidence of local pancreatic infection may 
be as high as 30%, needle aspiration under CT guidance 
is performed to sample fluid for culture. Many centers 
prescribe preemptive antibiotics for patients with necro-
tizing pancreatitis. Imipenem is frequently used for this 
purpose since it reaches high tissue levels in the pancreas 
(although it is not unique in this regard). If needle aspira-
tion yields infected fluid in the setting of acute necrotiz-
ing pancreatitis, most experts agree that surgery is supe-
rior to percutaneous drainage. Infected pseudocysts that 
occur remotely from acute pancreatitis are unlikely to be 
associated with significant amounts of necrotic tissue and 
may be treated with either surgical or percutaneous cath-
eter drainage in conjunction with appropriate antibiotic 
therapy.
Diagnosis
Scanning procedures have considerably facilitated the 
diagnosis of intraabdominal abscesses. Abdominal CT 
probably has the highest yield, although ultrasonogra-
phy is particularly useful for the right upper quadrant, 
kidneys, and pelvis. Both indium-labeled WBCs and 
gallium tend to localize in abscesses and may be useful 
in finding a collection. Since gallium is taken up in the 
bowel, indium-labeled WBCs may have a slightly greater 
yield for abscesses near the bowel. Neither indium-
labeled WBC nor gallium scans serve as a basis for a 
definitive diagnosis, however; both need to be followed 
by other, more specific studies, such as CT, if an area of 
possible abnormality is identified. Abscesses contiguous 
with or contained within diverticula are particularly dif-
ficult to diagnose with scanning procedures. Occasion-
ally, a barium enema may detect a diverticular abscess 
not diagnosed by other procedures, although barium 
should not be injected if a perforation is suspected. If 
one study is negative, a second study sometimes reveals 
a collection. Although exploratory laparotomy has been 
less commonly used since the advent of CT, this proce-
dure still must be undertaken on occasion if an abscess is 
strongly suspected on clinical grounds.
Treatment	
Intraperitoneal Abscesses
An algorithm for the management of patients with 
intraabdominal (including intraperitoneal) abscesses is 
presented in Fig. 25-3. The treatment of intraabdominal 
infections involves the determination of the initial focus 
of infection, the administration of broad-spectrum anti-
biotics targeting the organisms involved, and the perfor-
mance of a drainage procedure if one or more definitive 
Figure 25-3
Algorithm for the management of patients with intraab-
dominal abscesses using percutaneous drainage. Anti-
microbial therapy should be administered concomitantly. 
(Reprinted with permission from B Lorber (ed): Atlas of Infec-
tious Diseases, vol VII: Intra-abdominal Infections, Hepatitis, 
and Gastroenteritis. Philadelphia, Current Medicine, 1996, 
p 1.30, as adapted from OD Rotstein, RL Simmons, in 
SL Gorbach et al [eds]: Infectious Diseases. Philadelphia, 
Saunders, 1992, p 668.)
Percutaneous drainage
No improvement by 48 h
Defervescence by 24–48 h
Drain out when criteria for catheter removal satisfied
Repeat CT scan with
  dilute Hypaque injection
  into cavity and attempt
  further drainage
No drainage or
  no improvement
Successful drainage
  and defervescence
Surgery
ALGORITHM FOR THE USE OF PERCUTANEOUS DRAINAGE IN THE
MANAGEMENT OF PATIENTS WITH INTRAABDOMINAL ABSCESSES
abscesses have formed. Antimicrobial therapy, in general, 
is adjunctive to drainage and/or surgical correction of an 
underlying lesion or process in intraabdominal abscesses. 
Unlike the intraabdominal abscesses resulting from most 
causes, for which drainage of some kind is generally 
required, abscesses associated with diverticulitis usually 
wall off locally after rupture of a diverticulum, so that sur-
gical intervention is not routinely required.
A number of agents exhibit excellent activity against 
aerobic gram-negative bacilli. Since death in intraabdomi-
nal sepsis is linked to gram-negative bacteremia, empiri-
cal therapy for intraabdominal infection always needs to 
include adequate coverage of gram-negative aerobic, 
facultative, and anaerobic organisms. Even if anaerobes 
are not cultured from clinical specimens, they still must 
be covered by the therapeutic regimen. Empirical anti-
biotic therapy should be the same as that discussed 
above for secondary peritonitis.
Visceral Abscesses
Liver abscesses
The liver is the organ most subject to the develop-
ment of abscesses. In one study of 540 intraabdominal 
abscesses, 26% were visceral. Liver abscesses made up 
13% of the total number, or 48% of all visceral abscesses. 
Liver abscesses may be solitary or multiple; they may 
 
CHAPTER 25
Intraabdominal Infectionsand Abscesses 
259
arise from hematogenous spread of bacteria or from 
local spread from contiguous sites of infection within 
the peritoneal cavity. In the past, appendicitis with rup-
ture and subsequent spread of infection was the most 
common source for a liver abscess. Currently, associated 
disease of the biliary tract is most common. Pylephlebi-
tis (suppurative thrombosis of the portal vein), usually 
arising from infection in the pelvis but sometimes from 
infection elsewhere in the peritoneal cavity, is another 
common source for bacterial seeding of the liver.
Fever is the most common presenting sign of liver 
abscess. Some patients, particularly those with associ-
ated disease of the biliary tract, have symptoms and signs 
localized to the right upper quadrant, including pain, 
guarding, punch tenderness, and even rebound tender-
ness. Nonspecific symptoms, such as chills, anorexia, 
weight loss, nausea, and vomiting, may also develop. 
Only 50% of patients with liver abscesses, however, 
have hepatomegaly, right-upper-quadrant tenderness, 
or jaundice; thus, one-half of patients have no symp-
toms or signs to direct attention to the liver. Fever of 
unknown origin (FUO) may be the only manifesta-
tion of liver abscess, especially in the elderly. Diagnostic 
studies of the abdomen, especially the right upper quad-
rant, should be a part of any FUO workup. The single 
most reliable laboratory finding is an elevated serum 
concentration of alkaline phosphatase, which is docu-
mented in 70% of patients with liver abscesses. Other 
tests of liver function may yield normal results, but 50% 
of patients have elevated serum levels of bilirubin, and 
48% have elevated concentrations of aspartate amino-
transferase. Other laboratory findings include leukocy-
tosis in 77% of patients, anemia (usually normochromic, 
normocytic) in 50%, and hypoalbuminemia in 33%. 
Concomitant bacteremia is found in one-third to one-
half of patients. A liver abscess is sometimes suggested 
by chest radiography, especially if a new elevation of 
the right hemidiaphragm is seen; other suggestive find-
ings include a right basilar infiltrate and a right pleural 
effusion.
Imaging studies are the most reliable methods for 
diagnosing liver abscesses. These studies include ultra-
sonography, CT (Fig. 25-4), indium-labeled WBC or 
gallium scan, and MRI. More than one such study may 
be required. Organisms recovered from liver abscesses 
vary with the source. In liver infection arising from 
the biliary tree, enteric gram-negative aerobic bacilli 
and enterococci are common isolates. Unless previous 
surgery has been performed, anaerobes are not gener-
ally involved in liver abscesses arising from biliary infec-
tions. In contrast, in liver abscesses arising from pelvic 
and other intraperitoneal sources, a mixed flora includ-
ing both aerobic and anaerobic species is common; 
B. fragilis is the species most frequently isolated. With 
hematogenous spread of infection, usually only a single 
organism is encountered; this species may be S. aureus 
Figure 25-4
Multilocular liver abscess on CT scan. Multiple or multiloc-
ular abscesses are more common than solitary abscesses. 
(Reprinted with permission from B Lorber [ed]: Atlas of Infec-
tious Diseases, Vol VII: Intra-abdominal Infections, Hepatitis, 
and Gastroenteritis. Philadelphia, Current Medicine, 1996, 
Fig. 1.22.)
or a streptococcal species such as S. milleri. Results of 
cultures obtained from drain sites are not reliable for 
defining the etiology of infections. Liver abscesses may 
also be caused by Candida spp.; such abscesses usually 
follow fungemia in patients receiving chemotherapy 
for cancer and often present when PMNs return after 
a period of neutropenia. Amebic liver abscesses are not 
an uncommon problem (Chap. 209). Amebic serologic 
testing gives positive results in >95% of cases; thus, a 
negative result helps to exclude this diagnosis.
Treatment	
Liver Abscesses
(Fig. 25-3) While drainage—either percutaneous (with a 
pigtail catheter kept in place) or surgical—is the main-
stay of therapy for intraabdominal abscesses (including 
liver abscesses), there is growing interest in medical 
management alone for pyogenic liver abscesses. The 
drugs used for empirical therapy include the same ones 
used in intraabdominal sepsis and secondary bacterial 
peritonitis. Usually, blood cultures and a diagnostic aspi-
rate of abscess contents should be obtained before the 
initiation of empirical therapy, with antibiotic choices 
adjusted when the results of Gram’s staining and cul-
ture become available. Cases treated without definitive 
drainage generally require longer courses of antibiotic 
therapy. When percutaneous drainage was compared 
with open surgical drainage, the average length of hospi-
tal stay for the former was almost twice that for the latter, 
although both the time required for fever to resolve and 
SECTION IV
Infections of the Alimentary Tract
260
the mortality rate were the same for the two procedures. 
The mortality rate was appreciable despite treatment, 
averaging 15%. Several factors predict the failure of per-
cutaneous drainage and therefore may favor primary sur-
gical intervention. These factors include the presence of 
multiple, sizable abscesses; viscous abscess contents that 
tend to plug the catheter; associated disease (e.g., dis-
ease of the biliary tract) requiring surgery; or the lack of 
a clinical response to percutaneous drainage in 4–7 days.
Treatment of candidal liver abscesses often entails 
initial administration of amphotericin B or liposomal 
amphotericin, with subsequent fluconazole therapy 
(Chap. 203). In some cases, therapy with fluconazole 
alone (6 mg/kg daily) may be used—e.g., in clinically 
stable patients whose infecting isolate is susceptible to 
this drug.
Splenic abscesses
Splenic abscesses are much less common than liver 
abscesses. The incidence of splenic abscesses has ranged 
from 0.14% to 0.7% in various autopsy series. The clini-
cal setting and the organisms isolated usually differ from 
those for liver abscesses. The degree of clinical suspi-
cion for splenic abscess needs to be high, as this con-
dition is frequently fatal if left untreated. Even in the 
most recently published series, diagnosis was made only 
at autopsy in 37% of cases. While splenic abscesses may 
arise occasionally from contiguous spread of infection or 
from direct trauma to the spleen, hematogenous spread 
of infection is more common. Bacterial endocarditis is 
the most common associated infection (Chap. 124). 
Splenic abscesses can develop in patients who have 
received extensive immunosuppressive therapy (particu-
larly those with malignancy involving the spleen) and in 
patients with hemoglobinopathies or other hematologic 
disorders (especially sickle cell anemia).
While ∼50% of patients with splenic abscesses have 
abdominal pain, the pain is localized to the left upper 
quadrant in only one-half of these cases. Splenomegaly is 
found in ∼50% of cases. Fever and leukocytosis are gen-
erally present; the development of fever preceded diag-
nosis by an average of 20 days in one series. Left-sided 
chest findings may include abnormalities to auscultation, 
and chest radiographic findings may include an infiltrate 
or a left-sided pleural effusion. CT scan of the abdomen 
has been the most sensitive diagnostic tool. Ultrasonog-
raphy can yield the diagnosis but is less sensitive. Liver-
spleen scan or gallium scan may also be useful. Strep-
tococcal species are the most common bacterial isolates 
from splenic abscesses, followed by S. aureus—presum-
ably reflecting the associated endocarditis. An increase 
in the prevalence of gram-negative aerobic isolates 
from splenic abscesses has been reported; these organ-
isms often derive from a urinary tract focus, with associ-
ated bacteremia, or from another intraabdominal source. 
Salmonella species are seen fairly commonly, especially in 
patients with sickle cell hemoglobinopathy. Anaerobic 
species accounted for only 5% of isolates in the largest 
collected series, but the reporting of a number of “sterile 
abscesses” may indicate that optimal techniques for the 
isolation of anaerobes were not employed.
Treatment	
Splenic Abscesses
Because of the high mortality figures reported for 
splenic abscesses, splenectomy with adjunctive anti-
biotics has traditionally been considered standard 
treatment and remains the best approach for complex, 
multilocular abscesses or multiple abscesses. However, 
percutaneous drainage has worked well for single, 
small (<3-cm) abscesses in some studies and may also 
be useful for patients with high surgical risk. Patients 
undergoing splenectomy should be vaccinated against 
encapsulated organisms (Streptococcus pneumoniae, 
Haemophilus influenzae, Neisseria meningitidis). The 
most important factor in successful treatment of splenic 
abscesses is early diagnosis.
Perinephric and renal abscesses
Perinephric and renal abscesses are not common: The 
former accounted for only ∼0.02% of hospital admis-
sions and the latter for ∼0.2% in Altemeier’s series of 
540 intraabdominal abscesses. Before antibiotics became 
available, most renal and perinephric abscesses were 
hematogenous in origin, usually complicating pro-
longed bacteremia, with S. aureus most commonly recov-
ered. Now, in contrast, >75% of perinephric and renal 
abscesses arise from a urinary tract infection. Infection 
ascends from the bladder to the kidney, with pyelone-
phritis occurring prior to abscess development. Bacteria 
may directly invade the renal parenchyma from medulla 
to cortex. Local vascular channels within the kidney may 
also facilitate the transport of organisms. Areas of abscess 
developing within the parenchyma may rupture into the 
perinephric space. The kidneys and adrenal glands are 
surrounded by a layer of perirenal fat that, in turn, is sur-
rounded by Gerota’s fascia, which extends superiorly to 
the diaphragm and inferiorly to the pelvic fat. Abscesses 
extending into the perinephric space may track through 
Gerota’s fascia into the psoas or transversalis muscles, into 
the anterior peritoneal cavity, superiorly to the subdia-
phragmatic space, or inferiorly to the pelvis. Of the risk 
factors that have been associated with the development 
of perinephric abscesses, the most important is concomi-
tant nephrolithiasis obstructing urinary flow. Of patients 
with perinephric abscess, 20–60% have renal stones. 
Other structural abnormalities of the urinary tract, prior 
urologic surgery, trauma, and diabetes mellitus have also 
been identified as risk factors.
 
CHAPTER 25
Intraabdominal Infectionsand Abscesses 
261
The organisms most frequently encountered in peri-
nephric and renal abscesses are E. coli, Proteus spp., and 
Klebsiella spp. E. coli, the aerobic species most commonly 
found in the colonic flora, seems to have unique viru-
lence properties in the urinary tract, including factors 
promoting adherence to uroepithelial cells. The urease 
of Proteus spp. splits urea, thereby creating a more alka-
line and more hospitable environment for bacterial pro-
liferation. Proteus spp. are frequently found in association 
with large struvite stones caused by the precipitation of 
magnesium ammonium sulfate in an alkaline environ-
ment. These stones serve as a nidus for recurrent urinary 
tract infection. While a single bacterial species is usually 
recovered from a perinephric or renal abscess, multiple 
species may also be found. If a urine culture is not con-
taminated with periurethral flora and is found to con-
tain more than one organism, a perinephric abscess or 
renal abscess should be considered in the differential 
diagnosis. Urine cultures may also be polymicrobial in 
cases of bladder diverticulum.
Candida spp. can cause renal abscesses. This fungus 
may spread to the kidney hematogenously or by ascen-
sion from the bladder. The hallmark of the latter route of 
infection is ureteral obstruction with large fungal balls.
The presentation of perinephric and renal abscesses 
is quite nonspecific. Flank pain and abdominal pain are 
common. At least 50% of patients are febrile. Pain may 
be referred to the groin or leg, particularly with exten-
sion of infection. The diagnosis of perinephric abscess, 
like that of splenic abscess, is frequently delayed, and 
the mortality rate in some series is appreciable, although 
lower than in the past. Perinephric or renal abscess 
should be most seriously considered when a patient 
presents with symptoms and signs of pyelonephritis and 
remains febrile after 4 or 5 days of treatment. Moreover, 
when a urine culture yields a polymicrobial flora, when 
a patient is known to have renal stones, or when fever 
and pyuria coexist with a sterile urine culture, these 
diagnoses should be entertained.
Renal ultrasonography and abdominal CT are the 
most useful diagnostic modalities. If a renal or peri-
nephric abscess is diagnosed, nephrolithiasis should be 
excluded, especially when a high urinary pH suggests 
the presence of a urea-splitting organism.
Treatment	
Perinephric and Renal Abscesses
Treatment for perinephric and renal abscesses, like that 
for other intraabdominal abscesses, includes drainage 
of pus and antibiotic therapy directed at the organism(s) 
recovered. For perinephric abscesses, percutaneous 
drainage is usually successful.
Psoas abscesses
The psoas muscle is another location in which abscesses 
are encountered. Psoas abscesses may arise from a hema-
togenous source, by contiguous spread from an intraab-
dominal or pelvic process, or by contiguous spread from 
nearby bony structures (e.g., vertebral bodies). Associ-
ated osteomyelitis due to spread from bone to muscle or 
from muscle to bone is common in psoas abscesses. When 
Pott’s disease was common, Mycobacterium tuberculosis was a 
frequent cause of psoas abscess. Currently, either S. aureus 
or a mixture of enteric organisms including aerobic and 
anaerobic gram-negative bacilli is usually isolated from 
psoas abscesses in the United States. S. aureus is most likely 
to be isolated when a psoas abscess arises from hematog-
enous spread or a contiguous focus of osteomyelitis; a 
mixed enteric flora is the most likely etiology when the 
abscess has an intraabdominal or pelvic source. Patients 
with psoas abscesses frequently present with fever, lower 
abdominal or back pain, or pain referred to the hip or 
knee. CT is the most useful diagnostic technique.
Treatment	
Psoas Abscesses
Treatment includes surgical drainage and the adminis-
tration of an antibiotic regimen directed at the inciting 
organism(s).
Pancreatic abscesses
See Chap. 313.
Acknowledgment
The substantial contributions of Dori F. Zaleznik, MD, to this 
chapter in previous editions are gratefully acknowledged.
 John C. Atherton  I   Martin J. Blaser 
262
 definition 
 
Helicobacter pylori colonizes the stomachs of ∼50% 
of the world’s human population throughout 
their lifetimes. Colonization with this organism 
is the main risk factor for peptic ulceration ( Chap. 293 ) 
as well as for gastric adenocarcinoma and gastric MALT 
(mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue) lymphoma ( Chap. 91 ). 
Treatment for  H. pylori has revolutionized the manage-
ment of peptic ulcer disease, providing a permanent cure 
in most cases. Such treatment also represents fi rst-line 
therapy for patients with low-grade gastric MALT lym-
phoma. Treatment of  H. pylori is of no benefi t in the 
treatment of gastric adenocarcinoma, but prevention of 
H. pylori colonization could potentially prevent gastric 
malignancy and peptic ulceration. In contrast, increasing 
evidence indicates that lifelong  H. pylori colonization 
may offer some protection against complications of gas-
troesophageal refl ux disease (GERD), including esopha-
geal adenocarcinoma. Recent research has focused on 
whether  H. pylori colonization is a risk factor for some 
extragastric diseases and whether it is protective against 
some recently emergent medical problems, such as 
asthma and obesity. 
 etiologiC agent 
 H. pylori is a gram-negative bacillus that has naturally 
colonized humans for at least 50,000 years—and prob-
ably throughout human evolution. It lives in gastric 
mucus, with a small proportion of the bacteria adher-
ent to the mucosa and possibly a very small number of 
the organisms entering cells or penetrating the mucosa; 
its distribution is never systemic. Its spiral shape and 
fl agella render  H. pylori motile in the mucus environ-
ment. The organism has several acid-resistance mecha-
nisms, most notably a highly expressed urease that 
catalyzes urea hydrolysis to produce buffering ammo-
nia.  H. pylori is microaerophilic (requiring low levels of 
oxygen), is slow-growing, and requires complex growth 
media in vitro. Publication of several complete genomic 
sequences of  H. pylori since 1997 has led to signifi cant 
advances in the understanding of the organism’s biology. 
 A very small proportion of gastric  Helicobacter infec-
tions are due to species other than  H. pylori , possibly 
acquired as zoonoses. Whether these non- pylori gastric 
helicobacters cause disease remains controversial. In 
immunocompromised hosts, several nongastric (intes-
tinal)  Helicobacter species can cause disease with clinical 
features resembling those of  Campylobacter infections; 
these species are covered in  Chap. 155 . 
 ePideMiology 
The prevalence of  H. pylori among adults is ∼30% 
in the United States and other developed coun-
tries as opposed to >80% in most developing 
countries. In the United States, prevalence varies with 
age: ∼50% of 60-year-old persons, ∼20% of 30-year-old 
persons, and <10% of children are colonized.  H. pylori is 
usually acquired in childhood. The age association is due 
mostly to a birth-cohort effect whereby current 
60-year-olds were more commonly colonized as children 
than are current children. Spontaneous acquisition or 
loss of  H. pylori in adulthood is uncommon. Other 
strong risk factors for  H. pylori colonization are markers 
of crowding and maternal colonization. The low inci-
dence among children in developed countries at present 
is due, at least in part, to decreased maternal coloniza-
tion and increased use of antibiotics. 
 Humans are the only important reservoir of  H. pylori . 
Children may acquire the organism from their par-
ents (more often from the mother) or from other chil-
dren. Whether transmission takes place more often by 
the fecal-oral or the oral-oral route is unknown, but 
H. pylori is easily cultured from vomitus and gastroeso-
phageal refl uxate and is less easily cultured from stool. 
 HELICOBACTER PYLORI INFECTIONS 
 CHAPTER 26 
 
CHAPTER 26
Helicobacter pylori Infections
263
Pathology and Pathogenesis
H. pylori colonization induces a tissue response in the 
stomach, chronic superficial gastritis, which includes infil-
tration of the mucosa by both mononuclear and poly-
morphonuclear cells. (The term gastritis should be used 
specifically to describe histologic features; it has also 
been used to describe endoscopic appearances and 
even symptoms, which do not correlate with micro-
scopic findings or even with the presence of H. pylori.) 
Although H. pylori is capable of numerous adaptations 
that prevent excessive stimulation of the immune sys-
tem, colonization is accompanied by a considerable per-
sistent immune response, including the production of 
both local and systemic antibodies as well as cell-medi-
ated responses. However, these responses are ineffec-
tive in clearing the bacterium. This inefficient clearing 
appears to be due in part to H. pylori’s downregulation 
of the immune system, which fosters its own persistence.
Most H. pylori–colonized persons do not develop 
clinical sequelae. That some persons develop overt dis-
ease whereas others do not is related to a combination 
of factors: bacterial strain differences, host susceptibility 
to disease, and environmental factors.
Several H. pylori virulence factors are more com-
mon among strains that are associated with disease 
than among those that are not. The cag island is a 
group of genes that encodes a bacterial secretion system 
through which a specific protein, CagA, is translocated 
into epithelial cells. CagA affects host cell signal trans-
duction, inducing proliferative, cytoskeletal, and inflam-
matory changes; a proportion of transgenic mice 
expressing CagA in the stomach develop gastric adeno-
carcinoma. The secretion system also translocates soluble 
components of the peptidoglycan cell wall into the gas-
tric epithelial cell; these components are recognized by 
the intracellular emergency bacterial receptor Nod1, 
which stimulates a proinflammatory cytokine response 
resulting in enhanced gastric inflammation. Patients 
with peptic ulcer disease or gastric adenocarcinoma are 
more likely than persons without these conditions to be 
colonized by cag-positive strains. The secreted H. pylori 
protein VacA occurs in several forms. Strains with the 
more active forms are more commonly isolated from 
patients with peptic ulcer disease or gastric carcinoma 
than from persons without these conditions. Other bac-
terial factors that are associated with increased disease 
risk include adhesins, such as BabA and SabA, and 
incompletely characterized genes, such as dupA.
The best-characterized host determinants of disease 
are genetic polymorphisms leading to enhanced activa-
tion of the innate immune response, such as polymor-
phisms in cytokine genes or genes encoding bacterial 
recognition proteins such as Toll-like receptors (TLRs). 
For example, colonized people with polymorphisms in 
the interleukin (IL) 1 gene that cause the production of 
large quantities of this cytokine in response to H. pylori 
infection are at increased risk of gastric adenocarcinoma. 
In addition, environmental cofactors are important in 
pathogenesis. Smoking increases the risks of ulcers and 
cancer in H. pylori–positive individuals. Diets high in 
salt and preserved foods increase cancer risk, whereas 
diets high in antioxidants and vitamin C are protective.
The pattern of gastric inflammation is associated with 
disease risk: antral-predominant gastritis is most closely 
linked with duodenal ulceration, whereas pangastritis is 
linked with gastric ulceration and adenocarcinoma. This 
difference probably explains why patients with duodenal 
ulceration are not at high risk of developing gastric adeno-
carcinoma later in life, despite being colonized by H. pylori.
How gastric colonization causes duodenal ulceration 
is now becoming clearer. H. pylori–induced inflammation 
diminishes the number of somatostatin-producing D cells. 
Since somatostatin inhibits gastrin release, gastrin levels 
are higher than in H. pylori–negative persons, and these 
higher levels lead to increased meal-stimulated acid secre-
tion in the gastric corpus, which is only mildly inflamed 
in antral-predominant gastritis. How this increases duode-
nal ulcer risk remains controversial, but the increased acid 
secretion may contribute to the formation of the poten-
tially protective gastric metaplasia found in the duode-
num of duodenal ulcer patients. Gastric metaplasia in the 
duodenum may become colonized by H. pylori and sub-
sequently inflamed and ulcerated.
The pathogenesis of gastric ulceration and that of gas-
tric adenocarcinoma are less well understood, although 
both conditions arise in association with pan- or corpus-
predominant gastritis. The hormonal changes described 
above still occur, but the inflammation in the gastric cor-
pus means that it produces less acid (hypochlorhydria) 
despite hypergastrinemia. Gastric ulcers usually occur 
at the junction of antral and corpus-type mucosa, and 
this region is particularly inflamed. Gastric cancer prob-
ably stems from progressive DNA damage and the sur-
vival of abnormal epithelial cell clones. The DNA damage 
is thought to be due principally to reactive oxygen and 
nitrogen species arising from inflammatory cells and per-
haps in relation to other bacteria that survive in a hypo-
chlorhydric stomach. Longitudinal analyses of gastric 
biopsy specimens taken years apart from the same patient 
show that the common intestinal type of gastric adeno-
carcinoma follows stepwise changes from simple gastritis 
to gastric atrophy, intestinal metaplasia, and dysplasia. A 
second, diffuse type of gastric adenocarcinoma may arise 
directly from chronic gastritis alone.
Clinical Manifestations
Essentially all H. pylori–colonized persons have gastric 
tissue responses, but fewer than 15% develop associated 
illnesses such as peptic ulceration, gastric adenocarci-
noma, or gastric lymphoma (Fig. 26-1).
SECTION IV
Infections of the Alimentary Tract
264
Worldwide, >80% of duodenal ulcers and >60% 
of gastric ulcers are related to H. pylori coloniza-
tion (Chap. 293), although the proportion of 
ulcers due to aspirin and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory 
drugs (NSAIDs) is increasing, especially in developed 
countries. The main lines of evidence for an ulcer-promot-
ing role for H. pylori are that (1) the presence of the 
organism is a risk factor for the development of ulcers, (2) 
non-NSAID-induced ulcers rarely develop in the 
absence of H. pylori, (3) eradication of H. pylori mark-
edly reduces rates of ulcer relapse, and (4) experimental 
H. pylori infection of gerbils causes gastric ulceration.
Prospective nested case-control studies have shown that 
H. pylori colonization is a risk factor for adenocarcinomas 
of the distal (noncardia) stomach (Chap. 91). Long-term 
experimental infection of gerbils also may result in 
gastric adenocarcinoma. Moreover, the presence of 
H. pylori is strongly associated with primary gastric lym-
phoma, although this condition is much less common. 
Many low-grade gastric B cell lymphomas arising from 
MALT are driven by T cell proliferation, which in turn is 
driven by H. pylori antigen stimulation; H. pylori antigen–
driven tumors may regress either fully or partially after H. 
pylori eradication but require careful long-term monitoring.
Many patients have upper gastrointestinal symp-
toms but have normal results in upper gastrointestinal 
endoscopy (so-called functional or nonulcer dyspepsia; 
Figure 26-1
Schematic of the relationships between colonization with 
Helicobacter pylori and diseases of the upper gastroin-
testinal tract among persons in developed countries. 
Essentially all persons colonized with H. pylori develop a 
host response, which is generally termed chronic gastri-
tis. The nature of the interaction of the host with the par-
ticular bacterial population determines the clinical outcome. 
H. pylori colonization increases the lifetime risk of peptic ulcer 
disease, noncardia gastric cancer, and B cell non-Hodgkin’s 
gastric lymphoma [odds ratios (ORs) for all, >3]. In contrast, 
a growing body of evidence indicates that H. pylori colonization 
Tissue response (inflammation)
Primary
phenomenon:
Hyperacidity
Atrophic
gastritis
Secondary
phenomenon:
Antigenic
stimulation
?
Duodenal
ulceration
Clinical
outcome:
Association with
H. pylori (OR):
3–8
3–6
6–50
0.2–0.6
B-cell
lymphoma
Noncardia gastric
adenocarcinoma
Reflux
esophagitis
and sequelae
Chap. 293). Because H. pylori is common, some of these 
patients will be colonized with the organism. H. pylori 
eradication leads to symptom resolution a little (7%) 
more commonly than does placebo treatment. Whether 
such patients have peptic ulcers in remission at the time 
of endoscopy or whether a small subgroup of patients 
with true functional dyspepsia respond to H. pylori treat-
ment is unclear.
Much interest has focused on a possible protective role 
for H. pylori against GERD (Chap. 292), Barrett’s esoph-
agus (Chap. 292), and adenocarcinoma of the esophagus 
and gastric cardia (Chap. 91). The main lines of evidence 
for this role are (1) that there is a temporal relationship 
between a falling prevalence of gastric H. pylori coloni-
zation and a rising incidence of these conditions and 
(2) that, in most studies, the prevalence of H. pylori colo-
nization (especially with proinflammatory cagA+ strains) 
is significantly lower among patients with these esopha-
geal diseases than among control subjects. The mecha-
nism underlying this protective effect appears to include 
H. pylori–induced hypochlorhydria. Since, at the indi-
vidual level, GERD symptoms may decrease, worsen, 
or remain unchanged after treatment targeting H. pylori, 
concerns about GERD should not affect decisions about 
H. pylori treatment when an indication exists.
H. pylori has an increasingly recognized role in other 
gastric pathologies. It may be one initial precipitant of 
(especially with cagA+ strains) protects against adenocarci-
noma of the esophagus (and the sometimes related gastric 
cardia) and premalignant lesions such as Barrett’s esopha-
gus (OR, <1). While the incidences of peptic ulcer disease 
(cases not due to nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs) and 
noncardia gastric cancer are declining in developed coun-
tries, the incidence of adenocarcinoma of the esophagus is 
rapidly increasing. (Adapted from MJ Blaser: Hypothesis: The 
changing relationships of Helicobacter pylori and humans: 
Implications for health and disease. J Infect Dis 179:1523, 
1999, with permission.)
 
CHAPTER 26
Helicobacter pylori Infections
265
autoimmune gastritis and pernicious anemia and also 
may predispose some patients to iron deficiency through 
occult blood loss and/or hypochlorhydria and reduced 
iron absorption. In addition, several extragastrointestinal 
pathologies have been linked with H. pylori coloniza-
tion, although evidence of causality is less strong. Sev-
eral small studies of H. pylori treatment in idiopathic 
thrombocytopenic purpura have described improvement 
in or even normalization of platelet counts. Potentially 
important but even more controversial associations are 
with ischemic heart disease and cerebrovascular disease. 
However, the strength of these latter associations is 
reduced if confounding factors are taken into account, 
and most authorities consider the associations to be 
noncausal. Recent studies have shown an inverse asso-
ciation of cagA+ H. pylori with childhood-onset asthma, 
hay fever, and atopic disorders. Whether H. pylori status 
is merely a marker or is causally associated with protec-
tion against these diseases remains to be determined.
Diagnosis
Tests for the presence of H. pylori can be divided into 
two groups: invasive tests, which require upper gastro-
intestinal endoscopy and are based on the analysis of gas-
tric biopsy specimens, and noninvasive tests (Table 26-1). 
Endoscopy often is not performed in the initial man-
agement of young dyspeptic patients without “alarm” 
symptoms but is commonly used to exclude malignancy 
in older patients. If endoscopy is performed, the most 
convenient biopsy-based test is the biopsy urease test, in 
which one large or two small antral biopsy specimens 
are placed into a gel containing urea and an indicator. 
The presence of H. pylori urease leads to a pH alteration 
and therefore to a color change, which often occurs 
within minutes but can require up to 24 h. Histologic 
examination of biopsy specimens for H. pylori also is 
accurate, provided that a special stain (e.g., a modified 
Giemsa or silver stain) permitting optimal visualiza-
tion of the organism is used. If biopsy specimens are 
obtained from both antrum and corpus, histologic study 
yields additional information, including the degree and 
pattern of inflammation, atrophy, metaplasia, and dys-
plasia. Microbiologic culture is most specific but may be 
insensitive because of difficulty with H. pylori isolation. 
Once the organism is cultured, its identity as H. pylori 
can be confirmed by its typical appearance on Gram’s 
stain and its positive reactions in oxidase, catalase, and 
urease tests. Moreover, the organism’s susceptibility 
to antibiotics can be determined, and this information 
can be clinically useful in difficult cases. The occasional 
biopsy specimens containing the less common non-
pylori gastric helicobacters give only weakly positive 
results in the biopsy urease test. Positive identification of 
these bacteria requires visualization of the characteristic 
long, tight spirals in histologic sections.
Noninvasive H. pylori testing is the norm if gastric 
cancer does not need to be excluded by endoscopy. The 
most consistently accurate test is the urea breath test. 
In this simple test, the patient drinks a solution of urea 
labeled with the nonradioactive isotope 13C and then 
blows into a tube. If H. pylori urease is present, the urea 
Table 26-1 
Tests Commonly Used to Detect Helicobacter pylori
Test
Advantages
Disadvantages
Invasive (Based on Endoscopic Biopsy)
Biopsy urease test
Quick, simple
Some commercial tests not fully sensitive before 
24 h
Histology
May give additional histologic information
Sensitivity dependent on experience and use of 
special stains
Culture
Permits determination of antibiotic susceptibility
Sensitivity dependent on experience
Noninvasive
Serology
Inexpensive and convenient; not affected by 
recent antibiotics or proton pump inhibitors to 
the same extent as breath and stool tests
Cannot be used for early follow-up after treatment; 
some commercial kits inaccurate, and all less 
accurate than breath test
13C urea breath test
Inexpensive and simpler than endoscopy; useful 
for follow-up after treatment
Requires fasting; not as convenient as blood or 
stool tests
Stool antigen test
Inexpensive and convenient; useful for follow-up 
after treatment; may be useful in children
May be disliked by people from some cultures; 
may be slightly less accurate than urea breath 
test, particularly when used to assess treatment 
success
SECTION IV
Infections of the Alimentary Tract
266
is hydrolyzed and labeled carbon dioxide is detected in 
breath samples. The stool antigen test, another simple 
assay, is more convenient and potentially less expen-
sive than the urea breath test but has been slightly less 
accurate in some comparative studies. The simplest tests 
for ascertaining H. pylori status are serologic assays mea-
suring specific IgG levels in serum by enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay or immunoblot. The best of these 
tests are as accurate as other diagnostic methods, but 
many commercial tests—especially rapid office tests—do 
not perform well.
The urea breath test, the stool antigen test, and 
biopsy-based tests can all be used to assess the success of 
treatment (Fig. 26-2). However, because these tests are 
dependent on H. pylori load, their use <4 weeks after 
treatment may yield false-negative results. Furthermore, 
these tests are unreliable if performed within 4 weeks of 
intercurrent treatment with antibiotics or bismuth com-
pounds or within 2 weeks of the discontinuation of pro-
ton pump inhibitor (PPI) treatment. In the assessment 
of treatment success, noninvasive tests are normally 
preferred; however, after gastric ulceration, endoscopy 
should be repeated to ensure healing and to exclude gas-
tric carcinoma by further histologic sampling.
Serologic tests are not used to monitor treatment 
success, as the gradual drop in titer of H. pylori–specific 
antibodies is too slow to be of practical use.
Figure 26-2
Algorithm for the management of Helicobacter pylori infec-
tion. *Occasionally, an endoscopy and a biopsy-based test are 
used instead of a urea breath test in follow-up after treatment. 
The main indication for these invasive tests is gastric ulceration; 
Indication for H. pylori treatment
(e.g., peptic ulcer disease or new-onset dyspepsia)
Test for H. pylori 
Urea breath test*
Any remaining 
symptoms are not 
due to H. pylori
H. pylori 
not the cause
Second-line treatment
First-line treatment
Positive after
second-line treatment
Wait at least 1 month after
treatment finishes (no antibiotics, 
bismuth compounds, or proton
pump inhibitors in the meantime)
Third-line treatment;
endoscopy with H. pylori culture and 
sensitivity testing; treat according 
to known antibiotic sensitivities†
Positive after
third-line treatment
Negative
Negative
Positive
Positive
Refer to specialist
Consider whether treatment
is still indicated
(Table 151-2)
(Table 151-2) 
Treatment	
H. pylori Infections
The most clear-cut indications for treatment are H. pylori–
related duodenal or gastric ulceration or low-grade 
gastric B cell lymphoma. H. pylori should be eradicated 
in patients with documented ulcer disease, whether or 
not the ulcers are currently active, to reduce the likeli-
hood of relapse (Fig. 26-2). Many guidelines now rec-
ommend H. pylori eradication in uninvestigated simple 
dyspepsia following noninvasive diagnosis; others also 
recommend treatment in functional dyspepsia, in case 
the patient is one of the perhaps 7% (beyond placebo 
effects) to benefit from such treatment. Individuals 
with a strong family history of gastric cancer should be 
treated to eradicate H. pylori in the hope that their can-
cer risk will be reduced. Currently, widespread commu-
nity screening for and treatment of H. pylori as primary 
prophylaxis for gastric cancer and peptic ulcers are not 
recommended, mainly because it is unclear whether 
treatment for H. pylori reduces the risk of cancer to that 
in persons who have never acquired the organism. The 
largest randomized controlled study to date (performed 
in China) showed no cancer risk reduction during the 
7 years of follow-up, although a post hoc subgroup 
analysis documented improvement in the group of 
participants who did not already have gastric atrophy 
in this condition, as opposed to duodenal ulceration, it is impor-
tant to check healing and to exclude underlying gastric adeno-
carcinoma. †Some authorities now use empirical third-line regi-
mens, several of which have been described.
 
CHAPTER 26
Helicobacter pylori Infections
267
or intestinal metaplasia. Other studies have found a 
reduced cancer risk after treatment, but the size of this 
effect in different populations remains unclear, and 
the results of further large-scale prospective interven-
tional studies must be awaited. Other reasons for not 
treating H. pylori in asymptomatic populations at pres-
ent include (1) the adverse side effects of the multiple-
antibiotic regimens used (which are common and can 
be severe in rare cases); (2) antibiotic resistance, which 
may arise in H. pylori or other incidentally carried bac-
teria; (3) the anxiety that may arise in otherwise healthy 
people, especially if treatment is unsuccessful; and (4) 
the apparent existence of a subset of people who will 
develop GERD symptoms after treatment, although on 
average H. pylori treatment does not affect GERD symp-
toms or severity.
Although H. pylori is susceptible to a wide range of 
antibiotics in vitro, monotherapy is not usually success-
ful, probably because of inadequate antibiotic delivery 
to the colonization niche. Failure of monotherapy has 
prompted the development of multidrug regimens, the 
most successful of which are triple and quadruple com-
binations. Initially these regimens produced H. pylori 
eradication rates of >90% in many trials; in recent years, 
however, resistance to key antibiotics has become more 
common, a trend leading to H. pylori eradication rates 
of only 75–80% for the most commonly used regimens. 
Current regimens consist of a PPI or ranitidine bismuth 
citrate and two or three antimicrobial agents given for 
7–14 days (Table 26-2). Research on optimizing drug 
combinations to increase efficacy continues, and it is 
likely that guidelines will change as the field develops 
and as countries increasingly individualize treatment to 
suit local antibiotic resistance patterns and economic 
needs.The two most important factors in successful H. 
pylori treatment are the patient’s close compliance with 
the regimen and the use of drugs to which the patient’s 
strain of H. pylori has not acquired resistance. Treatment 
failure following minor lapses in compliance is com-
mon and often leads to acquired resistance to metro-
nidazole or clarithromycin. To stress the importance of 
compliance, written instructions should be given to the 
patient, and minor side effects of the regimen should be 
explained. Resistance to clarithromycin and, to a lesser 
extent, to metronidazole are of growing concern. Clar-
ithromycin resistance is less prevalent but, if present, 
usually results in treatment failure. Strains of H. pylori 
that are apparently resistant to metronidazole are more 
common but still may be cleared by metronidazole-
containing regimens, which have only slightly reduced 
efficacy. Assessment of antibiotic susceptibilities before 
treatment would be optimal but is not usually under-
taken because endoscopy and mucosal biopsy are nec-
essary to obtain H. pylori for culture and because most 
Table 26-2 
Recommended Treatment Regimens for Helicobacter pylori
Regimen (Duration)
Drug 1
Drug 2
Drug 3
Drug 4
Regimen 1: OCM 
(7–14 days)a
Omeprazoleb (20 mg bid)
Clarithromycin 
(500 mg bid)
Metronidazole (500 mg bid)
—
Regimen 2: OCA 
(7–14 days)a
Omeprazoleb (20 mg bid)
Clarithromycin 
(500 mg bid)
Amoxicillin (1 g bid)
—
Regimen 3: OBTM 
(14 days)c
Omeprazoleb (20 mg bid)
Bismuth subsalicylate 
(2 tabs qid)
Tetracycline HCl 
(500 mg qid)
Metronidazole 
(500 mg tid)
Regimen 4d: 
sequential 
(5 days + 5 days)
Omeprazoleb (20 mg bid)
Amoxicillin 1 g bid
Omeprazoleb (20 mg bid)
Clarithromycin 
(500 mg bid)
Tinidazole (500 mg bid)
Regimen 5e: OAL
(10 days)
Omeprazoleb (20 mg bid)
Amoxicillin (1 g bid)
Levofloxacin (500 mg qid)
aMeta-analyses show that a 14-day course of therapy is slightly superior to a 7-day course. However, in populations where 7-day treatment is 
known to have very high success rates, this shorter course is still often used.
bOmeprazole may be replaced with any proton pump inhibitor at an equivalent dosage or, in regimens 1 and 2, with ranitidine bismuth citrate 
(400 mg).
cData supporting this regimen come mainly from Europe and are based on the use of bismuth subcitrate and metronidazole (400 mg tid). This is 
the most commonly used second-line regimen.
dData supporting this regimen come from Europe. Although the two 5-day courses of different drugs have usually been given sequentially, recent 
evidence suggests no added benefit from this approach. Thus 10 days of the four drugs combined may be as good and may aid compliance.
eData supporting this second- or third-line regimen come from Europe. This regimen may be less effective where rates of quinolone use are high. 
Theoretically, it may also be wise to avoid it in populations where Clostridium difficile infection is common after broad-spectrum antibiotic use.
SECTION IV
Infections of the Alimentary Tract
268
microbiology laboratories are inexperienced in H. pylori 
culture. In the absence of susceptibility information, a 
history of the patient’s (even distant) antibiotic use for 
other conditions should be obtained; use of the agent 
should then be avoided if possible, particularly in the 
case of clarithromycin (e.g., previous use for upper respi-
ratory infection). If initial H. pylori treatment fails, one of 
two strategies may be used (Fig. 26-2). The more com-
mon approach is empirical re-treatment with another 
drug regimen, usually quadruple therapy (Table 26-2). 
The second approach is endoscopy, biopsy, and cul-
ture plus treatment based on documented antibiotic 
sensitivities. If re-treatment fails, susceptibility testing 
should ideally be performed, although empirical third-
line therapies are often used.
Clearance of non-pylori gastric helicobacters can fol-
low the use of bismuth compounds alone or of triple-
drug regimens. However, in the absence of trials, it is 
unclear whether this outcome represents successful 
treatment or natural clearance of the bacterium.
Prevention
Carriage of H. pylori has considerable public 
health significance in developed countries, 
where it is associated with peptic ulcer disease 
and gastric adenocarcinoma, and in developing coun-
tries, where gastric adenocarcinoma may be an even 
more common cause of cancer death late in life. If mass 
prevention were contemplated, vaccination would be 
the most obvious method, and experimental immuniza-
tion of animals has given promising results. However, 
given that H. pylori has co-evolved with its human host 
over millennia, preventing or eliminating colonization 
on a population basis may have distinct disadvantages. 
For example, lifelong absence of H. pylori is a risk factor 
for GERD complications, including esophageal adeno-
carcinoma. We have speculated that the disappearance of 
H. pylori may be associated with an increased risk of 
other emerging diseases reflecting aspects of the current 
Western lifestyle, such as asthma, obesity, and conceiv-
ably even type 2 diabetes mellitus.
 David A. Pegues  I   Samuel I. Miller 
269
 Bacteria of the genus  Salmonella are highly adapted 
for growth in both humans and animals and cause 
a wide spectrum of disease. The growth of serotypes 
 S. typhi and  S. paratyphi is restricted to human hosts, in 
whom these organisms cause enteric (typhoid) fever. 
The remaining serotypes (nontyphoidal  Salmonella , or 
NTS) can colonize the gastrointestinal tracts of a broad 
range of animals, including mammals, reptiles, birds, 
and insects. More than 200 serotypes are pathogenic 
to humans, in whom they often cause gastroenteritis 
and can be associated with localized infections and/or 
bacteremia. 
 Etiology 
 This large genus of gram-negative bacilli within the 
family Enterobacteriaceae consists of two species:  S. enterica , 
which contains six subspecies, and  S. bongori .  S. enterica 
subspecies I includes almost all the serotypes patho-
genic for humans. According to the current  Salmonella 
nomenclature system, the full taxonomic designation 
 S. enterica subspecies  enterica serotype typhimurium can be 
shortened to  Salmonella serotype typhimurium or simply 
 S. typhimurium. 
 Members of the seven  Salmonella subspecies are clas-
sifi ed into >2500 serotypes (serovars) according to the 
somatic O antigen [lipopolysaccharide (LPS) cell-wall 
components], the surface Vi antigen (restricted to  S. typhi 
and  S. paratyphi C), and the fl agellar H antigen. For sim-
plicity, most  Salmonella serotypes are named for the city 
where they were identifi ed, and the serotype is often 
used as the species designation. 
 Salmonellae are gram-negative, non-spore-forming,
facultatively anaerobic bacilli that measure 2–3 by 0.4–
0.6 μm. The initial identifi cation of salmonellae in the 
clinical microbiology laboratory is based on growth 
characteristics. Salmonellae, like other Enterobacte-
riaceae, produce acid on glucose fermentation, reduce 
nitrates, and do not produce cytochrome oxidase. In 
addition, all salmonellae except  S. gallinarum-pullorum are 
motile by means of peritrichous flagella, and all but 
S. typhi produce gas (H 2 S) on sugar fermentation. Nota-
bly, only 1% of clinical isolates ferment lactose; a high 
level of suspicion must be maintained to detect these 
rare clinical lactose-fermenting isolates. 
 Although serotyping of all surface antigens can be 
used for formal identifi cation, most laboratories per-
form a few simple agglutination reactions that defi ne 
specifi c O-antigen serogroups, designated A, B, C 1 , C 2 , 
D, and E. Strains in these six serogroups cause ∼99% 
of  Salmonella infections in humans and other warm-
blooded animals. Molecular typing methods, including 
pulsed-fi eld gel electrophoresis and polymerase chain 
reaction (PCR) fi ngerprinting, are used in epidemio-
logic investigations to differentiate  Salmonella strains of 
a common serotype. 
 pathogEnEsis 
 All  Salmonella infections begin with ingestion of organ-
isms, most commonly in contaminated food or water. 
The infectious dose is 10 3 –10 6 colony-forming units. 
Conditions that decrease either stomach acidity (an age 
of <1 year, antacid ingestion, or achlorhydric disease) or 
intestinal integrity (infl ammatory bowel disease, prior 
gastrointestinal surgery, or alteration of the intestinal 
fl ora by antibiotic administration) increase susceptibility 
to  Salmonella infection. 
 Once  S. typhi and  S. paratyphi reach the small intestine, 
they penetrate the mucus layer of the gut and traverse 
the intestinal layer through phagocytic microfold (M) 
cells that reside within Peyer’s patches. Salmonellae 
can trigger the formation of membrane ruffl es in nor-
mally nonphagocytic epithelial cells. These ruffl es reach 
out and enclose adherent bacteria within large vesicles 
by a process referred to as  bacteria-mediated endocyto-
sis (BME). BME is dependent on the direct delivery 
of  Salmonella proteins into the cytoplasm of epithelial 
 SALMONELLOSIS 
 chaptEr 27 
SECTION IV
Infections of the Alimentary Tract
270
cells by a specialized bacterial secretion system (type III 
secretion). These bacterial proteins mediate alterations in 
the actin cytoskeleton that are required for Salmonella 
uptake.
After crossing the epithelial layer of the small intes-
tine, S. typhi and S. paratyphi, which cause enteric 
(typhoid) fever, are phagocytosed by macrophages. These 
salmonellae survive the antimicrobial environment of 
the macrophage by sensing environmental signals that 
trigger alterations in regulatory systems of the phago-
cytosed bacteria. For example, PhoP/PhoQ (the best-
characterized regulatory system) triggers the expression 
of outer-membrane proteins and mediates modifica-
tions in LPS so that the altered bacterial surface can 
resist microbicidal activities and potentially alter host 
cell signaling. In addition, salmonellae encode a second 
type III secretion system that directly delivers bacterial 
proteins across the phagosome membrane into the mac-
rophage cytoplasm. This secretion system functions to 
remodel the Salmonella-containing vacuole, promoting 
bacterial survival and replication.
Once phagocytosed, typhoidal salmonellae dissemi-
nate throughout the body in macrophages via the lym-
phatics and colonize reticuloendothelial tissues (liver, 
spleen, lymph nodes, and bone marrow). Patients have 
relatively few or no signs and symptoms during this 
initial incubation stage. Signs and symptoms, including 
fever and abdominal pain, probably result from secre-
tion of cytokines by macrophages and epithelial cells 
in response to bacterial products that are recognized 
by innate immune receptors when a critical number of 
organisms have replicated. Over time, the development 
of hepatosplenomegaly is likely to be related to the 
recruitment of mononuclear cells and the development 
of a specific acquired cell-mediated immune response 
to S. typhi colonization. The recruitment of additional 
mononuclear cells and lymphocytes to Peyer’s patches 
during the several weeks after initial colonization/infec-
tion can result in marked enlargement and necrosis of 
the Peyer’s patches, which may be mediated by bacterial 
products that promote cell death as well as the inflam-
matory response.
In contrast to enteric fever, which is characterized 
by an infiltration of mononuclear cells into the small-
bowel mucosa, NTS gastroenteritis is characterized by 
massive polymorphonuclear leukocyte (PMN) infiltra-
tion into both the large- and small-bowel mucosa. This 
response appears to depend on the induction of inter-
leukin (IL) 8, a strong neutrophil chemotactic factor, 
which is secreted by intestinal cells as a result of Salmonella 
colonization and translocation of bacterial proteins into 
host cell cytoplasm. The degranulation and release of 
toxic substances by neutrophils may result in damage to 
the intestinal mucosa, causing the inflammatory diarrhea 
observed with nontyphoidal gastroenteritis.
Enteric (Typhoid) Fever
Enteric (typhoid) fever is a systemic disease character-
ized by fever and abdominal pain and caused by dissemi-
nation of S. typhi or S. paratyphi. The disease was initially 
called typhoid fever because of its clinical similarity to 
typhus. However, in the early 1800s, typhoid fever was 
clearly defined pathologically as a unique illness on the 
basis of its association with enlarged Peyer’s patches and 
mesenteric lymph nodes. In 1869, given the anatomic 
site of infection, the term enteric fever was proposed as an 
alternative designation to distinguish typhoid fever from 
typhus. However, to this day, the two designations are 
used interchangeably.
Epidemiology
In contrast to other Salmonella serotypes, the etiologic 
agents of enteric fever—S. typhi and S. paratyphi sero-
types A, B, and C—have no known hosts other than 
humans. Most commonly, food-borne or waterborne 
transmission results from fecal contamination by ill or 
asymptomatic chronic carriers. Sexual transmission 
between male partners has been described. Health care 
workers occasionally acquire enteric fever after expo-
sure to infected patients or during processing of clinical 
specimens and cultures.
With improvements in food handling and 
water/sewage treatment, enteric fever has 
become rare in developed nations. Worldwide, 
however, there are an estimated 22 million cases of 
enteric fever, with 200,000 deaths annually. The inci-
dence is highest (>100 cases per 100,000 population 
per year) in south central and Southeast Asia; medium 
(10–100 cases per 100,000) in the rest of Asia, Africa, 
Latin America, and Oceania (excluding Australia and 
New Zealand); and low in other parts of the world 
(Fig. 27-1). A high incidence of enteric fever correlates 
with poor sanitation and lack of access to clean drinking 
water. In endemic regions, enteric fever is more com-
mon in urban than rural areas and among young chil-
dren and adolescents. Risk factors include contaminated 
water or ice, flooding, food and drinks purchased from 
street vendors, raw fruits and vegetables grown in fields 
fertilized with sewage, ill household contacts, lack of 
hand washing and toilet access, and evidence of prior 
Helicobacter pylori infection (an association probably 
related to chronically reduced gastric acidity). It is esti-
mated that there is one case of paratyphoid fever for 
every four cases of typhoid fever, but the incidence of 
infection associated with S. paratyphi A appears to be 
increasing, especially in India; this increase may be a 
result of vaccination for S. typhi.
Multidrug-resistant (MDR) strains of S. typhi 
emerged in 1989 in China and Southeast Asia and have 
 
CHAPTER 27
Salmonellosis
271
since disseminated widely. These strains contain plasmids 
encoding resistance to chloramphenicol, ampicillin, and 
trimethoprim—antibiotics long used to treat enteric 
fever. With the increased use of fluoroquinolones to treat 
MDR enteric fever in the 1990s, strains of S. typhi and 
S. paratyphi with reduced susceptibility to ciprofloxacin 
[minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC), 0.125–1 μg/mL] 
have emerged in the Indian subcontinent, southern 
Asia, and (most recently) sub-Saharan Africa and have 
been associated with clinical treatment failure. Testing 
of isolates for resistance to the first-generation quino-
lone nalidixic acid detects most but not all strains with 
reduced susceptibility to ciprofloxacin.
The incidence of enteric fever among U.S. travelers 
is estimated at 3–30 cases per 100,000. Of 1902 cases of 
S. typhi–associated enteric fever reported to the Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) in 1999–
2006, 79% were associated with recent international 
travel, most commonly to India (47%), Pakistan (10%), 
Bangladesh (10%), Mexico (7%), and the Philippines 
(4%). Only 5% of travelers diagnosed with enteric fever 
had received S. typhi vaccine. Overall, 13% of S. typhi 
isolates in the United States were resistant to ampicillin, 
chloramphenicol, and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole 
(TMP-SMX), and the proportion of isolates resistant 
to nalidixic acid increased from 19% in 1999 to 58% 
in 2006. Infection with nalidixic acid-resistant (NAR) 
S. typhi was associated with travel to the Indian sub-
continent. Of the 25–30% of reported cases of enteric 
fever in the United States that are domestically acquired, 
the majority are sporadic, but outbreaks linked to con-
taminated food products and previously unrecognized 
chronic carriers continue to occur.
Clinical Course
Enteric fever is a misnomer, in that the hallmark features 
of this disease—fever and abdominal pain—are variable. 
While fever is documented at presentation in >75% of 
cases, abdominal pain is reported in only 30–40%. Thus, 
a high index of suspicion for this potentially fatal sys-
temic illness is necessary when a person presents with 
fever and a history of recent travel to a developing 
country.
The incubation period for S. typhi averages 10–14 days 
but ranges from 3–21 days, depending on the inoculum 
size and the host’s health and immune status. The most 
prominent symptom is prolonged fever (38.8°–40.5°C; 
101.8°–104.9°F), which can continue for up to 4 weeks 
if untreated. S. paratyphi A is thought to cause milder 
disease than S. typhi, with predominantly gastrointestinal 
symptoms. However, a prospective study of 669 consec-
utive cases of enteric fever in Kathmandu, Nepal, found 
that the infections were clinically indistinguishable. In 
this series, symptoms reported on initial medical evalu-
ation included headache (80%), chills (35–45%), cough 
(30%), sweating (20–25%), myalgias (20%), malaise 
(10%), and arthralgia (2–4%). Gastrointestinal symptoms 
included anorexia (55%), abdominal pain (30–40%), nausea 
(18–24%), vomiting (18%), and diarrhea (22–28%) more 
commonly than constipation (13–16%). Physical find-
ings included coated tongue (51–56%), splenomegaly 
(5–6%), and abdominal tenderness (4–5%).
Early physical findings of enteric fever include rash 
(“rose spots”; 30%), hepatosplenomegaly (3–6%), epi-
staxis, and relative bradycardia at the peak of high fever 
(<50%). Rose spots (Fig. 27-2; see also Fig. e7-9) make 
High (>100/100,000/year)
Medium (10–100/100,000/year)
Low (<10/100,000/year)
Figure 27-1
Annual incidence of typhoid fever per 100,000 population. (Adapted from Crump JA et al. The global burden of typhoid fever. 
Bull World Health Organ 82:346, 2004.)
SECTION IV
Infections of the Alimentary Tract
272
Figure 27-2
“Rose spots,” the rash of enteric fever due to S. typhi or 
S. paratyphi.
up a faint, salmon-colored, blanching, maculopapu-
lar rash located primarily on the trunk and chest. The 
rash is evident in ∼30% of patients at the end of the 
first week and resolves without a trace after 2–5 days. 
Patients can have two or three crops of lesions, and 
Salmonella can be cultured from punch biopsies of these 
lesions. The faintness of the rash makes it difficult to 
detect in highly pigmented patients.
The development of severe disease (which occurs in 
∼10–15% of patients) depends on host factors (immu-
nosuppression, antacid therapy, previous exposure, and 
vaccination), strain virulence and inoculum, and choice 
of antibiotic therapy. Gastrointestinal bleeding (10–20%) 
and intestinal perforation (1–3%) most commonly occur 
in the third and fourth weeks of illness and result from 
hyperplasia, ulceration, and necrosis of the ileocecal Pey-
er’s patches at the initial site of Salmonella infiltration. Both 
complications are life-threatening and require immediate 
fluid resuscitation and surgical intervention, with broad-
ened antibiotic coverage for polymicrobial peritonitis 
(Chap. 127) and treatment of gastrointestinal hemorrhages, 
including bowel resection. Neurologic manifestations 
occur in 2–40% of patients and include meningitis, 
Guillain-Barré syndrome, neuritis, and neuropsychiatric 
symptoms (described as “muttering delirium” or “coma 
vigil”), with picking at bedclothes or imaginary objects.
Rare complications whose incidences are reduced by 
prompt antibiotic treatment include disseminated intra-
vascular coagulation, hematophagocytic syndrome, pan-
creatitis, hepatic and splenic abscesses and granulomas, 
endocarditis, pericarditis, myocarditis, orchitis, hepatitis, 
glomerulonephritis, 
pyelonephritis 
and 
hemolytic-­
uremic syndrome, severe pneumonia, arthritis, osteo-
myelitis, and parotitis. Up to 10% of patients develop 
mild relapse, usually within 2–3 weeks of fever 
resolution and in association with the same strain type 
and susceptibility profile.
Up to 10% of untreated patients with typhoid fever 
excrete S. typhi in the feces for up to 3 months, and 
1–4% develop chronic asymptomatic carriage, shedding 
S. typhi in either urine or stool for >1 year. Chronic 
carriage is more common among women, infants, and 
persons who have biliary abnormalities or concur-
rent bladder infection with Schistosoma haematobium. 
The anatomic abnormalities associated with the latter 
conditions presumably allow prolonged colonization.
Diagnosis
Since the clinical presentation of enteric fever is relatively 
nonspecific, the diagnosis needs to be considered in any 
febrile traveler returning from a developing region, espe-
cially the Indian subcontinent, the Philippines, or Latin 
America. Other diagnoses that should be considered 
in these travelers include malaria, hepatitis, bacterial 
enteritis, dengue fever, rickettsial infections, leptospirosis, 
amebic liver abscesses, and acute HIV infection (Chap. 123). 
Other than a positive culture, no specific laboratory test is 
diagnostic for enteric fever. In 15–25% of cases, leukope-
nia and neutropenia are detectable. Leukocytosis is more 
common among children, during the first 10 days of ill-
ness, and in cases complicated by intestinal perforation or 
secondary infection. Other nonspecific laboratory find-
ings include moderately elevated liver function tests and 
muscle enzyme levels.
The definitive diagnosis of enteric fever requires the 
isolation of S. typhi or S. paratyphi from blood, bone 
marrow, other sterile sites, rose spots, stool, or intesti-
nal secretions. The sensitivity of blood culture is only 
40–80%, probably because of high rates of antibiotic use 
in endemic areas and the small quantities of S. typhi (i.e., 
<15 organisms/mL) typically present in the blood. Since 
almost all S. typhi organisms in blood are associated with 
the mononuclear-cell/platelet fraction, centrifugation 
of blood and culture of the buffy coat can substantially 
reduce the time to isolation of the organism but do not 
increase sensitivity.
Bone marrow culture is 55–90% sensitive, and, unlike 
that of blood culture, its yield is not reduced by up to 
5 days of prior antibiotic therapy. Culture of intestinal 
secretions (best obtained by a noninvasive duodenal 
string test) can be positive despite a negative bone mar-
row culture. If blood, bone marrow, and intestinal secre-
tions are all cultured, the yield is >90%. Stool cultures, 
while negative in 60–70% of cases during the first week, 
can become positive during the third week of infection 
in untreated patients.
Several serologic tests, including the classic Widal test 
for “febrile agglutinins,” are available. None of these 
tests is sufficiently sensitive or specific to replace culture-
based methods for the diagnosis of enteric fever in 
 
CHAPTER 27
Salmonellosis
273
developed countries. PCR and DNA probe assays to 
detect S. typhi in blood have been identified but have 
not yet been developed for clinical use.
Treatment	
Enteric (Typhoid) Fever
Prompt administration of appropriate antibiotic therapy 
prevents severe complications of enteric fever and results 
in a case-fatality rate of <1%. The initial choice of antibi-
otics depends on the susceptibility of the S. typhi and
S. paratyphi strains in the area of residence or travel 
(Table 27-1). For treatment of drug-susceptible typhoid 
fever, fluoroquinolones are the most effective class of 
agents, with cure rates of ∼98% and relapse and fecal 
carriage rates of <2%. Experience is most extensive with 
ciprofloxacin. Short-course ofloxacin therapy is simi-
larly successful against infection caused by nalidixic 
acid–susceptible strains. However, the increased inci-
dence of NAR S. typhi in Asia, which is probably related 
to the widespread availability of fluoroquinolones over 
the counter, is now limiting the use of this drug class for 
empirical therapy. Patients infected with NAR S. typhi 
strains should be treated with ceftriaxone, azithromycin, 
or high-dose ciprofloxacin. High-dose fluoroquinolone 
therapy for 7 days for NAR enteric fever has been 
associated with delayed resolution of fever and high 
rates of fecal carriage during convalescence. For NAR 
strains, 10–14 days of high-dose ciprofloxacin is preferred.
Ceftriaxone, cefotaxime, and (oral) cefixime are effec-
tive for treatment of MDR enteric fever, including NAR 
and fluoroquinolone-resistant strains. These agents 
clear fever in ∼1 week, with failure rates of ∼5–10%, fecal 
carriage rates of <3%, and relapse rates of 3–6%. Oral 
azithromycin results in defervescence in 4–6 days, with 
rates of relapse and convalescent stool carriage of <3%. 
Against NAR strains, azithromycin is associated with 
lower rates of treatment failure and shorter durations 
of hospitalization than are fluoroquinolones. Despite 
efficient in vitro killing of Salmonella, first- and second-
generation cephalosporins as well as aminoglycosides 
are ineffective in the treatment of clinical infections.
Most patients with uncomplicated enteric fever  
can be managed at home with oral antibiotics and  
antipyretics. Patients with persistent vomiting, diarrhea, 
and/or abdominal distension should be hospitalized and 
given supportive therapy as well as a parenteral third-
generation cephalosporin or fluoroquinolone, depend-
ing on the susceptibility profile. Therapy should be 
administered for at least 10 days or for 5 days after fever 
resolution.
In a randomized, prospective, double-blind study of 
critically ill patients with enteric fever (i.e., those with 
Table 27-1 
Antibiotic Therapy for Enteric Fever in Adults
Indication
Agent
Dosage (Route)
Duration, Days
Empirical Treatment
Ceftriaxonea
1–2 g/d (IV)
7–14
Azithromycin
1 g/d (PO)
5
Fully Susceptible
Ciprofloxacinb (first line)
500 mg bid (PO) or 400 mg q12h (IV)
5–7
Amoxicillin (second line)
1 g tid (PO) or 2 g q6h (IV)
14
Chloramphenicol
25 mg/kg tid (PO or IV)
14–21
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
160/800 mg bid (PO)
7–14
Multidrug-Resistant
Ciprofloxacin
500 mg bid (PO) or 400 mg q12h (IV)
5–7
Ceftriaxone
2–3 g/d (IV)
7–14
Azithromycin
1 g/d (PO)c
5
Nalidixic Acid–Resistant
Ceftriaxone
2–3 g/d (IV)
7–14
Azithromycin
1 g/d (PO)
5
High-dose ciprofloxacin
750 mg bid (PO) or 400 mg q8h (IV)
10–14
a Or another third-generation cephalosporin [e.g., cefotaxime, 2 g q8h (IV); or cefixime, 400 mg bid (PO)].
bOr ofloxacin, 400 mg bid (PO) for 2–5 days.
cOr 1 g on day 1 followed by 500 mg/d PO for 6 days.
SECTION IV
Infections of the Alimentary Tract
274
shock and obtundation) in Indonesia in the early 1980s, 
the administration of dexamethasone (an initial dose 
of 3 mg/kg followed by eight doses of 1 mg/kg every 
6 h) with chloramphenicol was associated with a sub-
stantially lower mortality rate than was treatment with 
chloramphenicol alone (10% vs 55%). Although this 
study has not been repeated in the “post-chlorampheni-
col era,” severe enteric fever remains one of the few indi-
cations for glucocorticoid treatment of an acute bacte-
rial infection.
The 1–5% of patients who develop chronic carriage 
of Salmonella can be treated for 4–6 weeks with an 
appropriate oral antibiotic. Treatment with oral amoxi-
cillin, TMP-SMX, ciprofloxacin, or norfloxacin is ∼80% 
effective in eradicating chronic carriage of susceptible 
organisms. However, in cases of anatomic abnormality 
(e.g., biliary or kidney stones), eradication often requires 
both antibiotic therapy and surgical correction.
Prevention and Control
Theoretically, it is possible to eliminate the salmonel-
lae that cause enteric fever since they survive only in 
human hosts and are spread by contaminated food and 
water. However, given the high prevalence of the dis-
ease in developing countries that lack adequate sewage 
disposal and water treatment, this goal is currently 
unrealistic. Thus, travelers to developing countries 
should be advised to monitor their food and water 
intake carefully and to consider vaccination.
Two typhoid vaccines are commercially available: 
(1) Ty21a, an oral live attenuated S. typhi vaccine (given 
on days 1, 3, 5, and 7, with a booster every 5 years); and 
(2) Vi CPS, a parenteral vaccine consisting of purified 
Vi polysaccharide from the bacterial capsule (given in 1 
dose, with a booster every 2 years). The old parenteral 
whole-cell typhoid/paratyphoid A and B vaccine is no 
longer licensed, largely because of significant side effects 
(see below). An acetone-killed whole-cell vaccine is 
available only for use by the U.S. military. The minimal 
age for vaccination is 6 years for Ty21a and 2 years for Vi 
CPS. Currently, there is no licensed vaccine for paraty-
phoid fever.
A large-scale meta-analysis of vaccine trials compar-
ing whole-cell vaccine, Ty21a, and Vi CPS in popu-
lations in endemic areas indicates that, while all three 
vaccines are similarly effective for the first year, the 
3-year cumulative efficacy of the whole-cell vaccine 
(73%) exceeds that of both Ty21a (51%) and Vi CPS 
(55%). In addition, the heat-killed whole-cell vaccine 
maintains its efficacy for 5 years, whereas Ty21a and Vi 
CPS maintain their efficacy for 4 and 2 years, respec-
tively. However, the whole-cell vaccine is associated 
with a much higher incidence of side effects (especially 
fever: 16% vs 1–2%) than the other two vaccines.
Vi CPS typhoid vaccine is poorly immunogenic in 
children <5 years of age because of T cell–independent 
properties. In the recently developed Vi-rEPA vaccine, 
Vi is bound to a nontoxic recombinant protein that is 
identical to Pseudomonas aeruginosa exotoxin A. In 2- to 
4-year-olds, two injections of Vi-rEPA induced higher 
T cell responses and higher levels of serum IgG anti-
body to Vi than did Vi CPS in 5- to 14-year-olds. In a 
two-dose trial in 2- to 5-year-old children in Vietnam, 
Vi-rEPA provided 91% efficacy at 27 months and 88% 
efficacy at 43 months and was very well tolerated. This 
vaccine is not yet commercially available in the United 
States. At least three new live vaccines are in clinical 
development and may prove more efficacious and longer-
lasting than previous live vaccines.
Typhoid vaccine is not required for international 
travel, but it is recommended for travelers to areas where 
there is a moderate to high risk of exposure to S. typhi, 
especially those who are traveling to southern Asia and 
other developing regions of Asia, Africa, the Caribbean, 
and Central and South America and who will be 
exposed to potentially contaminated food and drink. 
Typhoid vaccine should be considered even for per-
sons planning <2 weeks of travel to high-risk areas. In 
addition, laboratory workers who deal with S. typhi and 
household contacts of known S. typhi carriers should be 
vaccinated. Because the protective efficacy of vac-
cine can be overcome by the high inocula that are 
commonly encountered in food-borne exposures, 
immunization is an adjunct and not a substitute for 
avoiding high-risk foods and beverages. Immunization 
is not recommended for adults residing in typhoid-
endemic areas or for the management of persons who 
may have been exposed in a common-source outbreak.
Enteric fever is a notifiable disease in the United 
States. Individual health departments have their own 
guidelines for allowing ill or colonized food handlers or 
health care workers to return to their jobs. The report-
ing system enables public health departments to identify 
potential source patients and to treat chronic carriers 
in order to prevent further outbreaks. In addition, since 
1–4% of patients with S. typhi infection become chronic 
carriers, it is important to monitor patients (especially 
child-care providers and food handlers) for chronic car-
riage and to treat this condition if indicated.
Nontyphoidal Salmonellosis
Epidemiology
In the United States, the incidence of NTS infec-
tion has doubled in the past 2 decades; the 2009 figure 
is ∼14 million cases annually. In 2007, the incidence of 
NTS infection in this country was 14.9 per 100,000 
persons—the highest rate among the 11 food-borne 
 
CHAPTER 27
Salmonellosis
275
enteric pathogens under active surveillance. Five sero-
types accounted for one-half of U.S. infections in 2007: 
typhimurium (19%), enteritidis (14%), Newport (9%), 
Javiana (5%), and Heidelberg (4%).
The incidence of nontyphoidal salmonellosis is high-
est during the rainy season in tropical climates and 
during the warmer months in temperate climates, coin-
ciding with the peak in food-borne outbreaks. Rates of 
morbidity and mortality associated with NTS are high-
est among the elderly, infants, and immunocompromised 
individuals, including those with hemoglobinopathies, 
HIV infection, or infections that cause blockade of the 
reticuloendothelial system (e.g., bartonellosis, malaria, 
schistosomiasis, and histoplasmosis).
Unlike S. typhi and S. paratyphi, whose only res-
ervoir is humans, NTS can be acquired from multiple 
animal reservoirs. Transmission is most commonly asso-
ciated with animal food products, especially eggs, poul-
try, undercooked ground meat, dairy products, and fresh 
produce contaminated with animal waste.
S. enteritidis infection associated with chicken eggs 
emerged as a major cause of food-borne disease during 
the 1980s and 1990s. S. enteritidis infection of the ovaries 
and upper oviduct tissue of hens results in contamina-
tion of egg contents before shell deposition. Infection 
is spread to egg-laying hens from breeding flocks and 
through contact with rodents and manure. Of the 997 
outbreaks of S. enteritidis with a confirmed source that 
were reported to the CDC in 1985–2003, 75% were 
associated with raw or undercooked eggs. After peak-
ing at 3.9 cases per 100,000 U.S. population in 1995, 
the incidence of S. enteritidis infection declined substan-
tially to 1.7 per 100,000 in 2003; this decrease probably 
reflected improved on-farm control measures, refrig-
eration, and education of consumers and food-service 
workers. Transmission via contaminated eggs can be pre-
vented by cooking eggs until the yolk is solidified and 
through pasteurization of egg products.
Centralization of food processing and wide-
spread food distribution have contributed to the 
increased incidence of NTS in developed coun-
tries. Manufactured foods to which recent Salmonella 
outbreaks have been traced include peanut butter; milk 
products, including infant formula; and various pro-
cessed foods, including packaged breakfast cereal, salsa, 
frozen prepared meals, and snack foods. Large outbreaks 
have also been linked to fresh produce, including alfalfa 
sprouts, cantaloupe, fresh-squeezed orange juice, and 
tomatoes; these items become contaminated by manure 
or water at a single site and then are widely distributed.
An estimated 6% of sporadic Salmonella infections in 
the United States are attributed to contact with rep-
tiles and amphibians, especially iguanas, snakes, turtles, 
and lizards. Reptile-associated Salmonella infection more 
commonly leads to hospitalization and more frequently 
involves infants than do other Salmonella infections. 
Other pets, including African hedgehogs, snakes, birds, 
rodents, baby chicks, ducklings, dogs, and cats, are also 
potential sources of NTS.
Increasing antibiotic resistance in NTS species is a 
global problem and has been linked to the wide-
spread use of antimicrobial agents in food animals 
and especially in animal feed. In the early 1990s, 
S. typhimurium definitive phage type 104 (DT104), charac-
terized by resistance to ≥5 antibiotics (ampicillin, chloram-
phenicol, streptomycin, sulfonamides, and tetracyclines; 
R-type ACSSuT), emerged worldwide. In 2005, resis-
tance to at least ACSSuT was the most common MDR 
phenotype among NTS isolates in the United States. 
Acquisition is associated with exposure to ill farm animals 
and to various meat products, including uncooked or 
undercooked ground beef. Although probably no more 
virulent than susceptible S. typhimurium strains, DT104 
strains are associated with an increased risk of bloodstream 
infection and hospitalization. NAR and trimethoprim-
resistant DT104 strains are emerging, especially in the 
United Kingdom.
Because of increased resistance to conventional 
antibiotics such as ampicillin and TMP-SMX, 
extended-spectrum cephalosporins and fluoroquinolones 
have emerged as the agents of choice for the treatment of 
MDR NTS infections. In 2005, 2% of all NTS strains and 
12.6% of S. Newport strains were resistant to ceftriaxone. 
Most ceftriaxone-resistant isolates were from children 
<18 years of age, in whom ceftriaxone is the antibiotic 
of choice for treatment of invasive NTS infection. These 
strains contained plasmid-encoded AmpC β-lactamases 
that were probably acquired by horizontal genetic transfer 
from Escherichia coli strains in food-producing animals—
an event linked to the widespread use of the veterinary 
cephalosporin ceftiofur.
Resistance to nalidixic acid and fluoroquino-
lones also has begun to emerge and is most com-
monly associated with point mutations in the 
DNA gyrase genes gyrA and gyrB. Nalidixic acid resis-
tance is a good predictor of reduced susceptibility to 
clinically useful fluoroquinolones. From 1996–2005, the 
rate of NAR NTS isolates in the United States 
increased fivefold (from 0.5–2.4%). In Denmark, infec-
tion with NAR S. typhimurium DT104 has been linked 
to swine and associated with a threefold higher risk of 
invasive disease or death within 90 days. In Taiwan in 
2000, a strain of ciprofloxacin-resistant (MIC, ≥4 mcg/
mL) S. choleraesuis caused a large outbreak of invasive 
infections that was linked to the use of enrofloxacin in 
swine feed.
Clinical Manifestations
Gastroenteritis
Infection with NTS most often results in gastroenteritis 
indistinguishable from that caused by other enteric 
SECTION IV
Infections of the Alimentary Tract
276
pathogens. Nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea occur 6–48 h 
after the ingestion of contaminated food or water. 
Patients often experience abdominal cramping and 
fever (38–39°C; 100.5–102.2°F). Diarrheal stools are 
usually loose, nonbloody, and of moderate volume. How-
ever, large-volume watery stools, bloody stools, or symptoms 
of dysentery may occur. Rarely, NTS causes pseudoap-
pendicitis or an illness that mimics inflammatory bowel 
disease.
Gastroenteritis caused by NTS is usually self-lim-
ited. Diarrhea resolves within 3–7 days and fever within 
72 h. Stool cultures remain positive for 4–5 weeks 
after infection and—in rare cases of chronic carriage 
(<1%)—for >1 year. Antibiotic treatment usually is 
not recommended and may prolong fecal carriage. 
Neonates, the elderly, and immunosuppressed patients 
(e.g., transplant recipients, HIV-infected persons) 
with NTS gastroenteritis are especially susceptible to 
dehydration and dissemination and may require hospi-
talization and antibiotic therapy. Acute NTS gastroen-
teritis was associated with a threefold increased risk of 
dyspepsia and irritable bowel syndrome at 1 year in a 
recent study from Spain.
Bacteremia and endovascular infections
Up to 8% of patients with NTS gastroenteritis develop 
bacteremia; of these, 5–10% develop localized infections. 
Bacteremia and metastatic infection are most common 
with S. choleraesuis and S. Dublin and among infants, the 
elderly, and immunocompromised patients. NTS endo-
vascular infection should be suspected in high-grade or 
persistent bacteremia, especially with preexisting valvular 
heart disease, atherosclerotic vascular disease, prosthetic 
vascular graft, or aortic aneurysm. Arteritis should be sus-
pected in elderly patients with prolonged fever and back, 
chest, or abdominal pain developing after an episode of 
gastroenteritis. Endocarditis and arteritis are rare (<1% of 
cases) but are associated with potentially fatal complica-
tions, including valve perforation, endomyocardial abscess, 
infected mural thrombus, pericarditis, mycotic aneurysms, 
aneurysm rupture, aortoenteric fistula, and vertebral 
osteomyelitis. In some areas of sub-Saharan Africa, NTS 
may be among the most common causes—or even the 
most common cause—of bacteremia in children. NTS 
bacteremia among these children is not associated with 
diarrhea and has been associated with nutritional status 
and HIV infection.
Localized infections
Intraabdominal infections
Intraabdominal infections due to NTS are rare and usu-
ally manifest as hepatic or splenic abscesses or as cho-
lecystitis. Risk factors include hepatobiliary anatomic 
abnormalities (e.g., gallstones), abdominal malignancy, 
and sickle cell disease (especially with splenic abscesses). 
Eradication of the infection often requires surgical cor-
rection of abnormalities and percutaneous drainage of 
abscesses.
Central nervous system infections
NTS meningitis most commonly develops in infants 
1–4 months of age. It often results in severe sequelae 
(including seizures, hydrocephalus, brain infarction, and 
mental retardation) with death in up to 60% of cases. 
Other rare central nervous system infections include 
ventriculitis, subdural empyema, and brain abscesses.
Pulmonary infections
NTS pulmonary infections usually present as lobar 
pneumonia, and complications include lung abscess, 
empyema, and bronchopleural fistula formation. The 
majority of cases occur in patients with lung cancer, 
structural lung disease, sickle cell disease, or glucocor-
ticoid use.
Urinary and genital tract infections
Urinary tract infections caused by NTS present as either 
cystitis or pyelonephritis. Risk factors include malig-
nancy, urolithiasis, structural abnormalities, HIV infec-
tion, and renal transplantation. NTS genital infections 
are rare and include ovarian and testicular abscesses, 
prostatitis, and epididymitis. Like other focal infections, 
both genital and urinary tract infections can be compli-
cated by abscess formation.
Bone, joint, and soft tissue infections
Salmonella osteomyelitis most commonly affects the 
femur, tibia, humerus, or lumbar vertebrae and is most 
often seen in association with sickle cell disease, hemo-
globinopathies, or preexisting bone disease (e.g., fractures). 
Prolonged antibiotic treatment is recommended to 
decrease the risk of relapse and chronic osteomyelitis. 
Septic arthritis occurs in the same patient population 
as osteomyelitis and usually involves the knee, hip, or 
shoulder joints. Reactive arthritis (Reiter’s syndrome) 
can follow NTS gastroenteritis and is seen most fre-
quently in persons with the HLA-B27 histocompatibil-
ity antigen. NTS rarely can cause soft tissue infections, 
usually at sites of local trauma in immunosuppressed 
patients.
DIAGNOSIS
The diagnosis of NTS infection is based on isolation of 
the organism from freshly passed stool or from blood or 
another ordinarily sterile body fluid. All salmonellae iso-
lated in clinical laboratories should be sent to local public 
health departments for serotyping. Blood cultures should 
be done whenever a patient has prolonged or recurrent 
 
CHAPTER 27
Salmonellosis
277
fever. Endovascular infection should be suspected if there 
is high-grade bacteremia (>50% of three or more posi-
tive blood cultures). Echocardiography, CT, and indium-
labeled white cell scanning are used to identify localized 
infection. When another localized infection is suspected, 
joint fluid, abscess drainage, or cerebrospinal fluid should 
be cultured, as clinically indicated.
Treatment	
Nontyphoidal Salmonellosis
Antibiotics should not be used routinely to treat 
uncomplicated NTS gastroenteritis. The symptoms 
are usually self-limited, and the duration of fever and 
diarrhea is not significantly decreased by antibiotic 
therapy. In addition, antibiotic treatment has been 
associated with increased rates of relapse, prolonged 
gastrointestinal carriage, and adverse drug reactions. 
Dehydration secondary to diarrhea should be treated 
with fluid and electrolyte replacement.
Preemptive antibiotic treatment (Table 27-2) should 
be considered for patients at increased risk for invasive 
NTS infection, including neonates (probably up to 3 
months of age); persons >50 years of age with suspected 
atherosclerosis; and patients with immunosuppression, 
cardiac valvular or endovascular abnormalities, or signifi-
cant joint disease. Treatment should consist of an oral or 
IV antibiotic administered for 48–72 h or until the patient 
Table 27-2 
Antibiotic Therapy for Nontyphoidal Salmonella Infection in Adults
Indication
Agent
Dosage (Route)
Duration, Days
Preemptive Treatmenta
Ciprofloxacinb
500 mg bid (PO)
2–3
Severe Gastroenteritisc
Ciprofloxacin
500 mg bid (PO) or 400 mg 
q12h (IV)
3–7
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
160/800 mg bid (PO)
Amoxicillin
1 g tid (PO)
Ceftriaxone
1–2 g/d (IV)
Bacteremia
Ceftriaxoned
2 g/d (IV)
7–14
Ciprofloxacin
400 mg q12h (IV), then 500 mg 
bid (PO)
Endocarditis or Arteritis
Ceftriaxone
2 g/d (IV)
42
Ciprofloxacin
400 mg q8h (IV), then 750 mg 
bid (PO)
Ampicillin
2 g q4h (IV)
Meningitis
Ceftriaxone
2 g q12 h (IV)
14–21
Ampicillin
2 g q4h (IV)
Other Localized Infection
Ceftriaxone
2 g/d (IV)
14–28
Ciprofloxacin
500 mg bid (PO) or 400 mg 
q12h (IV)
Ampicillin
2 g q6h (IV)
aConsider for neonates; persons >50 years of age with possible atherosclerotic vascular disease; and patients with immunosuppression, 
endovascular graft, or joint prosthesis.
bOr ofloxacin, 400 mg bid (PO).
cConsider on an individualized basis for patients with severe diarrhea and high fever who require hospitalization.
dOr cefotaxime, 2 g q8h (IV).
SECTION IV
Infections of the Alimentary Tract
278
becomes afebrile. Immunocompromised persons may 
require up to 7–14 days of therapy. The <1% of persons 
who develop chronic carriage of NTS should receive 
a prolonged antibiotic course, as described above for 
chronic carriage of S. typhi.
Because of the increasing prevalence of antibiotic 
resistance, empirical therapy for life-threatening NTS  
bacteremia or focal NTS infection should include a 
third-generation cephalosporin or a fluoroquinolone  
(Table 27-2). If the bacteremia is low-grade (<50% of posi-
tive blood cultures), the patient should be treated for 7–14 
days. Patients with HIV/AIDS and NTS bacteremia should 
receive 1–2 weeks of IV antibiotic therapy followed by 4 
weeks of oral therapy with a fluoroquinolone. Patients 
whose infections relapse after this regimen should receive 
long-term suppressive therapy with a fluoroquinolone or 
TMP-SMX, as indicated by bacterial sensitivities.
If the patient has endocarditis or arteritis, treatment 
for 6 weeks with an IV β-lactam antibiotic (such as 
ceftriaxone or ampicillin) is indicated. IV ciprofloxacin 
followed by prolonged oral therapy is an option, but 
published experience is limited. Early surgical resection 
of infected aneurysms or other infected endovascular 
sites is recommended. Patients with infected prosthetic 
vascular grafts that cannot be resected have been main-
tained successfully on chronic suppressive oral therapy. 
For extraintestinal nonvascular infections, a 2- to 4-week 
course of antibiotic therapy (depending on the infection 
site) is usually recommended. In chronic osteomyelitis, 
abscess, or urinary or hepatobiliary infection associated 
with anatomic abnormalities, surgical resection or drain-
age may be required in addition to prolonged antibiotic 
therapy for eradication of infection.
Prevention and Control
Despite widespread efforts to prevent or reduce bacte-
rial contamination of animal-derived food products and 
to improve food-safety education and training, recent 
declines in the incidence of NTS in the United States 
have been modest compared with those of other food-
borne pathogens. This observation probably reflects the 
complex epidemiology of NTS. Identifying effective risk-
reduction strategies requires monitoring of every step of 
food production, from handling of raw animal or plant 
products to preparation of finished foods. Contaminated 
food can be made safe for consumption by pasteurization, 
irradiation, or proper cooking. All cases of NTS infection 
should be reported to local public health departments, 
since tracking and monitoring of these cases can identify 
the source(s) of infection and help authorities anticipate 
large outbreaks. Lastly, the prudent use of antimicrobial 
agents in both humans and animals is needed to limit the 
emergence of MDR Salmonella.
 Philippe Sansonetti  I   Jean Bergounioux 
279
 The discovery of  Shigella as the etiologic agent of 
dysentery—a clinical syndrome of fever, intestinal 
cramps, and frequent passage of small, bloody, mucopu-
rulent stools—is attributed to the Japanese microbiolo-
gist Kiyoshi Shiga, who isolated the Shiga bacillus (now 
known as  Shigella dysenteriae type 1) from patients’ stools 
in 1897 during a large and devastating dysentery epi-
demic.  Shigella cannot be distinguished from  Escherichia 
coli by DNA hybridization and remains a separate spe-
cies only on historical and clinical grounds. 
 definition 
 Shigella is a nonspore-forming, gram-negative bacte-
rium that, unlike  E. coli , is nonmotile and does not pro-
duce gas from sugars, decarboxylate lysine, or hydrolyze 
arginine. Some serovars produce indole, and occasional 
strains utilize sodium acetate.  S.  dysenteriae ,  S. fl exneri , 
 S.  boydii , and  S. sonnei (serogroups A, B, C, and D, respec-
tively) can be differentiated on the basis of biochemi-
cal and serologic characteristics. Genome sequencing of 
 E. coli K12,  S. fl exneri 2a,  S. sonnei ,  S. dysenteriae type 1, 
and  S. boydii has revealed that these species have ∼93% 
of genes in common. The three major genomic “sig-
natures” of  Shigella are (1) a 215-kb virulence plasmid 
that carries most of the genes required for pathogenic-
ity (particularly invasive capacity); (2) the lack or altera-
tion of genetic sequences encoding products (e.g., lysine 
decarboxylase) that, if expressed, would attenuate patho-
genicity; and (3) in  S. dysenteriae type 1, the presence of 
genes encoding Shiga toxin, a potent cytotoxin. 
 ePideMiology 
 The human intestinal tract represents the major reser-
voir of  Shigella , which is also found (albeit rarely) in the 
higher primates. Because excretion of shigellae is greatest 
in the acute phase of disease, the bacteria are transmit-
ted most effi ciently by the fecal-oral route via hand 
carriage; however, some outbreaks refl ect food-borne or 
waterborne transmission. In impoverished areas,  Shigella
can be transmitted by fl ies. The high-level infectivity of 
Shigella is refl ected by the very small inoculum required 
for experimental infection of volunteers [100 colony-
forming units (CFU)], by the very high attack rates dur-
ing outbreaks in day-care centers (33–73%), and by the 
high rates of secondary cases among family members of 
sick children (26–33%). Shigellosis can also be transmit-
ted sexually. 
Throughout history,  Shigella epidemics have 
often occurred in settings of human crowding 
under conditions of poor hygiene—e.g., among 
soldiers in campaigning armies, inhabitants of besieged 
cities, groups on pilgrimages, and refugees in camps. 
Epidemics follow a cyclical pattern in areas such as the 
Indian subcontinent and sub-Saharan Africa. These 
devastating epidemics, which are most often caused by 
S. dysenteriae type 1, are characterized by high attack and 
mortality rates. In Bangladesh, for instance, an epidemic 
caused by  S. dysenteriae type 1 was associated with a 42% 
increase in mortality rate among children 1–4 years of 
age. Apart from these epidemics, shigellosis is mostly an 
endemic disease, with 99% of cases occurring in the 
developing world and the highest prevalences in the 
most impoverished areas, where personal and general 
hygiene is below standard.  S. fl exneri isolates predomi-
nate in the least developed areas, whereas  S. sonnei is 
more prevalent in economically emerging countries and 
in the industrialized world. 
 Prevalence in the developing world 
 In a review published under the auspices of the World 
Health Organization (WHO), the total annual num-
ber of cases in 1966–1997 was estimated at 165 million, 
and 69% of these cases occurred in children <5 years 
of age. In this review, the annual number of deaths was 
calculated to range between 500,000 and 1.1 million. 
 SHIGELLOSIS 
 CHAPTER 28 
SECTION IV
Infections of the Alimentary Tract
280
More recent data (2000–2004) from six Asian countries 
indicate that even though the incidence of shigellosis 
remains stable, mortality rates associated with this 
disease may have decreased significantly, possibly as a 
result of improved nutritional status. However, extensive 
and essentially uncontrolled use of antibiotics, which may 
also account for declining mortality rates, has increased 
the rate of emergence of multidrug-resistant Shigella 
strains. An often-overlooked complication of shigellosis 
is the short- and long-term impairment of the nutri-
tional status of infected children in endemic areas. Com-
bined with anorexia, the exudative enteropathy resulting 
from mucosal abrasions contributes to rapid deteriora-
tion of the patient’s nutritional status. Shigellosis is thus 
a major contributor to stunted growth among children 
in developing countries.
Peaking in incidence in the pediatric population, 
endemic shigellosis is rare in young and middle-aged 
adults, probably because of naturally acquired immunity. 
Incidence then increases again in the elderly population.
Prevalence in the industrialized world
In pediatric populations, local outbreaks occur when 
proper and adapted hygiene policies are not imple-
mented in group facilities like day-care centers and 
institutions for the mentally retarded. In adults, as in 
children, sporadic cases occur among travelers returning 
from endemic areas, and rare outbreaks of varying size 
can follow waterborne or food-borne infections.
Pathogenesis and Pathology
Shigella infection occurs essentially through oral con-
tamination via direct fecal-oral transmission, the organism 
being poorly adapted to survive in the environment. 
Resistance to low-pH conditions allows shigellae to 
survive passage through the gastric barrier, an ability 
that may explain in part why a small inoculum (as few as 
100 CFU) is sufficient to cause infection.
The watery diarrhea that usually precedes the dysen-
teric syndrome is attributable to active secretion and 
abnormal water reabsorption—a secretory effect at the 
jejunal level described in experimentally infected rhesus 
monkeys. This initial purge is probably due to the com-
bined action of an enterotoxin (ShET-1) and mucosal 
inflammation. The dysenteric syndrome, manifested by 
bloody and mucopurulent stools, reflects invasion of the 
mucosa.
The pathogenesis of Shigella is essentially deter-
mined by a large virulence plasmid of 214 kb compris-
ing ∼100 genes, of which 25 encode a type III secretion 
system that inserts into the membrane of the host cell to 
allow effectors to transit from the bacterial cytoplasm to 
the host cell cytoplasm (Fig. 28-1). Bacteria are thereby 
able to invade intestinal epithelial cells by inducing 
their own uptake after the initial crossing of the epithe-
lial barrier through M cells (the specialized translocat-
ing epithelial cells in the follicle-associated epithelium 
that covers mucosal lymphoid nodules). The organisms 
induce apoptosis of subepithelial resident macrophages. 
Once inside the cytoplasm of intestinal epithelial cells, 
Shigella effectors trigger the cytoskeletal rearrangements 
necessary to direct uptake of the organism into the 
epithelial cell. The Shigella-containing vacuole is then 
quickly lysed, releasing bacteria into the cytosol.
Intracellular shigellae next use cytoskeletal compo-
nents to propel themselves inside the infected cell; when 
the moving organism and the host cell membrane come 
Shigella
M cell
Epithelial cells
IcsA
IpaB
Macrophage apoptosis
Caspase-I activation by IpaB
Bacterial survival
Initiation of inflammation
IpaC
type III
secretion
Cell-to-cell
spread
+
IpaA
Macrophages
IL-8
IL-18
IL-1`
Activation of
NF-gB caused by
IL-1` and
intracellular
NLR activation
Disruption of epithelial
permeability barrier by PMNs
Massive invasion of
epithelium
Figure 28-1
Invasive strategy of Shigella flexneri. IL, interleukin; NF-κB, nuclear factor κB; NLR, NOD-like receptor; PMN, polymorpho-
nuclear leukocyte.
 
CHAPTER 28
Shigellosis
281
into contact, cellular protrusions form and are engulfed 
by neighboring cells. This series of events permits bacte-
rial cell-to-cell spread.
Cytokines released by a growing number of infected 
intestinal epithelial cells attract increased numbers of 
immune cells [particularly polymorphonuclear leukocytes 
(PMNs)] to the infected site, thus further destabilizing 
the epithelial barrier, exacerbating inflammation, and 
leading to the acute colitis that characterizes shigellosis. 
Evidence indicates that some type III secretion system–
injected effectors can control the extent of inflamma-
tion, thus facilitating bacterial survival.
Shiga toxin produced by S. dysenteriae type 1 increases 
disease severity. This toxin belongs to a group of A1-B5 
protein toxins whose B subunit binds to the recep-
tor globotriaosylceramide on the target cell surface and 
whose catalytic A subunit is internalized by receptor-
mediated endocytosis and interacts with the subcellu-
lar machinery to inhibit protein synthesis by expressing 
RNA N-glycosidase activity on 28S ribosomal RNA. 
This process leads to inhibition of binding of the 
amino-acyl-tRNA to the 60S ribosomal subunit and 
thus to a general shutoff of cell protein biosynthesis. 
Shiga toxins are translocated from the bowel into the 
circulation. After binding of the toxins to target cells in 
the kidney, pathophysiologic alterations may result in 
hemolytic-uremic syndrome (HUS; see below).
Clinical Manifestations
The presentation and severity of shigellosis depend to 
some extent on the infecting serotype but even more 
on the age and the immunologic and nutritional status 
of the host. Poverty and poor standards of hygiene are 
strongly related to the number and severity of diarrheal 
episodes, especially in children <5 years old who have 
been weaned.
Shigellosis typically evolves through four phases: 
incubation, watery diarrhea, dysentery, and the postin-
fectious phase. The incubation period usually lasts 1–4 
days but may be as long as 8 days. Typical initial mani-
festations are transient fever, limited watery diarrhea, 
malaise, and anorexia. Signs and symptoms may range 
from mild abdominal discomfort to severe cramps, 
diarrhea, fever, vomiting, and tenesmus. The manifes-
tations are usually exacerbated in children, with tem-
peratures up to 40°–41°C (104.0°–105.8°F) and more 
severe anorexia and watery diarrhea. This initial phase 
may represent the only clinical manifestation of shigellosis, 
especially in developed countries. Otherwise, dysentery 
follows within hours or days and is characterized by 
uninterrupted excretion of small volumes of bloody 
mucopurulent stools with increased tenesmus and 
abdominal cramps. At this stage, Shigella produces acute 
colitis involving mainly the distal colon and the rectum. 
Unlike most diarrheal syndromes, dysenteric syn-
dromes rarely present with dehydration as a major fea-
ture. Endoscopy shows an edematous and hemorrhagic 
mucosa, with ulcerations and possibly overlying exu-
dates resembling pseudomembranes. The extent of the 
lesions correlates with the number and frequency of 
stools and with the degree of protein loss by exudative 
mechanisms. Most episodes are self-limited and resolve 
without treatment in 1 week. With appropriate treat-
ment, recovery takes place within a few days to a week, 
with no sequelae.
Acute life-threatening complications are seen most 
often in children <5 years of age (particularly those who 
are malnourished) and in elderly patients. Risk factors 
for death in a clinically severe case include nonbloody 
diarrhea, moderate to severe dehydration, bacteremia, 
absence of fever, abdominal tenderness, and rectal 
prolapse. Major complications are predominantly intes-
tinal (e.g., toxic megacolon, intestinal perforations, rectal 
prolapse) or metabolic (e.g., hypoglycemia, hyponatre-
mia, dehydration). Bacteremia is rare and is reported most 
frequently in severely malnourished and HIV-infected 
patients. Alterations of consciousness, including seizures, 
delirium, and coma, may occur, especially in children <5 
years old, and are associated with a poor prognosis; fever 
and severe metabolic alterations are more often the major 
causes of altered consciousness than is meningitis or the 
Ekiri syndrome (toxic encephalopathy associated with 
bizarre posturing, cerebral edema, and fatty degeneration 
of viscera), which has been reported mostly in Japanese 
children. Pneumonia, vaginitis, and keratoconjunctivitis 
due to Shigella are rarely reported. In the absence of seri-
ous malnutrition, severe and very unusual clinical mani-
festations, such as meningitis, may be linked to genetic 
defects in innate immune functions [i.e., deficiency in 
interleukin 1 receptor–associated kinase 4 (IRAK-4)] and 
may require genetic investigation.
Two complications of particular importance are 
toxic megacolon and HUS. Toxic megacolon is a con-
sequence of severe inflammation extending to the 
colonic smooth-muscle layer and causing paralysis and 
dilatation. The patient presents with abdominal disten-
tion and tenderness, with or without signs of localized 
or generalized peritonitis. The abdominal x-ray char-
acteristically shows marked dilatation of the transverse 
colon (with the greatest distention in the ascending and 
descending segments); thumbprinting caused by muco-
sal inflammatory edema; and loss of the normal haustral 
pattern associated with pseudopolyps, often extending 
into the lumen. Pneumatosis coli is an occasional find-
ing. If perforation occurs, radiographic signs of pneumo-
peritoneum may be apparent. Predisposing factors (e.g., 
hypokalemia and use of opioids, anticholinergics, 
loperamide, psyllium seeds, and antidepressants) should 
be investigated.
SECTION IV
Infections of the Alimentary Tract
282
Shiga toxin produced by S. dysenteriae type 1 has 
been linked to HUS in developing countries but 
rarely in industrialized countries, where enterohe-
morrhagic E. coli (EHEC) predominates as the etiologic 
agent of this syndrome. HUS is an early complication 
that most often develops after several days of diarrhea. 
Clinical examination shows pallor, asthenia, and irrita-
bility and, in some cases, bleeding of the nose and gums, 
oliguria, and increasing edema. HUS is a nonimmune 
(Coombs test–negative) hemolytic anemia defined by a 
diagnostic triad: microangiopathic hemolytic anemia 
[hemoglobin level typically <80 g/L (<8 g/dL)], throm-
bocytopenia (mild to moderate in severity; typically 
<60,000 platelets/μL), and acute renal failure due to 
thrombosis of the glomerular capillaries (with markedly 
elevated creatinine levels). Anemia is severe, with frag-
mented red blood cells (schizocytes) in the peripheral 
smear, high serum concentrations of lactate dehydroge-
nase and free circulating hemoglobin, and elevated retic-
ulocyte counts. Acute renal failure occurs in 55–70% of 
cases; however, renal function recovers in most of these 
cases (up to 70% in various series). Leukemoid reactions, 
with leukocyte counts of 50,000/μL, are sometimes 
noted in association with HUS.
The postinfectious immunologic complication known 
as reactive arthritis can develop weeks or months after 
shigellosis, especially in patients expressing the histo-
compatibility antigen HLA-B27. About 3% of patients 
infected with S. flexneri later develop this syndrome, with 
arthritis, ocular inflammation, and urethritis—a condi-
tion that can last for months or years and can progress to 
difficult-to-treat chronic arthritis. Postinfectious arthrop-
athy occurs only after infection with S. flexneri and not 
after infection with the other Shigella serotypes.
Laboratory Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis in patients with a dysen-
teric syndrome depends on the clinical and envi-
ronmental context. In developing areas, infectious 
diarrhea caused by other invasive pathogenic bacteria 
(Salmonella, Campylobacter jejuni, Clostridium difficile, Yersinia 
enterocolitica) or parasites (Entamoeba histolytica) should be 
considered. Only bacteriologic and parasitologic examina-
tions of stool can truly differentiate among these pathogens. 
A first flare of inflammatory bowel disease, such as 
Crohn’s disease or ulcerative colitis (Chap. 295), should be 
considered in patients in industrialized countries. Despite 
similar symptoms, anamnesis discriminates between shig-
ellosis, which usually follows recent travel in an endemic 
zone, and these other conditions.
Microscopic examination of stool smears shows the 
presence of erythrophagocytic trophozoites with very few 
PMNs in E. histolytica infection, whereas bacterial entero-
invasive infections (particularly shigellosis) are characterized 
by high PMN counts in each microscopic field. However, 
because shigellosis often manifests only as watery diarrhea, 
systematic attempts to isolate Shigella are necessary.
The “gold standard” for the diagnosis of Shigella 
infection remains the isolation and identification of the 
pathogen from fecal material. One major difficulty, par-
ticularly in endemic areas where laboratory facilities are 
not immediately available, is the fragility of Shigella and its 
common disappearance during transport, especially with 
rapid changes in temperature and pH. In the absence of 
a reliable enrichment medium, buffered glycerol saline 
or Cary-Blair medium can be used as a holding medium, 
but prompt inoculation onto isolation medium is essen-
tial. The probability of isolation is higher if the portion of 
stools that contains bloody and/or mucopurulent mate-
rial is directly sampled. Rectal swabs can be used, as they 
offer the highest rate of successful isolation during the 
acute phase of disease. Blood cultures are positive in <5% 
of cases but should be done when a patient presents with 
a clinical picture of severe sepsis.
In addition to quick processing, the use of several 
media increases the likelihood of successful isolation: a 
nonselective medium such as bromocresol-purple agar 
lactose; a low-selectivity medium such as MacConkey 
or eosin-methylene blue; and a high-selectivity medium 
such as Hektoen, Salmonella-Shigella, or xylose-lysine-
deoxycholate agar. After incubation on these media 
for 12–18 h at 37°C (98.6°F), shigellae appear as 
nonlactose-fermenting colonies that measure 0.5–1 mm 
in diameter and have a convex, translucent, smooth 
surface. Suspected colonies on nonselective or low-
selectivity medium can be subcultured on a high-­
selectivity medium before being specifically identified 
or can be identified directly by standard commercial sys-
tems on the basis of four major characteristics: glucose 
positivity (usually without production of gas), lactose 
negativity, H2S negativity, and lack of motility. The four 
Shigella serogroups (A–D) can then be differentiated by 
additional characteristics. This approach adds time and 
difficulty to the identification process; however, after 
presumptive diagnosis, the use of serologic methods 
(e.g., slide agglutination, with group- and then type-spe-
cific antisera) should be considered. Group-specific anti-
sera are widely available; in contrast, because of the large 
number of serotypes and sub-serotypes, type-specific 
antisera are rare and more expensive and thus are often 
restricted to reference laboratories.
Treatment	
Shigellosis
Antibiotic Susceptibility of Shigella
As an enteroinvasive disease, shigellosis requires antibiotic 
treatment. Since the mid-1960s, however, increasing 
resistance to multiple drugs has been a dominant fac-
tor in treatment decisions. Resistance rates are highly 
 
CHAPTER 28
Shigellosis
283
dependent on the geographic area. Clonal spread of 
particular strains and horizontal transfer of resistance 
determinants, particularly via plasmids and transpo-
sons, contribute to multidrug resistance. The current 
global status—i.e., high rates of resistance to classic 
first-line antibiotics such as amoxicillin—has led to a  
rapid switch to quinolones such as nalidixic acid. How-
ever, resistance to such early-generation quinolones  
has also emerged and spread quickly as a result of chro-
mosomal mutations affecting DNA gyrase and topoi-
somerase IV; this resistance has necessitated the use of 
later-generation quinolones as first-line antibiotics in 
many areas. For instance, a review of the antibiotic resis-
tance history of Shigella in India found that, after their 
introduction in the late 1980s, the second-generation 
quinolones norfloxacin, ciprofloxacin, and ofloxacin were 
highly effective in the treatment of shigellosis, including  
cases caused by multidrug-resistant strains of S. dysenteriae 
type 1. However, investigations of subsequent outbreaks  
in India and Bangladesh detected resistance to norfloxacin, 
ciprofloxacin, and ofloxacin in 5% of isolates. The inci-
dence of multidrug resistance parallels the widespread, 
uncontrolled use of antibiotics and calls for the rational 
use of effective drugs.
Antibiotic Treatment of Shigellosis 
(Table 28-1) Because of the ready transmissibility of 
Shigella, current public health recommendations in the 
United States are that every case be treated with antibiot-
ics. Ciprofloxacin is recommended as first-line treatment. 
A number of other drugs have been tested and shown 
to be effective, including ceftriaxone, azithromycin, 
pivmecillinam, and some fifth-generation quinolones. 
While infections caused by non-dysenteriae Shigella in 
immunocompetent individuals are routinely treated 
with a 3-day course of antibiotics, it is recommended 
that S. dysenteriae type 1 infections be treated for 5 days 
and that Shigella infections in immunocompromised 
patients be treated for 7–10 days.
Treatment for shigellosis must be adapted to the clin-
ical context, with the recognition that the most fragile 
patients are children <5 years old, who represent two-
thirds of all cases worldwide. There are few data on the 
use of quinolones in children, but Shigella-induced dys-
entery is a well-recognized indication for their use. The 
half-life of ciprofloxacin is longer in infants than in older 
individuals. The ciprofloxacin dose generally recom-
mended for children is 30 mg/kg per d in two divided 
doses. Adults living in areas with high standards of 
hygiene are likely to develop milder, shorter-duration 
disease, whereas infants in endemic areas can develop 
severe, sometimes fatal dysentery. In the former set-
ting, treatment will remain minimal and bacteriologic 
proof of infection will often come after symptoms have 
resolved; in the latter setting, antibiotic treatment and 
more aggressive measures, possibly including resuscita-
tion, are often required.
Rehydration 
and 
Nutrition  Shigella 
infection rarely causes significant dehydration. Cases 
requiring aggressive rehydration (particularly in indus-
trialized countries) are uncommon. In developing coun-
tries, malnutrition remains the primary indicator for 
diarrhea-related death, highlighting the importance of 
nutrition in early management. Rehydration should be 
oral unless the patient is comatose or presents in shock. 
Because of the improved effectiveness of reduced-
osmolarity oral rehydration solution (especially for chil-
dren with acute noncholera diarrhea), the WHO and  
UNICEF now recommend a standard solution of  
Table 28-1 
Recommended Antimicrobial Therapy for 
Shigellosis
Antimicrobial 
Agent
Treatment 
Schedule
Children
Adults
Limitations
First line
Ciprofloxacin
15 mg/kg
500 mg
2 times per day 
for 3 days, PO
Second line
Pivmecillinam
20 mg/kg
100 mg
Cost
4 times per day 
for 5 days, PO
No pediatric  
formulation
Frequent  
administration
Resistance  
emerging
Ceftriaxone
50–100 
mg/kg
–
Efficacy not  
validated
Once a day IM 
for 2–5 days
Must be injected
Azithromycin
6–20 mg/kg
1–1.5 g
Cost
Once a day for 
1–5 days, PO
Efficacy not  
validated
MIC near serum 
concentration
Rapid emer-
gence of 
resistance and 
spread to other 
bacteria
Source: WHO Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data: Guidelines 
for the control of shigellosis, including epidemics due to Shigella 
dysenteriae type 1 (www.searo. who.int/LinkFiles/CAH_Publications_
shigella.pdf).
SECTION IV
Infections of the Alimentary Tract
284
245 mOsm/L (sodium, 75 mmol/L; chloride, 65 mmol/L; 
glucose (anhydrous), 75 mmol/L; potassium, 20 mmol/L; 
citrate, 10 mmol/L). In shigellosis, the coupled transport 
of sodium to glucose may be variably affected, but oral 
rehydration therapy remains the easiest and most effi-
cient form of rehydration, especially in severe cases.
Nutrition should be started as soon as possible after 
completion of initial rehydration. Early refeeding is safe, 
well tolerated, and clinically beneficial. Because breast-
feeding reduces diarrheal losses and the need for oral 
rehydration in infants, it should be maintained in the 
absence of contraindications (e.g., maternal HIV infection).
Nonspecific, Symptom-Based Therapy  
Antimotility agents have been implicated in prolonged 
fever in volunteers with shigellosis. These agents are 
suspected of increasing the risk of toxic megacolon and 
are thought to have been responsible for HUS in chil-
dren infected by EHEC strains. For safety reasons, it is 
better to avoid antimotility agents in bloody diarrhea.
Treatment of Complications  There is 
no consensus regarding the best treatment for toxic 
megacolon. The patient should be assessed frequently 
by both medical and surgical teams. Anemia, dehydra-
tion, and electrolyte deficits (particularly hypokalemia) 
may aggravate colonic atony and should be actively 
treated. Nasogastric aspiration helps to deflate the 
colon. Parenteral nutrition has not been proven to be 
beneficial. Fever persisting beyond 48–72 h raises the 
possibility of local perforation or abscess. Most studies 
recommend colectomy if, after 48–72 h, colonic disten-
tion persists. However, some physicians recommend 
continuation of medical therapy for up to 7 days if the 
patient seems to be improving clinically despite per-
sistent megacolon without free perforation. Intestinal 
perforation, either isolated or complicating toxic mega-
colon, requires surgical treatment and intensive medical 
support.
Rectal prolapse must be treated as soon as possible. 
With the health care provider using surgical gloves or a 
soft warm wet cloth and the patient in the knee-chest 
position, the prolapsed rectum is gently pushed back 
into place. If edema of the rectal mucosa is evident 
(rendering reintegration difficult), it can be osmotically 
reduced by applying gauze impregnated with a warm 
solution of saturated magnesium sulfate. Rectal pro-
lapse often relapses but usually resolves along with the 
resolution of dysentery.
HUS must be treated by water restriction, includ-
ing discontinuation of oral rehydration solution and 
potassium-rich alimentation. Hemofiltration is usually 
required.
Prevention
Hand washing after defecation or handling of children’s 
feces and before handling of food is recommended. Stool 
decontamination (e.g., with sodium hypochlorite), together 
with a cleaning protocol for medical staff as well as for 
patients, has proven useful in limiting the spread of infec-
tion during Shigella outbreaks. Ideally, patients should have 
a negative stool culture before their infection is considered 
cured. Recurrences are rare if therapeutic and preventive 
measures are correctly implemented.
Although several live attenuated oral and subunit par-
enteral vaccine candidates have been produced and are 
undergoing clinical trials, no vaccine against shigellosis 
is currently available. Especially given the rapid pro-
gression of antibiotic resistance in Shigella, a vaccine is 
urgently needed.
 Martin J. Blaser 
285
 deFinition 
 Bacteria of the genus  Campylobacter and of the related 
genera  Arcobacter and  Helicobacter ( Chap. 151 ) cause a 
variety of infl ammatory conditions. Although acute 
diarrheal illnesses are most common, these organisms 
may cause infections in virtually all parts of the body, 
especially in compromised hosts, and these infec-
tions may have late nonsuppurative sequelae. The 
designation  Campylobacter comes from the Greek for 
“curved rod” and refers to the organism’s vibrio-like 
morphology. 
 etiology 
 Campylobacters are motile, non-spore-forming, curved, 
gram-negative rods. Originally known as  Vibrio fetus , 
these bacilli were reclassifi ed as a new genus in 1973, 
after their dissimilarity to other vibrios was recog-
nized. More than 15 species have since been identifi ed. 
These species are currently divided into three genera: 
 Campylobacter ,  Arcobacter , and  Helicobacter . Not all of the 
species are pathogens of humans. The human pathogens 
fall into two major groups: those that primarily cause 
diarrheal disease and those that cause extraintestinal 
infection. The principal diarrheal pathogen is  C. jejuni , 
which accounts for 80–90% of all cases of recognized 
illness due to campylobacters and related genera. Other 
organisms that cause diarrheal disease include  C. coli , 
 C. upsaliensis ,  C. lari ,  C. hyointestinalis ,  C. fetus ,  A. 
butzleri ,  A. cryaerophilus ,  H. cinaedi , and  H. fennelliae . 
The two  Helicobacter species causing diarrheal disease, 
 H. cinaedi and  H. fennelliae , are intestinal rather than gas-
tric organisms; in terms of the clinical features of the ill-
nesses they cause, these species most closely resemble 
 Campylobacter rather than  H. pylori ( Chap. 151 ) and thus 
are considered in this chapter. 
 The major species causing extraintestinal illnesses 
is  C. fetus . However, any of the diarrheal agents 
listed above may cause systemic or localized infec-
tion as well, especially in compromised hosts. Neither 
aerobes nor strict anaerobes, these microaerophilic 
organisms are adapted for survival in the gastrointesti-
nal mucous layer. This chapter focuses on  C. jejuni and 
 C. fetus as the major pathogens in and prototypes for 
their groups. The key features of infection are listed by 
species (excluding  C. jejuni , described in detail in the 
text below) in  Table 29-1 . 
 ePidemiology 
 Campylobacters are found in the gastrointestinal tract of 
many animals used for food (including poultry, cattle, 
sheep, and swine) and many household pets (includ-
ing birds, dogs, and cats). These microorganisms usu-
ally do not cause illness in their animal hosts. In most 
cases, campylobacters are transmitted to humans in raw 
or undercooked food products or through direct con-
tact with infected animals. In the United States and 
other developed countries, ingestion of contaminated 
poultry that has not been suffi ciently cooked is the most 
common mode of acquisition (30–70% of cases). Other 
modes include ingestion of raw (unpasteurized) milk or 
untreated water, contact with infected household 
pets, travel to developing countries (campylobac-
ters being among the leading causes of traveler’s diar-
rhea;  Chaps. 123 and  128 ), oral-anal sexual contact, and 
(occasionally) contact with an index case who is incon-
tinent of stool (e.g., a baby). 
Campylobacter 
infections 
are 
common. 
Several 
studies indicate that, in the United States, diarrheal 
disease due to campylobacters is more common than 
that due to  Salmonella and  Shigella combined. Infections 
occur throughout the year, but their incidence peaks 
 INFECTIONS DUE TO  CAMPYLOBACTER AND 
RELATED ORGANISMS 
 CHAPTER 29 
SECTION IV
Infections of the Alimentary Tract
286
during summer and early autumn. Persons of all ages are 
affected; however, attack rates for C. jejuni are highest 
among young children and young adults, while those 
for C. fetus are highest at the extremes of age. Systemic 
infections due to C. fetus (and to other Campylobacter 
and related species) are most common among com-
promised hosts. Persons at increased risk include those 
with AIDS, hypogammaglobulinemia, neoplasia, liver 
disease, diabetes mellitus, and generalized atherosclero-
sis as well as neonates and pregnant women. However, 
apparently healthy nonpregnant persons occasionally 
develop transient Campylobacter bacteremia as part of a 
gastrointestinal illness.
In contrast, in many developing countries, 
C. jejuni infections are hyperendemic, with the 
highest rates among children <2 years old. Infec-
tion rates fall with age, as does the illness-to-infection 
ratio. These observations suggest that frequent exposure 
to C. jejuni leads to the acquisition of immunity.
Pathology and Pathogenesis
C. jejuni infections may be subclinical, espe-
cially in hosts in developing countries who 
have had multiple prior infections and thus are 
partially immune. Symptomatic infections mostly 
occur within 2–4 days (range, 1–7 days) of exposure to 
the organism in food or water. The sites of tissue 
injury include the jejunum, ileum, and colon. Biopsies 
show an acute nonspecific inflammatory reaction, with 
neutrophils, monocytes, and eosinophils in the lamina 
propria, as well as damage to the epithelium, including 
loss of mucus, glandular degeneration, and crypt 
abscesses. Biopsy findings may be consistent with Crohn’s 
disease or ulcerative colitis, but these “idiopathic” 
chronic inflammatory diseases should not be diagnosed 
unless infectious colitis, specifically including that due to 
infection with Campylobacter species and related organ-
isms, has been ruled out.
Table 29-1
Clinical Features Associated With Infection Due to “Atypical” Campylobacter and Related 
Species Implicated as Causes of Human Illness
Species
Common Clinical  
Features
Less Common 
Clinical Features
Additional Information
Campylobacter coli
Fever, diarrhea, abdominal 
pain
Bacteremiaa
Clinically indistinguishable from C. jejuni
Campylobacter fetus
Bacteremia,a sepsis, 
meningitis, vascular  
infections
Diarrhea, relapsing 
fevers
Not usually isolated from media containing 
cephalothin or incubated at 42°C
Campylobacter 
upsaliensis
Watery diarrhea, low-grade 
fever, abdominal pain
Bacteremia, 
abscesses
Difficult to isolate because of cephalothin 
susceptibility
Campylobacter lari
Abdominal pain, diarrhea
Colitis, appendicitis
Seagulls frequently colonized; organism 
often transmitted to humans via  
contaminated water
Campylobacter 
hyointestinalis
Watery or bloody diarrhea, 
vomiting, abdominal pain
Bacteremia
Causes proliferative enteritis in swine
Helicobacter 
fennelliae
Chronic mild diarrhea, 
abdominal cramps, proctitis
Bacteremiaa
Best treated with fluoroquinolones
Helicobacter 
cinaedi
Chronic mild diarrhea, 
abdominal cramps, proctitis
Bacteremiaa
Best treated with fluoroquinolones; identified 
in healthy hamsters
Campylobacter jejuni 
subspecies doylei
Diarrhea
Chronic gastritis, 
bacteremiab
Uncertain role as human pathogen
Arcobacter 
cryaerophilus
Diarrhea
Bacteremia
Cultured under aerobic conditions
Arcobacter 
butzleri
Fever, diarrhea, abdominal 
pain, nausea
Bacteremia,  
appendicitis
Cultured under aerobic conditions; enzootic 
in nonhuman primates
Campylobacter 
sputorum
Pulmonary, perianal, groin, 
and axillary abscesses;  
diarrhea
Bacteremia
Three clinically relevant biovars: sputorum, 
fecalis, and paraureolyticus
aIn immunocompromised hosts, especially HIV-infected persons.
bIn children.
Source: Adapted from BM Allos, MJ Blaser: Clin Infect Dis 20:1092, 1995.
 
CHAPTER 29
Infections Due to Campylobacter and Related Organisms
287
The high frequency of C. jejuni infections and their 
severity and recurrence among hypogammaglobulin-
emic patients suggest that antibodies are important in 
protective immunity. The pathogenesis of infection is 
uncertain. Both the motility of the strain and its capac-
ity to adhere to host tissues appear to favor disease, but 
classic enterotoxins and cytotoxins (although described 
and including cytolethal distending toxin, or CDT) 
appear not to play substantial roles in tissue injury or 
disease production. The organisms have been visualized 
within the epithelium, albeit in low numbers. The doc-
umentation of a significant tissue response and occasion-
ally of C. jejuni bacteremia further suggests that tissue 
invasion is clinically significant, and in vitro studies are 
consistent with this pathogenetic feature.
The pathogenesis of C. fetus infections is better 
defined. Virtually all clinical isolates of C. fetus possess 
a proteinaceous capsule-like structure (an S-layer) that 
renders the organisms resistant to complement-mediated 
killing and opsonization. As a result, C. fetus can cause 
bacteremia and can seed sites beyond the intestinal 
tract. The ability of the organism to switch the S-layer 
proteins expressed—a phenomenon that results in anti-
genic variability—may contribute to the chronicity and 
high rate of recurrence of C. fetus infections in com-
promised hosts.
Clinical Manifestations
The clinical features of infections due to Campylobacter 
and the related Arcobacter and intestinal Helicobacter 
species causing enteric disease appear to be highly simi-
lar. C. jejuni can be considered the prototype, in part 
because it is by far the most common enteric pathogen 
in the group. A prodrome of fever, headache, myalgia, 
and/or malaise often occurs 12–48 h before the onset 
of diarrheal symptoms. The most common signs and 
symptoms of the intestinal phase are diarrhea, abdom-
inal pain, and fever. The degree of diarrhea varies 
from several loose stools to grossly bloody stools; most 
patients presenting for medical attention have ≥10 
bowel movements on the worst day of illness. Abdom-
inal pain usually consists of cramping and may be the 
most prominent symptom. Pain is usually generalized 
but may become localized; C. jejuni infection may cause 
pseudoappendicitis. Fever may be the only initial mani-
festation of C. jejuni infection, a situation mimicking 
the early stages of typhoid fever. Febrile young children 
may develop convulsions. Campylobacter enteritis is 
generally self-limited; however, symptoms persist for 
>1 week in 10–20% of patients seeking medical atten-
tion, and clinical relapses occur in 5–10% of such 
untreated patients. Studies of common-source epidemics 
indicate that milder illnesses or asymptomatic infections 
may commonly occur.
C. fetus may cause a diarrheal illness similar to that 
due to C. jejuni, especially in normal hosts. This organ-
ism also may cause either intermittent diarrhea or 
nonspecific abdominal pain without localizing signs. 
Sequelae are uncommon, and the outcome is benign. 
C. fetus may also cause a prolonged relapsing systemic 
illness (with fever, chills, and myalgias) that has no 
obvious primary source; this manifestation is especially 
common among compromised hosts. Secondary seed-
ing of an organ (e.g., meninges, brain, bone, urinary 
tract, or soft tissue) complicates the course, which may 
be fulminant. C. fetus infections have a tropism for vas-
cular sites: endocarditis, mycotic aneurysm, and septic 
thrombophlebitis may all occur. Infection during preg-
nancy often leads to fetal death. A variety of Campylo-
bacter species and H. cinaedi can cause recurrent celluli-
tis with fever and bacteremia in immunocompromised 
hosts.
Complications
Except in infection with C. fetus, bacteremia is uncom-
mon, developing most often in immunocompromised 
hosts and at the extremes of age. Three patterns of 
extraintestinal infection have been noted: (1) tran-
sient bacteremia in a normal host with enteritis (benign 
course, no specific treatment needed); (2) sustained bac-
teremia or focal infection in a normal host (bacteremia 
originating from enteritis, with patients responding well 
to antimicrobial therapy); and (3) sustained bacteremia 
or focal infection in a compromised host. Enteritis may 
not be clinically apparent. Antimicrobial therapy, pos-
sibly prolonged, is necessary for suppression or cure of 
the infection.
Campylobacter, Arcobacter, and intestinal Helicobacter 
infections in patients with AIDS or hypogammaglobu-
linemia may be severe, persistent, and extraintestinal; 
relapse after cessation of therapy is common. Hypogam-
maglobulinemic patients also may develop osteomyelitis 
and an erysipelas-like rash or cellulitis.
Local 
suppurative 
complications 
of 
infection 
include cholecystitis, pancreatitis, and cystitis; dis-
tant complications include meningitis, endocarditis, 
arthritis, peritonitis, cellulitis, and septic abortion. All 
these complications are rare, except in immunocom-
promised hosts. Hepatitis, interstitial nephritis, and 
the hemolytic-uremic syndrome occasionally com-
plicate acute infection. Reactive arthritis and other 
rheumatologic complaints may develop several weeks 
after infection, especially in persons with the HLA-
B27 phenotype. Guillain-Barré syndrome or its 
Miller Fisher (cranial polyneuropathy) variant fol-
lows Campylobacter infections uncommonly—i.e., in 
1 of every 1000–2000 cases or, for certain C. jejuni 
serotypes (such as O19), in 1 of every 100–200 cases. 
SECTION IV
Infections of the Alimentary Tract
288
Despite the low frequency of this complication, it is 
now estimated that Campylobacter infections, because 
of their high incidence, may trigger 20–40% of all 
cases of Guillain-Barré syndrome. Asymptomatic Cam-
pylobacter infection also may trigger this syndrome. 
Immunoproliferative small-intestinal disease (alpha 
chain disease), a form of lymphoma that originates in 
small-intestinal mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue, has 
been associated with C. jejuni; antimicrobial therapy 
has led to marked clinical improvement.
Diagnosis
In patients with Campylobacter enteritis, peripheral 
leukocyte counts reflect the severity of the inflammatory 
process. However, stools from nearly all Campylobacter-
infected patients presenting for medical attention in 
the United States contain leukocytes or erythrocytes. 
Gram- or Wright-stained fecal smears should be exam-
ined in all suspected cases. When the diagnosis of 
Campylobacter enteritis is suspected on the basis of find-
ings indicating inflammatory diarrhea (fever, fecal leu-
kocytes), clinicians can ask the microbiology laboratory 
to attempt the visualization of organisms with char-
acteristic vibrioid morphology by direct microscopic 
examination of stools with Gram’s staining or to use 
phase-contrast or dark-field microscopy to identify the 
organisms′ characteristic “darting” motility. Confirma-
tion of the diagnosis of Campylobacter infection is based 
on identification of an isolate from cultures of stool, 
blood, or another site. Campylobacter-specific media 
should be used to culture stools from all patients with 
inflammatory or bloody diarrhea. Since all Campy-
lobacter species are fastidious, they will not be isolated 
unless selective media or other selective techniques are 
used. Not all media are equally useful for isolation of 
the broad array of campylobacters; therefore, failure to 
isolate campylobacters from stool does not entirely rule 
out their presence. The detection of the organisms in 
stool almost always implies infection; there is a brief 
period of postconvalescent fecal carriage and no obvi-
ous commensalism in humans. In contrast, C. sputo-
rum and related organisms found in the oral cavity are 
commensals that only rarely have pathogenic signifi-
cance. Because of the low levels of metabolic activity of 
Campylobacter species in standard blood culture media, 
Campylobacter bacteremia may be difficult to detect 
unless laboratorians check for low-positive results in 
quantitative assays.
Differential Diagnosis
The symptoms of Campylobacter enteritis are not suffi-
ciently unusual to distinguish this illness from that due 
to Salmonella, Shigella, Yersinia, and other pathogens. 
The combination of fever and fecal leukocytes or eryth-
rocytes is indicative of inflammatory diarrhea, and 
definitive diagnosis is based on culture or demonstration 
of the characteristic organisms on stained fecal smears. 
Similarly, extraintestinal Campylobacter illness is diag-
nosed by culture. Infection due to Campylobacter should 
be suspected in the setting of septic abortion, and that 
due to C. fetus should be suspected specifically in the 
setting of septic thrombophlebitis. It is important to 
reiterate that (1) the presentation of Campylobacter 
­enteritis may mimic that of ulcerative colitis or Crohn’s 
disease, (2) Campylobacter enteritis is much more com-
mon than either of the latter (especially among young 
adults), and (3) biopsy may not distinguish among these 
entities. Thus a diagnosis of inflammatory bowel disease 
should not be made until Campylobacter infection has 
been ruled out, especially in persons with a history of 
foreign travel, significant animal contact, immunodefi-
ciency, or exposure incurring a high risk of transmission.
Treatment	
Campylobacter Infection
Fluid and electrolyte replacement is central to the treat-
ment of diarrheal illnesses (Chap. 128). Even among  
patients 
presenting 
for 
medical 
attention 
with  
Campylobacter enteritis, not all clearly benefit from 
specific antimicrobial therapy. Indications for therapy 
include high fever, bloody diarrhea, severe diarrhea, 
persistence for >1 week, and worsening of symptoms. A 
5- to 7-day course of erythromycin (250 mg orally four 
times daily or—for children—30–50 mg/kg per day, in 
divided doses) is the regimen of choice. Both clinical  
trials and in vitro susceptibility testing indicate that 
other macrolides, including azithromycin (a 1- or 3-day 
regimen), also are useful therapeutic agents. An alterna-
tive regimen for adults is ciprofloxacin (500 mg orally 
twice daily) or another fluoroquinolone for 5–7 days, 
but resistance to this class of agents as well as to tetra-
cyclines has been increasing. Patients infected with anti-
biotic-resistant strains are at increased risk of adverse 
outcomes. Use of antimotility agents, which may  
prolong the duration of symptoms and have been asso-
ciated with toxic megacolon and with death, is not rec-
ommended.
For systemic infections, treatment with gentamicin 
(1.7 mg/kg IV every 8 h after a loading dose of 2 mg/kg), 
imipenem (500 mg IV every 6 h), or chloramphenicol 
(50 mg/kg IV each day in three or four divided doses) 
should be started empirically, but susceptibility testing 
should then be performed. Ciprofloxacin and amoxicillin/ 
clavulanate are alternative agents for susceptible 
strains. In the absence of immunocompromise or endo-
vascular infections, therapy should be administered  
for 14 days. For immunocompromised patients with 
 
CHAPTER 29
Infections Due to Campylobacter and Related Organisms
289
systemic infections due to C. fetus and for patients with 
endovascular infections, prolonged therapy (for up to  
4 weeks) is usually necessary. For recurrent infections in 
immunocompromised hosts, lifelong therapy/prophy-
laxis is sometimes necessary.
Prognosis
Nearly all patients recover fully from Campylobacter 
enteritis, either spontaneously or after antimicrobial 
therapy. Volume depletion probably contributes to the 
few deaths that are reported. As stated above, occasional 
patients develop reactive arthritis or Guillain-Barré 
syndrome or its variants. Systemic infection with 
C. fetus is much more often fatal than that due to 
related species; this higher mortality rate reflects in 
part the population affected. Prognosis depends on the 
rapidity with which appropriate therapy is begun. Oth-
erwise-healthy hosts usually survive C. fetus infections 
without sequelae. Compromised hosts often have recur-
rent and/or life-threatening infections due to a variety 
of Campylobacter species.
 Matthew K. Waldor  I   Edward T. Ryan 
290
 Members of the genus  Vibrio cause a number of impor-
tant infectious syndromes. Classic among them is cholera, 
a devastating diarrheal disease caused by  V. cholerae that 
has been responsible for seven global pandemics and 
much suffering over the past two centuries. Epidemic 
cholera remains a signifi cant public health concern in 
the developing world today. Other vibrioses caused by 
other  Vibrio species include syndromes of diarrhea, soft 
tissue infection, or primary sepsis. All  Vibrio species are 
highly motile, facultatively anaerobic, curved gram-
negative rods with one or more fl agella. In nature, vib-
rios most commonly reside in tidal rivers and bays under 
conditions of moderate salinity. They proliferate in 
the summer months when water temperatures exceed 
20°C. As might be expected, the illnesses they cause also 
increase in frequency during the warm months. 
 chOLerA 
 DefinitiOn 
 Cholera is an acute diarrheal disease that can, in a mat-
ter of hours, result in profound, rapidly progressive 
dehydration and death. Accordingly, cholera gravis 
(the severe form of cholera) is a much-feared disease, 
particularly in its epidemic presentation. Fortunately, 
prompt aggressive fl uid repletion and supportive care 
can obviate the high mortality that cholera has histori-
cally wrought. While the term  cholera has occasionally 
been applied to any severely dehydrating secretory diar-
rheal illness, whether infectious in etiology or not, it 
now refers to disease caused by  V. cholerae serogroup O1 
or O139—i.e., the serogroups with epidemic potential. 
 MiCROBiOlOgy AnD ePiDeMiOlOgy 
 The species  V. cholerae is classifi ed into more than 200 
serogroups based on the carbohydrate determinants of 
their lipopolysaccharide (LPS) O antigens. Although 
some non-O1  V. cholerae serogroups (strains that do not 
agglutinate in antisera to the O1 group antigen) have 
occasionally caused sporadic outbreaks of diarrhea, sero-
group O1 was, until the emergence of serogroup O139 
in 1992, the exclusive cause of epidemic cholera. Two 
biotypes of  V. cholerae O1, classical and El Tor, are dis-
tinguished. Each biotype is further subdivided into two 
serotypes, termed  Inaba and  Ogawa . 
 The natural habitat of  V. cholerae is coastal salt water 
and brackish estuaries, where the organism lives in close 
relation to plankton. Humans become infected inciden-
tally but, once infected, can act as vehicles for spread. 
Ingestion of water contaminated by human feces is the 
most common means of acquisition of  V. cholerae . Con-
sumption of contaminated food also can contribute to 
spread. There is no known animal reservoir. While the 
infectious dose is relatively high, it is markedly reduced 
in hypochlorhydric persons, in those using antacids, and 
when gastric acidity is buffered by a meal. Cholera is 
predominantly a pediatric disease in endemic areas, but 
it affects adults and children equally when newly intro-
duced into a population. In endemic areas, the burden 
of disease is often greatest during “cholera seasons” asso-
ciated with high temperatures, heavy rainfall, and fl ood-
ing, but cholera can occur year-round. For unexplained 
reasons, susceptibility to cholera is signifi cantly infl u-
enced by ABO blood group status; persons with type 
O blood are at greatest risk of severe disease if infected, 
while those with type AB are at least risk. 
 
Cholera is native to the Ganges delta in the 
Indian subcontinent. Since 1817, seven global 
pandemics have occurred. The current (seventh) 
pandemic—the fi rst due to the El Tor biotype—began 
in Indonesia in 1961 and spread throughout Asia as 
 V. cholerae El Tor displaced the endemic classical biotype. 
In the early 1970s, El Tor cholera erupted in Africa, 
causing major epidemics before becoming a persistent 
endemic problem. Currently, >90% of cholera cases 
 CHOLERA AND OTHER VIBRIOSES 
 chApter 30 
 
CHAPTER 30
Cholera and Other Vibrioses
291
reported annually to the World Health Organization 
(WHO) are from Africa (Fig. 30-1), but the true bur-
den in Africa as well as in Asia is unknown since diag-
nosis is often syndromic and since many countries with 
endemic cholera do not report cholera to the WHO. It 
is possible that >3 million cases of cholera occur yearly 
(of which only ∼200,000 are reported to the WHO), 
resulting in >100,000 deaths annually (of which <5000 
are reported to the WHO).
The recent history of cholera has been punctuated 
by severe outbreaks, especially among impoverished or 
displaced persons. Such outbreaks are often precipitated 
by war or other circumstances that lead to the break-
down of public health measures. Such was the case in 
the camps for Rwandan refugees set up in 1994 around 
Goma, Zaire; in 2008–2009 in Zimbabwe; and in 2010 
in Haiti. Since 1973, sporadic endemic infections due 
to V. cholerae O1 strains related to the seventh-
pandemic strain have been recognized along the U.S. 
Gulf Coast of Louisiana and Texas. These infections are 
typically associated with the consumption of contami-
nated, locally harvested shellfish. Occasionally, cases in 
U.S. locations remote from the Gulf Coast have been 
linked to shipped-in Gulf Coast seafood.
After a century without cholera in Latin America, 
the current cholera pandemic reached Central and 
South America in 1991. Following an initial explosive 
spread that affected millions (Fig. 30-2), the burden 
of disease has markedly decreased in Latin America, 
although, as it did in Africa two decades earlier, the epi-
demic El Tor strain proved capable of establishing itself 
in inland fresh waters rather than in its classic niche of 
coastal salt waters. In 2010, cholera reappeared in Haiti 
after a century-long absence.
In October 1992, a large-scale outbreak of clinical 
cholera caused by a new serogroup, O139, occurred in 
Countries reporting imported cases
Areas reporting outbreaks
Figure 30-1 
World distribution of cholera in 2009. (Adapted from WHO: Wkly Epidemiol Rec 84:309, 2009.)
Initial Epidemics
January 1991
August 1991
February 1992
November 1994
Figure 30-2 
Spread of Vibrio cholerae O1 in the Americas, 1991–1994. 
(Courtesy of Dr. Robert V. Tauxe, Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention, Atlanta; with permission.)
SECTION IV
Infections of the Alimentary Tract
292
southeastern India. The organism appears to be a deriv-
ative of El Tor O1 but has a distinct LPS and an immu-
nologically related O-antigen polysaccharide capsule. 
(O1 organisms are not encapsulated.) After an initial 
spread across 11 Asian countries (Fig. 30-3), V. cholerae 
O139 has once again been largely replaced by O1, 
although O139 still causes a minority of cases in some 
Asian countries. The clinical manifestations of disease 
caused by V. cholerae O139 are indistinguishable from 
those of O1 cholera. Immunity to one, however, is not 
protective against the other.
Pathogenesis
In the final analysis, cholera is a toxin-mediated disease. 
The watery diarrhea characteristic of cholera is due to 
the action of cholera toxin, a potent protein entero-
toxin elaborated by the organism in the small intestine. 
The toxin-coregulated pilus (TCP), so named because 
its synthesis is regulated in parallel with that of cholera 
toxin, is essential for V. cholerae to survive and multiply 
in (colonize) the small intestine. Cholera toxin, TCP, 
and several other virulence factors are coordinately reg-
ulated by ToxR. This protein modulates the expres-
sion of genes coding for virulence factors in response 
to environmental signals via a cascade of regulatory 
proteins. Additional regulatory processes, including bac-
terial responses to the density of the bacterial population 
(in a phenomenon known as quorum sensing), control 
the virulence of V. cholerae.
Once established in the human small bowel, the 
organism produces cholera toxin, which consists of 
a monomeric enzymatic moiety (the A subunit) and a 
pentameric binding moiety (the B subunit). The B pen-
tamer binds to GM1 ganglioside, a glycolipid on the 
surface of epithelial cells that serves as the toxin receptor 
and makes possible the delivery of the A subunit to its 
cytosolic target. The activated A subunit (A1) irrevers-
ibly transfers ADP-ribose from nicotinamide adenine 
dinucleotide to its specific target protein, the GTP-
binding regulatory component of adenylate cyclase. 
The ADP-ribosylated G protein upregulates the activity 
of adenylate cyclase; the result is the intracellular accu-
mulation of high levels of cyclic AMP. In intestinal epi-
thelial cells, cyclic AMP inhibits the absorptive sodium 
transport system in villus cells and activates the secretory 
chloride transport system in crypt cells, and these events 
lead to the accumulation of sodium chloride in the 
intestinal lumen. Since water moves passively to main-
tain osmolality, isotonic fluid accumulates in the lumen. 
When the volume of that fluid exceeds the capacity of 
the rest of the gut to resorb it, watery diarrhea results. 
Unless the wasted fluid and electrolytes are adequately 
replaced, shock (due to profound dehydration) and 
acidosis (due to loss of bicarbonate) follow. Although 
perturbation of the adenylate cyclase pathway is the 
primary mechanism by which cholera toxin causes 
excess fluid secretion, cholera toxin also enhances intes-
tinal secretion via prostaglandins and/or neural histamine 
receptors.
The V. cholerae genome comprises two circular 
chromosomes. Lateral gene transfer has played a 
key role in the evolution of epidemic V. cholerae. 
The genes encoding cholera toxin (ctxAB) are part of the 
genome of a bacteriophage, CTXΦ. The receptor for 
this phage on the V. cholerae surface is the intestinal colo-
nization factor TCP. Since ctxAB is part of a mobile 
genetic element (CTXΦ), horizontal transfer of this bac-
teriophage may account for the emergence of new toxi-
genic V. cholerae serogroups. Many of the other genes 
important for V. cholerae pathogenicity, including the 
genes encoding the biosynthesis of TCP, those encoding 
accessory colonization factors, and those regulating 
virulence gene expression, are clustered together in the 
V. cholerae pathogenicity island. Similar clustering of vir-
ulence genes is found in other bacterial pathogens. It is 
believed that pathogenicity islands are acquired by hori-
zontal gene transfer. V. cholerae O139 is probably derived 
from an El Tor O1 strain that acquired the genes for 
O139 O-antigen synthesis by horizontal gene transfer.
Clinical Manifestations
Individuals infected with V. cholerae O1 or O139 exhibit 
a range of clinical manifestations. Some individuals 
March 1993
October 1994
Initial Epidemic, October 1992
Figure 30-3 
Spread of Vibrio cholerae O139 in the Indian subcon-
tinent and elsewhere in Asia, 1992–1994. (Courtesy of 
Dr. Robert V. Tauxe, CDC, Atlanta; with permission.)
 
CHAPTER 30
Cholera and Other Vibrioses
293
are asymptomatic or have only mild diarrhea; others 
present with the sudden onset of explosive and life-
threatening diarrhea (cholera gravis). The reasons for 
the range in signs and symptoms of disease are incom-
pletely understood but include the level of preexist-
ing immunity, blood type, and nutritional status. In a 
nonimmune individual, after a 24- to 48-h incubation 
period, cholera characteristically begins with the sud-
den onset of painless watery diarrhea that may quickly 
become voluminous. Patients often vomit. In severe 
cases, volume loss can exceed 250 mL/kg in the first 
24 h. If fluids and electrolytes are not replaced, hypo-
volemic shock and death may ensue. Fever is usually 
absent. Muscle cramps due to electrolyte disturbances 
are common. The stool has a characteristic appearance: 
a nonbilious, gray, slightly cloudy fluid with flecks of 
mucus, no blood, and a somewhat fishy, inoffensive 
odor. It has been called “rice-water” stool because of 
its resemblance to the water in which rice has been 
washed (Fig. 30-4). Clinical symptoms parallel volume 
contraction: At losses of <5% of normal body weight, 
thirst develops; at 5–10%, postural hypotension, weak-
ness, tachycardia, and decreased skin turgor are docu-
mented; and at >10%, oliguria, weak or absent pulses, 
sunken eyes (and, in infants, sunken fontanelles), wrin-
kled (“washerwoman”) skin, somnolence, and coma 
are characteristic. Complications derive exclusively 
from the effects of volume and electrolyte depletion 
and include renal failure due to acute tubular necrosis. 
Thus, if the patient is adequately treated with fluid and 
electrolytes, complications are averted and the process is 
self-limited, resolving in a few days.
Laboratory data usually reveal an elevated hematocrit 
(due to hemoconcentration) in nonanemic patients; 
mild neutrophilic leukocytosis; elevated levels of blood 
urea nitrogen and creatinine consistent with prerenal 
azotemia; normal sodium, potassium, and chloride levels; 
a markedly reduced bicarbonate level (<15 mmol/L); 
and an elevated anion gap (due to increases in serum 
lactate, protein, and phosphate). Arterial pH is usually 
low (∼7.2).
Diagnosis
The clinical suspicion of cholera can be confirmed by 
the identification of V. cholerae in stool; however, the 
organism must be specifically sought. With experience, 
it can be detected directly by dark-field microscopy 
on a wet mount of fresh stool, and its serotype can be 
discerned by immobilization with specific antiserum. 
Laboratory isolation of the organism requires the use of 
a selective medium such as taurocholate-tellurite-gelatin 
(TTG) agar or thiosulfate–citrate–bile salts–sucrose 
(TCBS) agar. If a delay in sample processing is expected, 
Carey-Blair transport medium and/or alkaline-peptone 
water-enrichment medium may be used as well. In 
endemic areas, there is little need for biochemical con-
firmation and characterization, although these tasks may 
be worthwhile in places where V. cholerae is an uncom-
mon isolate. Standard microbiologic biochemical test-
ing for Enterobacteriaceae will suffice for identification 
of V. cholerae. All vibrios are oxidase-positive. A point-
of-care antigen-detection cholera dipstick assay is now 
commercially available for use in the field or where lab-
oratory facilities are lacking.
Treatment	
Cholera
Death from cholera is due to hypovolemic shock; thus 
treatment of individuals with cholera first and fore-
most requires fluid resuscitation and management. 
In light of the level of dehydration (Table 30-1) and 
the patient’s age and weight, euvolemia should first 
be rapidly restored, and adequate hydration should 
then be maintained to replace ongoing fluid losses  
(Table 30-2). Administration of oral rehydration solution 
(ORS) takes advantage of the hexose-Na+ co-transport 
mechanism to move Na+ across the gut mucosa 
Figure 30-4 
Rice water cholera stool. Note floating mucus and gray 
watery appearance. (Courtesy of Dr. ASG Faruque, Interna-
tional Centre for Diarrhoeal Disease Research, Dhaka; with 
permission.)
SECTION IV
Infections of the Alimentary Tract
294
together with an actively transported molecule such 
as glucose (or galactose). Cl− and water follow. This 
transport mechanism remains intact even when chol-
era toxin is active. ORS may be made by adding safe 
water to prepackaged sachets containing salts and 
sugar or by adding 0.5 teaspoon of table salt (NaCl;  
3.5 g) and 4 tablespoons of table sugar (glucose;  
40 g) to 1 L of safe water. Potassium intake in bananas 
or green coconut water should be encouraged. A num-
ber of ORS formulations are available, and the WHO now  
recommends “low-osmolarity” ORS for treatment of  
individuals with dehydrating diarrhea of any cause 
(Table 30-3). If available, rice-based ORS is considered 
superior to standard ORS in the treatment of cholera.  
ORS can be administered via a nasogastric tube to 
individuals who cannot ingest fluid; however, optimal 
management of individuals with severe dehydration 
includes the administration of IV fluid and electrolytes. 
Because profound acidosis (pH <7.2) is common in this 
group, Ringer’s lactate is the best choice among com-
mercial products (Table 30-4). It must be used with 
additional potassium supplements, preferably given  
by mouth. The total fluid deficit in severely dehydrated 
patients (>10% of body weight) can be replaced safely 
within the first 3–6 h of therapy, half within the first  
hour. Transient muscle cramps and tetany are common.  
Thereafter, oral therapy can usually be initiated,  
with the goal of maintaining fluid intake equal to 
fluid output. However, patients with continued large-­
volume diarrhea may require prolonged IV treatment 
to match gastrointestinal fluid losses. Severe hypo-
kalemia can develop but will respond to potassium 
given either IV or orally. In the absence of adequate 
staff to monitor the patient’s progress, the oral route 
of rehydration and potassium replacement is safer 
than the IV route.
Table 30-1
Assessing the Degree of Dehydration in 
Patients With Cholera
Degree of 
Dehydration
Clinical Findings
None or mild,  
but diarrhea
Thirst in some cases; <5% loss of total 
body weight
Moderate
Thirst, postural hypotension, weakness, 
tachycardia, decreased skin turgor, dry 
mouth/tongue, no tears; 5–10% loss 
of total body weight
Severe
Unconsciousness, lethargy, or  
“floppiness”; weak or absent pulse; 
inability to drink; sunken eyes (and, in 
infants, sunken fontanelles);  
>10% loss of total body weight
Table 30-2 
Treatment of Cholera, Based on Degree of 
Dehydrationa
Degree of Dehydration, 
Patient’s Age (Weight)
Treatment
None or Mild, but Diarrheab
<2 years
1/4–1/2 cup (50–100 mL) of 
ORS, to a maximum of 0.5 L/d
2–9 years
1/2–1 cup (100–200 mL) of 
ORS, to a maximum of 1 L/d
≥10 years
As much ORS as desired, to 
a maximum of 2 L/d
Moderateb,c
<4 months (<5 kg)
200–400 mL of ORS
4–11 months (5–<8 kg)
400–600 mL of ORS
12–23 months (8–<11 kg)
600–800 mL of ORS
2–4 years (11–<16 kg)
800–1200 mL of ORS
5–14 years (16–<30 kg)
1200–2200 mL of ORS
≥15 years (≥30 kg)
2200–4000 mL of ORS
Severeb
All ages and weights
IV fluid replacement with 
Ringer’s lactate (or, if not 
available, normal saline): 
100 mL/kg in first 3-h period 
(or first 6-h period for  
children <12 months old); 
start rapidly, then slow 
down; total of 200 mL/kg 
in first 24 h; continue until 
patient is awake, can ingest 
ORS, and no longer has a 
weak pulse
Note: Continue normal feeding during treatment.
aAdapted from World Health Organization: First steps for managing an 
outbreak of acute diarrhoea. Global Task Force on Cholera Control, 
2009 (www.who.int/topics/cholera). ORS, oral rehydration solution.
bReassess regularly; monitor stool and vomit output.
cAmounts of ORS listed should be given within the first 4 h.
Although not necessary for cure, the use of an antibi-
otic to which the organism is susceptible diminishes the 
duration and volume of fluid loss and hastens clearance 
of the organism from the stool. The WHO recommends 
administration of antibiotics to cholera patients only 
if they are severely dehydrated, although wider use is 
often justifiable. Doxycycline (a single dose of 300 mg) 
or tetracycline (12.5 mg/kg four times a day for 3 days) 
may be effective in adults but is not recommended for 
children <8 years of age because of possible deposi-
tion in bone and developing teeth. Emerging drug 
resistance is an ever-present concern. For nonpregnant 
adults with cholera in areas where tetracycline resis-
tance is prevalent, ciprofloxacin (either in a single dose 
[30 mg/kg, not to exceed a total dose of 1 g] or in a short 
 
CHAPTER 30
Cholera and Other Vibrioses
295
Table 30-3
Composition of World Health Organization 
Reduced-Osmolarity Oral Rehydration 
Solution (ORS)a,b
Constituent
Concentration, mmol/L
Na+
75
K+
20
Cl−
65
Citratec
10
Glucose
75
Total osmolarity
245
aContains (per package, to be added to 1 L of drinking water): NaCl, 
2.6 g; Na3C6H5O7·2H2O, 2.9 g; KCl, 1.5 g; and glucose (anhydrous), 
13.5 g.
bIf prepackaged ORS is unavailable, a simple homemade alternative 
can be prepared by combining 3.5 g (∼1/2 teaspoon) of NaCl with 
either 50 g of precooked rice cereal or 40 g (4 tablespoons) of table 
sugar (sucrose) in 1 L of drinking water. In that case, potassium must 
be supplied separately (e.g., in orange juice or coconut water).
c10 mmol citrate per liter, which supplies 30 mmol HCO3/L.
Table 30-4
Electrolyte Composition of Cholera Stool 
and of Intravenous Rehydration Solution
Concentration, mmol/L
Substance
Na+
K+
Cl−
Base
Stool
Adult
135
15
100
45
Child
100
25
90
30
Ringer’s lactate
130
4a
109
28
aPotassium supplements, preferably administered by mouth, are 
required to replace the usual potassium losses from stool.
provides little protection to nonimmune subjects and 
predictably causes adverse effects, including pain at the 
injection site, malaise, and fever. The vaccine’s limited 
efficacy is due, at least in part, to its failure to induce a 
local immune response at the intestinal mucosal surface.
Two types of oral cholera vaccines have been devel-
oped. The first is a killed whole-cell (WC) vaccine. 
Two formulations of the killed WC vaccine have been 
prepared: one that also contains the nontoxic B subunit 
of cholera toxin (WC/BS) and one composed solely 
of killed bacteria. In placebo-controlled field trials in 
Bangladesh, both of the killed vaccines offered signifi-
cant protection from cholera for the first 6 months after 
vaccination, with protection rates of ∼58% for WC vac-
cine and 85% for WC/BS vaccine. Protective efficacy 
rates for both vaccines declined to ∼50% by 3 years after 
vaccine administration. Immunity was relatively sus-
tained in persons vaccinated at an age of >5 years but 
was not well sustained in younger vaccinees. The WC/
BS vaccine proved effective in a trial conducted in a 
sub-Saharan African population with a high prevalence 
of HIV infection. Trials of locally produced killed WC 
vaccines have yielded promising results in Vietnam and 
in Kolkata (Calcutta), India. Killed oral vaccines also 
confer herd protection to unvaccinated individuals liv-
ing in proximity to vaccinated individuals. The WHO 
now recommends that vaccination against cholera be 
part of a larger response plan for populations at risk for 
epidemic cholera. The oral killed vaccines are available 
in Europe and Asia but (like other cholera vaccines) are 
not available in the United States.
The second type of cholera vaccine under develop-
ment involves the use of oral live attenuated vaccine 
strains developed, for example, by the isolation or cre-
ation of mutants lacking the genes encoding cholera 
toxin. One such vaccine, CVD 103-HgR, was safe and 
immunogenic in phase 1 and 2 studies but afforded min-
imal protection in a large field trial in Indonesia. Other 
live attenuated vaccine candidate strains have been pre-
pared from El Tor and O139 V. cholerae and are now 
undergoing clinical trials. The development of effec-
tive and safe cholera vaccines and strategies that provide 
long-lasting protective mucosal immunity, especially 
among malnourished, impoverished, and potentially 
HIV-infected adults and children (the individuals most 
at risk for cholera), is a priority. As mentioned earlier, 
no cholera vaccine is commercially available in the 
United States.
Other Vibrio Species
The genus Vibrio includes several human patho-
gens that do not cause cholera. Abundant in 
coastal waters throughout the world, noncholera 
vibrios can reach high concentrations in the tissues of 
course [15 mg/kg bid for 3 days, not to exceed a total 
daily dose of 1 g]), erythromycin (40–50 mg/kg daily in 
three divided doses for 3 days), or azithromycin (a single 
1-g dose) may be a clinically effective substitute. Preg-
nant women and children are usually treated with eryth-
romycin or azithromycin (10 mg/kg in children).
Prevention
Provision of safe water and facilities for sanitary dis-
posal of feces, improved nutrition, and attention to food 
preparation and storage in the household can signifi-
cantly reduce the incidence of cholera.
Much effort has been devoted to the development of 
an effective cholera vaccine over the past few decades, 
with a particular focus on oral vaccine strains. Tra-
ditional killed cholera vaccine given intramuscularly 
SECTION IV
Infections of the Alimentary Tract
296
filter-feeding mollusks. As a result, human infection 
commonly follows the ingestion of seawater or of raw 
or undercooked shellfish (Table 30-5). Most nonchol-
era vibrios can be cultured on blood or MacConkey 
agar, which contains enough salt to support the growth 
of these halophilic species. In the microbiology labora-
tory, the species of noncholera vibrios are distin-
guished by standard biochemical tests. The most 
important of these organisms are V. parahaemolyticus 
and V. vulnificus.
The two major types of syndromes for which these 
species are responsible are gastrointestinal illness (due to 
V. parahaemolyticus, non-O1/O139 V. cholerae, V. mimicus, 
V. fluvialis, V. hollisae, and V. furnissii) and soft tissue 
infections (due to V. vulnificus, V. alginolyticus, and 
V. damselae). V. vulnificus is also a cause of primary sepsis 
in some compromised individuals.
Species Associated Primarily with 
Gastrointestinal Illness
V. parahaemolyticus
Widespread in marine environments, the halo-
philic V. parahaemolyticus causes food-borne 
enteritis worldwide. This species was originally 
implicated in enteritis in Japan in 1953, accounting for 
24% of reported cases in one study—a rate that pre-
sumably was due to the common practice of eating raw 
seafood in that country. In the United States, common-
source outbreaks of diarrhea caused by this organism 
have been linked to the consumption of undercooked 
or improperly handled seafood or of other foods 
contaminated by seawater. Since the mid-1990s, the 
incidence of V. parahaemolyticus infections has increased 
in several countries, including the United States. 
Serotypes O3:K6, O4:K68, and O1:K-untypable, which 
are genetically related to one another, account for this 
increase. The enteropathogenicity of V. parahaemolyticus 
is linked to its ability to cause hemolysis on Wagatsuma 
agar (i.e., the Kanagawa phenomenon). Although the mech-
anism by which the organism causes diarrhea remains 
unclear, the genome sequence of V. parahaemolyticus 
contains two type III secretion systems, which 
directly inject toxic bacterial proteins into host cells. 
V. parahaemolyticus should be considered a possible 
etiologic agent in all cases of diarrhea that can be 
linked epidemiologically to seafood consumption or to 
the sea itself.
Infections with V. parahaemolyticus can result in two 
distinct gastrointestinal presentations. The more com-
mon of the two presentations (including nearly all cases 
in North America) is characterized by watery diarrhea, 
usually occurring in conjunction with abdominal cramps, 
nausea, and vomiting and accompanied in ∼25% of 
cases by fever and chills. After an incubation period of 
4 h to 4 days, symptoms develop and persist for a median 
of 3 days. Dysentery, the less common presentation, is 
characterized by severe abdominal cramps, nausea, vom-
iting, and bloody or mucoid stools. V. parahaemolyticus 
also causes rare cases of wound infection and otitis and 
very rare cases of sepsis.
Most cases of V. parahaemolyticus–associated gastro-
intestinal illness, regardless of the presentation, are self-
limited and require neither antimicrobial treatment 
nor hospitalization. Deaths are extremely rare among 
immunocompetent individuals. Severe infections are 
associated with underlying diseases, including diabe-
tes, preexisting liver disease, iron-overload states, or 
immunosuppression. The occasional severe case should 
be treated with fluid replacement and antibiotics, as 
described earlier for cholera.
Table 30-5
Features of Selected Noncholera Vibrioses
Organism
Vehicle or Activity
Host at Risk
Syndrome
V. parahaemolyticus
Shellfish, seawater
Normal
Gastroenteritis
Seawater
Normal
Wound infection
Non-O1/O139 
Shellfish, travel
Normal
Gastroenteritis
V. cholerae
Seawater
Normal
Wound infection, otitis media
V. vulnificus
Shellfish
Immunosuppresseda
Sepsis, secondary cellulitis
Seawater
Normal,  
immunosuppresseda
Wound infection, cellulitis
V. alginolyticus
Seawater
Normal
Wound infection, cellulitis, otitis
Seawater
Burned, other  
immunosuppressed
Sepsis
aEspecially with liver disease or hemochromatosis.
Source: Table 161-3 in Harrisons Principles of Internal Medicine, 14th edition.
 
CHAPTER 30
Cholera and Other Vibrioses
297
Non-O1/O139 (noncholera) V. cholerae
The heterogeneous non-O1/O139 V. cholerae organ-
isms cannot be distinguished from V. cholerae O1 or 
O139 by routine biochemical tests but do not aggluti-
nate in O1 or O139 antiserum. Non-O1/O139 strains 
have caused several well-studied food-borne outbreaks 
of gastroenteritis and have also been responsible for spo-
radic cases of otitis media, wound infection, and bac-
teremia; although gastroenteritis outbreaks can occur, 
non-O1/O139 V. cholerae strains do not cause epi-
demics of cholera. Like other vibrios, non-O1/O139 
V. cholerae organisms are widely distributed in marine 
environments. In most instances, recognized cases in 
the United States have been associated with the con-
sumption of raw oysters or with recent travel, typically 
to Mexico. The broad clinical spectrum of diarrheal ill-
ness caused by these organisms is probably due to the 
group’s heterogeneous virulence attributes.
In the United States, about half of all non-O1/O139 
V. cholerae isolates are from stool samples. The typical 
incubation period for gastroenteritis due to these organ-
isms is <2 days, and the illness lasts for ∼2–7 days. 
Patients’ stools may be copious and watery or may be 
partly formed, less voluminous, and bloody or mucoid. 
Diarrhea can result in severe dehydration. Many cases 
include abdominal cramps, nausea, vomiting, and fever. 
Like those with cholera, patients who are seriously 
dehydrated should receive oral or IV fluids; the value of 
antibiotics is not clear.
Extraintestinal infections due to non-O1/O139 
V. cholerae commonly follow occupational or recre-
ational exposure to seawater. Around 10% of non-O1/
O139 V. cholerae isolates come from cases of wound 
infection, 10% from cases of otitis media, and 20% 
from cases of bacteremia (which is particularly likely to 
develop in patients with liver disease). Extraintestinal 
infections should be treated with antibiotics. Informa-
tion to guide antibiotic selection and dosing is limited, 
but most strains are sensitive in vitro to tetracycline, 
ciprofloxacin, and third-generation cephalosporins.
Species Associated Primarily with 
Soft Tissue Infection or Bacteremia 
V. vulnificus
Infection with V. vulnificus is rare, but this organism is 
the most common cause of severe Vibrio infections in 
the United States. Like most vibrios, V. vulnificus pro-
liferates in the warm summer months and requires a 
saline environment for growth. In this country, infec-
tions in humans typically occur in coastal states between 
May and October and most commonly affect men 
>40 years of age. V. vulnificus has been linked to two 
distinct syndromes: primary sepsis, which usually occurs 
in patients with underlying liver disease, and primary 
wound infection, which generally affects people with-
out underlying disease. (Vulnificus is Latin for “wound 
maker.”) Some authors have suggested that V. vulnificus 
also causes gastroenteritis independent of other clinical 
manifestations. V. vulnificus is endowed with a number 
of virulence attributes, including a capsule that con-
fers resistance to phagocytosis and to the bactericidal 
activity of human serum as well as a cytolysin. Mea-
sured as the 50% lethal dose in mice, the organism’s 
virulence is considerably increased under conditions of 
iron overload; this observation is consistent with the 
propensity of V. vulnificus to infect patients who have 
hemochromatosis.
Primary sepsis most often develops in patients 
who have cirrhosis or hemochromatosis. However, 
V. vulnificus bacteremia can also affect individuals who 
have hematopoietic disorders or chronic renal insuffi-
ciency, those who are using immunosuppressive medi-
cations or alcohol, or (in rare instances) those who have 
no known underlying disease. After a median incuba-
tion period of 16 h, the patient develops malaise, chills, 
fever, and prostration. One-third of patients develop 
hypotension, which is often apparent at admission. 
Cutaneous manifestations develop in most cases (usually 
within 36 h of onset) and characteristically involve the 
extremities (the lower more often than the upper). In a 
common sequence, erythematous patches are followed 
by ecchymoses, vesicles, and bullae. In fact, sepsis and 
hemorrhagic bullous skin lesions suggest the diagnosis 
in appropriate settings. Necrosis and sloughing may also 
be evident. Laboratory studies reveal leukopenia more 
often than leukocytosis, thrombocytopenia, or elevated 
levels of fibrin split products. V. vulnificus can be cul-
tured from blood or cutaneous lesions. The mortality 
rate approaches 50%, with most deaths due to uncon-
trolled sepsis. Accordingly, prompt treatment is critical 
and should include empirical antibiotic administration, 
aggressive debridement, and general supportive care. 
V. vulnificus is sensitive in vitro to a number of antibiot-
ics, including tetracycline, fluoroquinolones, and third-
generation cephalosporins. Data from animal models 
suggest that either a fluoroquinolone or the combina-
tion of minocycline and cefotaxime should be used in 
the treatment of V. vulnificus septicemia.
V. vulnificus can infect either a fresh or an old wound 
that comes into contact with seawater; the patient may 
or may not have underlying disease. After a short incu-
bation period (4 h to 4 days; mean, 12 h), the disease 
begins with swelling, erythema, and (in many cases) 
intense pain around the wound. These signs and symp-
toms are followed by cellulitis, which spreads rapidly 
and is sometimes accompanied by vesicular, bullous, or 
necrotic lesions. Metastatic events are uncommon. Most 
SECTION IV
Infections of the Alimentary Tract
298
patients have a fever and leukocytosis. V. vulnificus can 
be cultured from skin lesions and occasionally from the 
blood. Prompt antibiotic therapy and debridement are 
usually curative.
V. alginolyticus
First identified as a pathogen of humans in 1973, 
V. alginolyticus occasionally causes eye, ear, and wound 
infections. This species is the most salt-tolerant of the 
vibrios and can grow in salt concentrations of >10%. 
Most clinical isolates come from superinfected wounds 
that presumably become contaminated at the beach. 
Although its severity varies, V. alginolyticus infection 
tends not to be serious and generally responds well to 
antibiotic therapy and drainage. A few cases of otitis 
externa, otitis media, and conjunctivitis due to this 
pathogen have been described. Tetracycline treatment 
usually results in cure. V. alginolyticus is a rare cause of 
bacteremia in immunocompromised hosts.
Acknowledgment
The authors gratefully acknowledge the valuable contributions 
of Drs. Robert Deresiewicz and Gerald T. Keusch, coauthors 
of this chapter for previous editions of Harrison’s Principles of 
Internal Medicine.
 Umesh D. Parashar  I   Roger I. Glass 
299
 
Acute infectious gastroenteritis is a common 
illness that affects persons of all ages worldwide. 
It is a leading cause of mortality among children 
in developing countries, accounting for an estimated 
1.8 million deaths each year, and is responsible for up to 
10–12% of all hospitalizations among children in indus-
trialized countries, including the United States. Elderly 
persons, especially those with debilitating health condi-
tions, are also at risk of severe complications and death 
from acute gastroenteritis. Among healthy young adults, 
acute gastroenteritis is rarely fatal but incurs substantial 
medical and social costs, including those of time lost 
from work. 
 Several enteric viruses have been recognized as 
important etiologic agents of acute infectious gastroen-
teritis  ( Table 31-1 ,  Fig. 31-1 ) . Although most viral 
gastroenteritis is caused by RNA viruses, the DNA 
viruses that are occasionally involved (e.g., adenovirus 
types 40 and 41) are included in this chapter. Illness 
caused by these viruses is characterized by the acute 
onset of vomiting and/or diarrhea, which may be 
accompanied by fever, nausea, abdominal cramps, 
anorexia, and malaise. As shown in  Table 31-2 , sev-
eral features can help distinguish gastroenteritis caused 
by viruses from that caused by bacterial agents. How-
ever, the distinction based on clinical and epidemiologic 
parameters alone is often diffi cult, and laboratory tests 
may be required to confi rm the diagnosis. 
 huMan CaliCiViruses 
 Etiologic agent 
 The Norwalk virus is the prototype strain of a group 
of nonenveloped, small (27–40 nm), round, icosahedral 
viruses with relatively amorphous surface features on 
visualization by electron microscopy. These viruses have 
been diffi cult to classify because they have not been 
adapted to cell culture, they often are shed in low titers 
for only a few days, and no animal models are available. 
 VIRAL GASTROENTERITIS 
 CHAPTER 31 
Table 31-1 
 Viral Causes of Gastroenteritis aMonG huMans 
Virus
faMily
GenoMe
PriMary aGe 
GrouP at risK
CliniCal 
seVerity
deteCtion assays
Group A rotavirus
Reoviridae
Double-strand 
segmented RNA
Children <5 years
+ + +
EM, EIA 
(commercial), 
PAGE, RT-PCR
Norovirus
Caliciviridae
Positive-sense 
single-strand RNA
All ages
+ +
EM, EIA, RT-PCR
Sapovirus
Caliciviridae
Positive-sense 
single-strand RNA
Children <5 years
+
EM, EIA, RT-PCR
Astrovirus
Astroviridae
Positive-sense 
single-strand RNA
Children <5 years
+
EM, EIA, RT-PCR
Adenovirus 
(types 40 and 41)
Adenoviridae
Double-strand DNA
Children <5 years
+/+ +
EM, EIA 
(commercial), PCR
 Abbreviations: EIA, enzyme immunoassay; EM, electron microscopy; PAGE, polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis; PCR, polymerase chain 
reaction; RT-PCR, reverse-transcription PCR.
SECTION IV
Infections of the Alimentary Tract
300
Table 31-2 
Characteristics of Gastroenteritis Caused by Viral and Bacterial Agents
Feature
Viral Gastroenteritis
Bacterial Gastroenteritis
Setting
Incidence similar in developing and  
developed countries
More common in settings with poor hygiene and sanitation
Infectious 
dose
Low (10–100 viral particles) for most agents
High (>105 bacteria) for Escherichia coli, Salmonella, Vibrio; 
medium (102–105 bacteria) for Campylobacter jejuni; low 
(10–100 bacteria) for Shigella
Seasonality
In temperate climates, winter seasonality 
for most agents; year-round occurrence in 
tropical areas
More common in summer or rainy months, particularly in 
developing countries with a high disease burden
Incubation 
period
1–3 days for most agents; can be shorter for 
norovirus
1–7 days for common agents (e.g., Campylobacter, E. coli, 
Shigella, Salmonella); a few hours for bacteria producing 
preformed toxins (e.g., Staphylococcus aureus, Bacillus cereus)
Reservoir
Primarily humans
Depending on species, human (e.g., Shigella, Salmonella), 
animal (e.g., Campylobacter, Salmonella, E. coli), and water 
(e.g., Vibrio) reservoirs exist.
Fever
Common with rotavirus and norovirus; 
uncommon with other agents
Common with agents causing inflammatory diarrhea (e.g.,  
Salmonella, Shigella?)
Vomiting
Prominent and can be the only presenting 
feature, especially in children
Common with bacteria producing preformed toxins; less  
prominent in diarrhea due to other agents
Diarrhea
Common; nonbloody in almost all cases
Prominent and frequently bloody with agents causing  
inflammatory diarrhea
Duration
1–3 days for norovirus and sapovirus;  
2–8 days for other viruses
1–2 days for bacteria producing preformed toxins; 2–8 days for 
most other bacteria
Diagnosis
This is often a diagnosis of exclusion in  
clinical practice. Commercial enzyme 
immunoassays are available for detection of 
rotavirus and adenovirus, but identification 
of other agents is limited to research and 
public health laboratories.
Fecal examination for leukocytes and blood is helpful in  
differential diagnosis. Culture of stool specimens, sometimes 
on special media, can identify several pathogens. Molecular 
techniques are useful epidemiologic tools but are not routinely 
used in most laboratories.
Treatment
Supportive therapy to maintain  
adequate hydration and nutrition should be 
given. Antibiotics and antimotility agents  
are contraindicated.
Supportive hydration therapy is adequate for most patients. 
Antibiotics are recommended for patients with dysentery 
caused by Shigella or Vibrio cholerae and for some patients 
with Clostridium difficile colitis.
Figure 31-1 
Viral agents of gastroenteritis. NV, norovirus; SV, sapovirus.
 
CHAPTER 31
Viral Gastroenteritis
301
Molecular cloning and characterization have demon-
strated that the viruses have a single, positive-strand 
RNA genome ∼7.5 kb in length and that they possess a 
single virion-associated protein—similar to that of typi-
cal caliciviruses—with a molecular mass of 60 kDa. On 
the basis of these molecular characteristics, these viruses 
are presently classified in two genera belonging to the 
family Caliciviridae: the noroviruses and the sapoviruses 
(previously called Norwalk-like viruses and Sapporo-
like viruses, respectively).
Epidemiology
Infections with the Norwalk and related human 
caliciviruses are common worldwide, and most 
adults have antibodies to these viruses. Antibody 
is acquired at an earlier age in developing countries—a 
pattern consistent with the presumed fecal-oral mode of 
transmission. Infections occur year-round, although, in 
temperate climates, a distinct increase has been noted in 
cold-weather months. Noroviruses may be the most 
common infectious agents of mild gastroenteritis in the 
community and affect all age groups, whereas sapovi-
ruses primarily cause gastroenteritis in children. Norovi-
ruses also cause traveler’s diarrhea, and outbreaks have 
occurred among military personnel deployed to various 
parts of the world. The limited data available indicate 
that norovirus may be the second most common viral 
agent (after rotavirus) among young children and the 
most common agent among older children and adults. 
For example, in a comprehensive evaluation of eight 
enteric pathogens in patients with gastroenteritis in 
England, three-fourths of patients had at least one 
pathogen detected in fecal specimens, and noroviruses 
were the most prevalent, detected in 36% of patients 
and 18% of healthy controls. Noroviruses are also rec-
ognized as the major cause of epidemics of gastroenteri-
tis worldwide. In the United States, >90% of outbreaks 
of nonbacterial gastroenteritis are caused by noroviruses.
Virus is transmitted predominantly by the fecal-oral 
route but is also present in vomitus. Because an inoculum 
with very few viruses can be infectious, transmission can 
occur by aerosolization, by contact with contaminated 
fomites, and by person-to-person contact. Viral shed-
ding and infectivity are greatest during the acute illness, 
but challenge studies with Norwalk virus in volunteers 
indicate that viral antigen may be shed by asymptom-
atically infected persons and also by symptomatic per-
sons before the onset of symptoms and for several weeks 
after the resolution of illness.
Pathogenesis
The exact sites and cellular receptors for attachment of 
viral particles have not been determined. Data suggest 
that carbohydrates that are similar to human histo-blood 
group antigens and are present on the gastroduode-
nal epithelium of individuals with the secretor phe-
notype may serve as ligands for the attachment of 
Norwalk virus. Additional studies must more fully elu-
cidate norovirus-carbohydrate interactions, including 
potential strain-specific variations. After the infection 
of volunteers, reversible lesions are noted in the upper 
jejunum, with broadening and blunting of the villi, 
shortening of the microvilli, vacuolization of the lin-
ing epithelium, crypt hyperplasia, and infiltration of 
the lamina propria by polymorphonuclear neutrophils 
and lymphocytes. The lesions persist for at least 4 days 
after the resolution of symptoms and are associated with 
malabsorption of carbohydrates and fats and a decreased 
level of brush-border enzymes. Adenylate cyclase activ-
ity is not altered. No histopathologic changes are seen 
in the stomach or colon, but gastric motor function is 
delayed, and this alteration is believed to contribute to 
the nausea and vomiting that are typical of this illness.
Clinical manifestations
Gastroenteritis caused by Norwalk and related human 
caliciviruses has a sudden onset, following an average 
incubation period of 24 h (range, 12–72 h). The ill-
ness generally lasts 12–60 h and is characterized by one 
or more of the following symptoms: nausea, vomit-
ing, abdominal cramps, and diarrhea. Vomiting is more 
prevalent among children, whereas a greater proportion 
of adults develop diarrhea. Constitutional symptoms are 
common, including headache, fever, chills, and myalgias. 
The stools are characteristically loose and watery, with-
out blood, mucus, or leukocytes. White cell counts are 
generally normal; rarely, leukocytosis with relative lym-
phopenia may be observed. Death is a rare outcome and 
usually results from severe dehydration in vulnerable 
persons (e.g., elderly patients with debilitating health 
conditions).
Immunity
Approximately 50% of persons challenged with 
Norwalk virus become ill and acquire short-term 
immunity against the infecting strain. Immunity to 
Norwalk virus appears to correlate inversely with level 
of antibody; i.e., persons with higher levels of preexist-
ing antibody to Norwalk virus are more susceptible to 
illness. This observation suggests that some individuals 
have a genetic predisposition to illness. Specific ABO, 
Lewis, and secretor blood group phenotypes may influ-
ence susceptibility to norovirus infection.
Diagnosis
Cloning and sequencing of the genomes of Norwalk 
and several other human caliciviruses have allowed 
SECTION IV
Infections of the Alimentary Tract
302
the development of assays based on polymerase chain 
reaction (PCR) for detection of virus in stool and 
vomitus. Virus-like particles produced by expression 
of capsid proteins in a recombinant baculovirus vec-
tor have been used to develop enzyme immuno­assays 
(EIAs) for detection of virus in stool or a serologic 
response to a specific viral antigen. These newer diag-
nostic techniques are considerably more sensitive than 
previous detection methods, such as electron micros-
copy, immune electron microscopy, and EIAs based on 
reagents derived from humans. However, no currently 
available single assay can detect all human caliciviruses 
because of their great genetic and antigenic diversity. In 
addition, the assays are still cumbersome and are avail-
able primarily in research laboratories, although they 
are increasingly being adopted by public health labo-
ratories for routine screening of fecal specimens from 
patients affected by outbreaks of gastroenteritis. Com-
mercial EIA kits, which are available in some European 
countries and in Japan but not yet in the United States, 
have limited sensitivity and usefulness in clinical practice 
and are of greatest utility in outbreaks, in which many 
specimens are tested and only a few need be positive to 
identify norovirus as the cause.
Treatment	
Infections with Norwalk and Related 
Human Caliciviruses
The disease is self-limited, and oral rehydration therapy 
is generally adequate. If severe dehydration develops, IV 
fluid therapy is indicated. No specific antiviral therapy is 
available.
Prevention
Epidemic prevention relies on situation-specific mea-
sures, such as control of contamination of food and 
water, exclusion of ill food handlers, and reduction of 
person-to-person spread through good personal hygiene 
and disinfection of contaminated fomites. The role 
of immunoprophylaxis is not clear, given the lack of 
long-term immunity from natural disease, but efforts to 
develop norovirus vaccines are ongoing.
Rotavirus
Etiologic agent
Rotaviruses are members of the family Reoviridae. The 
viral genome consists of 11 segments of double-strand 
RNA that are enclosed in a triple-layered, nonen-
veloped, icosahedral capsid 75 nm in diameter. Viral 
protein 6 (VP6), the major structural protein, is the 
target of commercial immunoassays and determines 
the group specificity of rotaviruses. There are seven 
major groups of rotavirus (A through G); human illness 
is caused primarily by group A and, to a much lesser 
extent, by groups B and C. Two outer-capsid proteins, 
VP7 (G-protein) and VP4 (P-protein), determine sero-
type specificity, induce neutralizing antibodies, and 
form the basis for binary classification of rotaviruses 
(G and P types). The segmented genome of rotavirus 
allows genetic reassortment (i.e., exchange of genome 
segments between viruses) during co-infection—a 
property that may play a role in viral evolution and has 
been utilized in the development of reassortant animal-
human rotavirus–based vaccines.
Epidemiology
Worldwide, nearly all children are infected with 
rotavirus by 3–5 years of age. Neonatal infections 
are common but are often asymptomatic or mild, 
presumably because of protection from maternal anti-
body or breast-feeding. First infections after 3 months of 
age are likely to be symptomatic, and the incidence of 
disease peaks among children 4–23 months of age. 
Reinfections are common, but the severity of disease 
decreases with each repeat infection. Therefore, severe 
rotavirus infections are relatively uncommon among 
older children and adults. Nevertheless, rotavirus can 
cause illness in parents and caretakers of children with 
rotavirus diarrhea, immunocompromised persons, travel-
ers, and elderly individuals and should be considered in 
the differential diagnosis of gastroenteritis among adults.
In tropical settings, rotavirus disease occurs year-
round, with less pronounced seasonal peaks than in 
temperate settings, where rotavirus disease occurs pre-
dominantly during the cooler fall and winter months. 
Before the introduction of rotavirus vaccine in the 
United States, the rotavirus season each year began 
in the Southwest during the autumn and early winter 
(October through December) and migrated across the 
continent, peaking in the Northeast during late winter 
and spring (March through May). The reasons for this 
characteristic pattern are not clear, but a recent study 
suggested a correlation with state-specific differences in 
birth rates, which could influence the rate of accumu-
lation of susceptible infants after each rotavirus season. 
After the implementation of routine vaccination of 
U.S. infants against rotavirus in 2006, the onset of 
the 2007–2008 and 2008–2009 rotavirus seasons was 
delayed by 11 weeks and 6 weeks, respectively, and the 
seasons were shorter, lasting 14 and 17 weeks, respec-
tively, in comparison with a median of 26 weeks in 
2000–2006 (Fig. 31-2). These changes in seasonal pat-
terns of rotavirus activity were accompanied by declines 
in the number of detections of rotavirus by 64% and 
60% in 2007–2008 and 2008–2009, respectively, from 
the figures for 2000–2006, as collected by a national 
network of sentinel laboratories.
 
CHAPTER 31
Viral Gastroenteritis
303
During episodes of rotavirus-associated diarrhea, 
virus is shed in large quantities in stool (107–1012/g). 
Viral shedding detectable by EIA usually subsides within 
1 week but may persist for >30 days in immunocom-
promised individuals. Viral shedding may be detected 
for longer periods by sensitive molecular assays, such as 
PCR. The virus is transmitted predominantly through 
the fecal-oral route. Spread through respiratory secre-
tions, person-to-person contact, or contaminated envi-
ronmental surfaces has also been postulated to explain 
the rapid acquisition of antibody in the first 3 years of 
life, regardless of sanitary conditions.
At least 10 different G serotypes of group A rotavirus 
have been identified in humans, but only five types 
(G1 through G4 and G9) are common. While human 
rotavirus strains that possess a high degree of genetic 
homology with animal strains have been identified, 
animal-to-human transmission appears to be uncommon.
Group B rotaviruses have been associated with 
several large epidemics of severe gastroenteritis 
among adults in China since 1982 and have also 
been identified in India. Group C rotaviruses have been 
associated with a small proportion of pediatric gastroen-
teritis cases in several countries worldwide.
Pathogenesis
Rotaviruses infect and ultimately destroy mature 
enterocytes in the villous epithelium of the proximal 
small intestine. The loss of absorptive villous epi-
thelium, coupled with the proliferation of secretory 
crypt cells, results in secretory diarrhea. Brush-­border 
enzymes characteristic of differentiated cells are 
reduced, and this change leads to the accumulation of 
unmetabolized disaccharides and consequent osmotic 
diarrhea. Studies in mice indicate that a nonstructural 
rotavirus protein, NSP4, functions as an enterotoxin 
and contributes to secretory diarrhea by altering epithe-
lial cell function and permeability. In addition, rotavi-
rus may evoke fluid secretion through activation of the 
enteric nervous system in the intestinal wall. Recent 
data indicate that rotavirus antigenemia and viremia are 
common among children with acute rotavirus infection, 
although the antigen and RNA levels in serum are sub-
stantially lower than those in stool.
Clinical manifestations
The clinical spectrum of rotavirus infection ranges 
from subclinical infection to severe gastroenteritis lead-
ing to life-threatening dehydration. After an incuba-
tion period of 1–3 days, the illness has an abrupt onset, 
with vomiting frequently preceding the onset of 
­diarrhea. Up to one-third of patients may have a tem-
perature of >39°C. The stools are characteristically 
loose and watery and only infrequently contain red or 
white cells. Gastrointestinal symptoms generally resolve 
in 3–7 days.
30
40
50
60
70
2000–2006 Maximum
2000–2006 Median
2000–2006 Minimum
2007–2008 Season
2008–2009 Season
0
10
20
27 29 31 33 35 37 39 41 43 45 47 49 51
1
3
5
7
9
11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25
Week of year
% of tests rotavirus positive
Figure 31-2 
The maximal or minimal percentage of rotavirus-positive 
tests for 2000–2006 may have occurred during any of the six 
baseline seasons. The onset of rotavirus season was defined 
as the first of two consecutive weeks during which the per-
centage of stool specimens testing positive for rotavirus was 
≥10%, and the end of the season was defined as the last of 
two consecutive weeks during which the percentage of stool 
specimens testing positive for rotavirus was ≥10%. At the 
top right, the dots bracket the rotavirus season from onset to 
end, and the diamond indicates the peak week during each 
period. (Adapted from Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, 2009.)
SECTION IV
Infections of the Alimentary Tract
304
Respiratory and neurologic features in children with 
rotavirus infection have been reported, but causal asso-
ciations have not been proven. Moreover, rotavirus 
infection has been associated with a variety of other 
clinical conditions (e.g., sudden infant death syndrome, 
necrotizing enterocolitis, intussusception, Kawasaki’s 
disease, and type 1 diabetes), but no causal relationship 
has been confirmed with any of these syndromes.
Rotavirus does not appear to be a major oppor-
tunistic pathogen in children with HIV infection. In 
severely immunodeficient children, rotavirus can cause 
protracted diarrhea with prolonged viral excretion and, 
in rare instances, can disseminate systemically. Persons 
who are immunosuppressed for bone marrow transplan-
tation are also at risk for severe or even fatal rotavirus 
disease.
Immunity
Protection against rotavirus disease is correlated with 
the presence of virus-specific secretory IgA antibodies 
in the intestine and, to some extent, the serum. Because 
virus-specific IgA production at the intestinal surface is 
short lived, complete protection against disease is only 
temporary. However, each infection and subsequent 
reinfection confers progressively greater immunity; thus 
severe disease is most common among young children 
with first or second infections. Immunologic memory is 
believed to be important in the attenuation of disease 
severity upon reinfection.
Diagnosis
Illness caused by rotavirus is difficult to distinguish clini-
cally from that caused by other enteric viruses. Because 
large quantities of virus are shed in feces, the diagnosis 
can usually be confirmed by a wide variety of commer-
cially available EIAs or by techniques for detecting viral 
RNA, such as gel electrophoresis, probe hybridization, 
or PCR.
Treatment	
Rotavirus Infections
Rotavirus gastroenteritis can lead to severe dehydration. 
Thus appropriate treatment should be instituted early. 
Standard oral rehydration therapy is successful in most 
children who can take oral fluids, but IV fluid replace-
ment may be required for patients who are severely 
dehydrated or are unable to tolerate oral therapy 
because of frequent vomiting. The therapeutic role of 
probiotics, bismuth subsalicylate, enkephalinase inhibi-
tors, and nitazoxanide has been evaluated in clinical 
studies but is not clearly defined. Antibiotics and antimo-
tility agents should be avoided. In immunocompromised 
children with chronic symptomatic rotavirus disease, 
orally administered immunoglobulins or colostrum may 
result in the resolution of symptoms, but the best choices 
regarding agents and their doses have not been well 
studied, and treatment decisions are often empirical.
Prevention
Efforts to develop rotavirus vaccines were pursued 
because it was apparent—given the similar rates in less-
developed and industrialized nations—that improve-
ments in hygiene and sanitation were unlikely to reduce 
disease incidence. The first rotavirus vaccine licensed in 
the United States in 1998 was withdrawn from the market 
within 1 year because it was linked with intussuscep-
tion, a severe bowel obstruction.
In 2006, promising safety and efficacy results for 
two new rotavirus vaccines were reported from 
large clinical trials conducted in North America, 
Europe, and Latin America. Both vaccines are now rec-
ommended for routine immunization of all U.S. infants, 
and their use has rapidly led to a decline in rotavirus 
hospitalizations and emergency department visits at 
­hospitals across the United States. In Mexico, a decline 
in deaths from childhood diarrhea following introduc-
tion of rotavirus vaccines has been documented. Fur-
thermore, postmarketing surveillance information has 
not revealed an association of these vaccines with any 
serious adverse events (including intussusception), 
although a risk of low magnitude cannot be excluded 
on the basis of available data.
Global considerations
Rotavirus is ubiquitous and infects nearly all 
children worldwide by 5 years of age. However, 
compared with rotavirus disease in industrialized 
countries, disease in developing countries occurs at a 
younger age, is less seasonal, and is more frequently 
caused by uncommon rotavirus strains. Moreover, 
because of suboptimal access to hydration therapy, 
­rotavirus is a leading cause of diarrheal death among 
children in the developing world, with the highest mor-
tality rates among children in sub-Saharan Africa and 
southern Asia (Fig. 31-3).
The different epidemiology of rotavirus disease 
and the greater prevalence of co-infection with other 
enteric pathogens, of comorbidities, and of malnutrition 
in developing countries may adversely affect the per-
formance of oral rotavirus vaccines, as is the case with 
oral vaccines against poliomyelitis, cholera, and typhoid 
in these regions. Therefore, evaluation of the efficacy 
of rotavirus vaccines in resource-poor settings of Africa 
and Asia was specifically recommended, and these trials 
have now been completed. As anticipated, the efficacy 
 
CHAPTER 31
Viral Gastroenteritis
305
of rotavirus vaccines was moderate (50–75%) in these 
settings when compared with that in industrialized 
countries. Nevertheless, even a moderately efficacious 
rotavirus vaccine would be likely to have substantial 
public health benefits in these areas with a high disease 
burden. Given these considerations, in April 2009 the 
World Health Organization recommended the use of 
rotavirus vaccines in all countries worldwide.
Other Viral Agents of 
Gastroenteritis
Enteric adenoviruses of serotypes 40 and 41 belonging 
to subgroup F are 70- to 80-nm viruses with double-
strand DNA that cause ∼2–12% of all diarrhea episodes 
in young children. Unlike adenoviruses that cause 
­respiratory illness, enteric adenoviruses are difficult to 
cultivate in cell lines, but they can be detected with 
commercially available EIAs.
Astroviruses, 28- to 30-nm viruses with a character-
istic icosahedral structure, contain a positive-sense, 
single-strand RNA. At least seven serotypes have 
been identified, of which serotype 1 is most common. 
Astroviruses are primarily pediatric pathogens, caus-
ing ∼2–10% of cases of mild to moderate gastroenteri-
tis in children. The availability of simple immunoas-
says to detect virus in fecal specimens and of molecular 
methods to confirm and characterize strains will permit 
more comprehensive assessment of the etiologic role of 
these agents.
Toroviruses are 100- to 140-nm, enveloped, positive-
strand RNA viruses that are recognized as causes of 
gastroenteritis in horses (Berne virus) and cattle (Breda 
virus). Their role as a cause of diarrhea in humans is still 
unclear, but studies from Canada have demonstrated 
associations between torovirus excretion and both nos-
ocomial gastroenteritis and necrotizing enterocolitis in 
neonates. These associations require further evaluation.
Picobirnaviruses are small, bisegmented, double-strand 
RNA viruses that cause gastroenteritis in a variety of 
animals. Their role as primary causes of gastroenteritis in 
humans remains unclear, but several studies have found 
an association between picobirnaviruses and gastro­
enteritis in HIV-infected adults.
Several other viruses (e.g., enteroviruses, reoviruses, 
pestiviruses, and parvovirus B) have been identified in 
the feces of patients with diarrhea, but their ­etiologic 
role in gastroenteritis has not been proven. Diarrhea 
has also been noted as a manifestation of infection with 
recently recognized viruses that primarily cause severe 
respiratory illness: the severe acute respiratory syn-
drome–associated coronavirus (SARS-CoV), influenza 
A/H5N1 virus, and the current pandemic strain of 
influenza A/H1N1 virus.
<10 deaths per 100,000
10 to 50 deaths per 100,000
50 to 100 deaths per 100,000
100 to 500 deaths per 100,000
Figure 31-3 
Rotavirus mortality rates by country, per 100,000 children <5 years of age. (Reproduced with permission from UD Parashar 
et al: J Infect Dis 200:S9, 2009.)
 Samuel L. Stanley, Jr. 
306
 AmebIAsIs 
 definition 
 Amebiasis is infection with the parasitic intestinal pro-
tozoan  Entamoeba histolytica (the “tissue-lysing ameba”). 
Most infections are probably asymptomatic, but 
 E. histolytica can cause disease ranging from dysentery to 
extraintestinal infections, including liver abscesses. 
 life CyCle and transmission 
 E. histolytica exists in two stages: a hardy multinucle-
ate cyst form ( Fig. 32-1 ) and the motile trophozoite 
stage ( Fig. 32-2 ). Infection (of which humans are the 
natural hosts) is acquired by ingestion of cysts contained 
in fecally contaminated food or water or, more rarely, 
through oral-anal sexual contact. Cysts survive stomach 
 AMEBIASIS AND INFECTION WITH 
FREE-LIVING AMEBAS 
 chAPter 32 
acidity and excyst within the small intestine to form the 
20- to 50-µm trophozoite stage. Trophozoites can live 
within the large-bowel lumen without causing disease 
or can invade the intestinal mucosa, causing amebic 
colitis. In some cases,  E. histolytica trophozoites invade 
through the mucosa and into the bloodstream, travel-
ing through the portal circulation to reach the liver and 
causing amebic liver abscesses. Motile trophozoites may 
be excreted into the stool—a diagnostically important 
event—but are rapidly killed upon exposure to air or 
stomach acid and therefore are not infectious. Tropho-
zoite cysts within the large bowel are excreted in the 
stool, continuing the life cycle. 
 ePidemiology 
 Molecular diagnostics continue to clarify what was once 
a confusing picture of the true incidence and prevalence 
 Figure 32-1 
Entamoeba cyst. Three of the four nuclei are clearly visible. 
 (Courtesy of Dr. George Healy, Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention.) 
 Figure 32-2  
E. histolytica trophozoite with ingested red blood cells.
Note the single nucleus with central nucleolus.  (Courtesy of 
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.) 
 
CHAPTER 32
Amebiasis and Infection with Free-Living Amebas
307
of E. histolytica infection and disease. It was a staple of 
most textbooks that 10% of the world’s population was 
infected with E. histolytica. We now know that most 
asymptomatic individuals harboring amebic trophozo-
ites or cysts in their stools are infected with a noninva-
sive species: Entamoeba dispar or Entamoeba moshkovskii. 
E. dispar appears not to cause disease, even in the most 
profoundly immunosuppressed individuals; further-
more, at this time, there is little evidence to suggest 
that E. moshkovskii causes disease, although epidemio-
logic studies of this species are in their infancy. In con-
trast, E. histolytica infection can cause disease, although 
not all patients develop symptoms. It remains unclear 
how frequently people infected with E. histolytica do 
develop symptoms; in one study in a highly endemic 
area, only 10% of infected patients developed symptoms 
over a 1-year observation period. A remarkable feature 
of amebiasis is its more common occurrence in men 
than in women, although the prevalence of infection 
with E. histolytica does not appear to differ between the 
sexes. This pattern is particularly pronounced for ame-
bic liver abscess, whose prevalence is ∼7 times higher 
among men than among women. The explanation 
for this difference remains unknown, but less efficient 
complement-mediated killing of amebic trophozoites by 
serum from men than by serum from women has been 
reported.
E. histolytica infections are most common in 
areas of the world where poor sanitation and 
crowding compromise the barriers to contami-
nation of food and drinking water with human feces. 
Endemic areas include parts of Mexico, India, and 
nations in the tropical regions of Africa, South and 
Central America, and Asia. E. histolytica was present in 
∼2.1% of individuals presenting with diarrhea in a large 
series from Bangladesh and in 1.4% of the asymptomatic 
control group. In 2007, amebiasis was listed as the sixth 
most common cause of disease in Mexico, with an inci-
dence of ∼544 cases per 100,000 population. In the 
United States and other developed countries, disease is 
unusual and is found almost exclusively in travelers or 
immigrants from endemic areas. Rarely, outbreaks take 
place in institutionalized populations, and infections 
have been documented with increased frequency 
among men who have sex with men; however, most of 
the latter cases have been asymptomatic and probably 
represent E. dispar infections.
Pathogenesis and Pathology
E. histolytica trophozoites possess a potent repertoire 
of adhesins, proteinases, pore-forming proteins, and 
other effector molecules that enable them to lyse cells 
and tissue, induce both cellular necrosis and apoptosis, 
and resist both innate and adaptive immune defenses. 
Disease begins when E. histolytica trophozoites adhere 
to colonic mucosal epithelial cells. Disruption of the 
colonic mucin barrier is seen in pathologic sections 
from the diseased colon, but it is not clear whether 
this disruption is caused by the parasite, facilitating its 
adherence to mucosal cells, or occurs as a consequence 
of the adhesion event, with subsequent mucosal 
damage. Adherence is mediated primarily by a family of 
surface lectin molecules capable of binding to galactose and 
N-acetylgalactosamine residues. E. histolytica can lyse 
host cells upon contact through a family of amphipathic 
peptides called amoebapores that form barrel-stave pores 
in target cell membranes. Both cellular necrosis and 
apoptosis can occur after E. histolytica comes into con-
tact with host cells, and which outcome predominates 
may relate to inherent characteristics of the target cell or 
the tissue environment. One consistent and unequivo-
cal finding is the important role played by amebic cys-
teine proteinases in the disease process. E. histolytica 
possesses a large family of cysteine proteinases that are 
capable of lysing the extracellular matrix between host 
cells (thus detaching cells and facilitating invasion) and 
cleaving host defense molecules (including comple-
ment components and antibodies). Studies in animal 
models, including chimeric mice with human intestinal 
xenografts, have shown that inhibition of E. histolytica 
cysteine proteinase activity, via either direct gene 
targeting or chemical inhibitors, significantly reduces 
disease. The ultimate effect of all these amebic virulence 
factors on the human colon is the production of small 
ulcers that have heaped borders and contain focal areas 
of epithelial cell loss, a modest inflammatory response, 
and mucosal hemorrhage. The intervening mucosa 
is usually normal, but diffuse hyperemia is sometimes 
seen. E. histolytica trophozoites can then invade laterally 
through the submucosal layer, creating the classic flask-
shaped ulcers that appear on pathologic examination as 
narrow-necked lesions, broadening in the submucosal 
region, with E. histolytica trophozoites at the margins 
between dead and live tissues (Fig. 32-3). Ulcers tend 
to stop at the muscularis layer, and full-thickness lesions 
and colonic perforation are unusual. Amebomas, a rare 
complication of intestinal disease, are granulomatous 
mass lesions protruding into the bowel lumen, with a 
thickened edematous and hemorrhagic bowel wall that 
can cause obstructive symptoms.
In some individuals with E. histolytica colonic infec-
tion, trophozoites invade the portal venous system 
and reach the liver, where they cause amebic liver 
abscesses. E. histolytica trophozoites must resist lysis 
by serum complement to survive in the bloodstream. 
Amebic liver abscesses have a characteristic appear-
ance on pathologic examination: the roughly circu-
lar abscesses contain a large necrotic center resembling 
anchovy paste that is surrounded by a narrow ring of a 
few inflammatory cells, fibrosis, and occasionally a few 
amebic trophozoites. The adjacent liver parenchyma 
SECTION IV
Infections of the Alimentary Tract
308
is usually completely normal. Results in experimental 
rodent models of amebic liver abscess suggest that ini-
tial lesions may have more inflammatory cells and that 
lysis of neutrophils by E. histolytica trophozoites may 
contribute to tissue damage. In murine models of dis-
ease, apoptosis is a prominent component of hepatocyte 
death and the blockade of caspase activity can signifi-
cantly reduce liver abscess formation, but whether any 
of these factors is applicable to human disease is unclear.
The role of innate and adaptive immunity in pre-
venting E. histolytica infection or controlling disease 
needs further clarification. Studies of children in a 
highly endemic area have suggested that prior E. his-
tolytica intestinal infection may stimulate mucosal IgA 
antibodies to amebic antigens, thereby reducing the 
likelihood of subsequent infections; this protection is 
relatively short lived. In contrast, among individuals in 
an area of Vietnam with a high prevalence of amebic 
liver abscess, a prior episode of disease did not reduce 
the risk of a second case, despite the presence of serum 
antibodies. Studies of animal models suggest that cell-
mediated immunity may play a role in host defense, 
and glucocorticoid use has been associated with worse 
outcomes in patients with amebic colitis. However, 
individuals with HIV/AIDS do not appear to be at 
increased risk for infection with E. histolytica, and there 
is no evidence that they develop more severe disease 
than do immunocompetent hosts.
Clinical Syndromes
Intestinal amebiasis
Most patients harboring Entamoeba species are asymp-
tomatic, but individuals with E. histolytica infection can 
develop disease. Symptoms of amebic colitis generally 
appear 2–6 weeks after ingestion of the cyst form of the 
parasite. Diarrhea (classically heme-positive) and lower 
abdominal pain are the most common symptoms. Malaise 
and weight loss may be noted as disease progresses. Severe 
dysentery, with 10–12 small-volume, blood- and mucus-
containing stools daily, may develop, but only ∼40% of 
patients are febrile. Fulminant amebic colitis, with even 
more profuse diarrhea, severe abdominal pain (including 
peritoneal signs), fever, and pronounced leukocytosis are 
rare, disproportionately affecting young children, pregnant 
women, individuals being treated with glucocorticoids, 
and possibly individuals with diabetes or alcoholism. Par-
alytic ileus and colonic mucosal sloughing may be seen; 
intestinal perforation occurs in >75% of patients with 
this fulminant form of disease. Mortality rates from ful-
minant amebic colitis exceed 40% in some series. Rec-
ognized complications of amebic colitis also include toxic 
megacolon (documented in ∼0.5% of patients with colitis), 
with severe bowel dilation and intramural air, and the 
aforementioned ameboma, which presents as an abdomi-
nal mass that may be confused with colon cancer.
Amebic liver abscess
Just a century ago, amebic liver abscess—the most 
common extraintestinal manifestation of amebiasis—
was almost always fatal; however, with current rapid 
diagnostic methods and effective medical treatment, 
mortality rates are now 1–3%. Disease begins when 
E. histolytica trophozoites penetrate through the colonic 
mucosa, travel through the portal circulation, and reach 
the liver. Most individuals with amebic liver abscess 
do not have concurrent signs or symptoms of coli-
tis, and most do not have E. histolytica trophozoites in 
their stools. The exceptions are individuals with fulmi-
nant amebic colitis, in which concurrent amebic liver 
abscess is not uncommon. Disease can arise from months 
to years after travel to or residence in an endemic area; 
therefore, a careful travel history is key in making the 
diagnosis. The classic presentations of amebic liver 
abscess are right-upper-quadrant pain, fever, and hepatic 
tenderness. The pace of disease is usually acute, with 
symptoms lasting <10 days. However, a more chronic 
presentation, with weight loss and anorexia as prominent 
accompanying features, does occur. Jaundice is unusual, 
but dullness and rales at the right lung base (secondary to 
pleural effusion) are common. The most common labo-
ratory findings are leukocytosis (without eosinophilia), 
an elevated alkaline phosphatase level, mild anemia, and 
an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate.
Other extraintestinal complications  
of amebiasis
Right-sided pleural effusions and atelectasis are com-
mon in cases of amebic liver abscess and generally 
Figure 32-3 
E. histolytica flask-shaped intestinal ulceration from a kitten. 
(Courtesy of Dr. Mae Melvin, Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention.)
 
CHAPTER 32
Amebiasis and Infection with Free-Living Amebas
309
require no treatment. However, the abscess ruptures 
through the diaphragm in ∼10% of patients, causing 
pleuropulmonary amebiasis. Suggestive symptoms are 
sudden-onset cough, pleuritic chest pain, and short-
ness of breath. In some patients, pleuropulmonary 
amebiasis is the presenting manifestation of amebic 
liver abscess and may be confused with bacterial pneu-
monia and empyema. A dramatic complication is the 
development of a hepatobronchial fistula, in which 
patients can cough up the contents of the liver abscess— 
copious amounts of brown sputum that may contain 
E. histolytica trophozoites. In ∼1–3% of cases, the amebic 
liver abscess ruptures into the peritoneum, and perito-
neal signs and shock develop. Even rarer is rupture of an 
amebic liver abscess into the pericardium; the signs and 
symptoms are those commonly seen with pericarditis 
(chest pain, pericardial rub, dyspnea, tachypnea, or car-
diac tamponade), and nearly 30% of cases end in death. 
Cerebral abscesses complicate <0.1% of cases of amebic 
liver abscess and are associated with the sudden onset of 
headache, vomiting, seizures, and mental status changes 
and a high mortality rate. Cutaneous amebiasis (which 
usually involves the anal and perianal regions), genital 
disease (including rectovaginal fistulas), and urinary tract 
lesions are rare but reported complications of amebiasis.
Diagnostic Tests
The diagnosis of amebic colitis has traditionally been 
based on the demonstration of E. histolytica trophozo-
ites or cysts in the stool or colonic mucosa of patients 
with diarrhea. However, the inability of microscopy to 
differentiate between E. histolytica and other Entamoeba 
species, such as E. dispar and E. moshkovskii, limits its 
effectiveness as a sole diagnostic method. Examina-
tion of three stool samples improves sensitivity for the 
detection of Entamoeba species, and it has been argued 
that the presence of amebic trophozoites containing 
red blood cells in a diarrheal stool is highly suggestive 
of E. histolytica infection. However, because trophozo-
ites containing red blood cells are not found in most 
patients with E. histolytica infection, the applicability of 
this finding is limited.
Despite these inherent limitations, microscopy, 
often combined with serologic testing, remains 
the standard diagnostic approach in many hospitals 
and clinics worldwide. Culture of stools for E. histolytica 
trophozoites serves as a research tool but is generally not 
available for clinical use. PCR assay for DNA in stool 
samples is currently the most sensitive and specific 
method for identifying E. histolytica infection and has 
become a valuable epidemiologic and research tool; 
probes can be configured to detect E. dispar and 
E. moshkovskii as well. While significant advances are being 
made in reducing the costs of PCR-based diagnostics, 
this method still is not feasible for clinical diagnosis in 
most endemic areas. Commercially available tests that 
use enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs) 
or immunochromatographic techniques to detect 
Entamoeba antigens are less expensive and more easily 
performed and are being used with increasing frequency. 
Greater sensitivity than microscopy and the ability to 
detect E. histolytica specifically are claimed by some of 
the leading kits, representing significant advantages over 
microscopy. Unfortunately, not all clinical studies have 
supported these claims, concerns have been raised about 
the specificity of the tests in nonendemic areas, and the 
ELISAs are less sensitive and specific than are PCR-
based diagnostics. At this point, antigen detection–based 
ELISAs that can specifically identify E. histolytica in stool 
probably represent the best choice in endemic areas; 
however, the results of any of these diagnostic tests need 
to be interpreted in light of clinical presentation, and a 
second confirmatory test (e.g., microscopy and/or ame-
bic serology) may be prudent. In instances in which 
amebiasis is suspected on clinical grounds in a patient 
with acute colitis but initial stool samples are negative, 
colonoscopy with examination of brushings or mucosal 
biopsies for E. histolytica trophozoites may be helpful in 
making the diagnosis or in identifying other diseases, 
such as inflammatory bowel disease or pseudomembra-
nous colitis.
The diagnosis of amebic liver abscess is based on the 
detection (generally by ultrasound or CT; Fig. 32-4) 
of one or more space-occupying lesions in the liver and 
a positive serologic test for antibodies to E. histolytica 
antigens. As has been noted, amebiasis can present 
Figure 32-4 
Large amebic abscess in the right lobe of the liver 
visualized by CT. (Courtesy of Dr. M. M. Reeder, International 
Registry of Tropical Imaging.)
SECTION IV
Infections of the Alimentary Tract
310
months or years after travel to or residence in an 
endemic area, and so a careful travel history is manda-
tory when anyone presents with a liver abscess. Amebic 
liver abscesses are classically described as single, large, 
and located in the right lobe of the liver, but sensi-
tive imaging techniques have shown that multiple 
abscesses are more common than previously sus-
pected. When a patient has a space-occupying lesion 
of the liver, a positive amebic serology is highly sensi-
tive (>94%) and highly specific (>95%) for the diag-
nosis of amebic liver abscess. False-negative serologic 
tests have been reported when serum samples were 
obtained very early in the course of abscess (within 
7–10 days of onset), but repeat tests are almost always 
positive.
Differential Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis of amebic colitis includes 
bacterial dysentery (e.g., Shigella and Campylobacter 
infections), schistosomiasis, Balantidium coli infection, 
pseudomembranous colitis, inflammatory bowel dis-
ease, and ischemic colitis. Stool cultures for bacterial 
pathogens, microscopic examination of stools, and ame-
bic serology help differentiate amebic colitis from these 
other entities. Amebomas may be confused with colonic 
carcinoma; several case reports describe instances in 
which amebomas and associated liver abscesses were ini-
tially considered to be colon cancer with liver metas-
tases. Amebic liver abscess must be distinguished from 
pyogenic liver abscess, echinococcal cysts, and primary 
or metastatic liver tumors. It is difficult to differentiate 
pyogenic from amebic liver abscesses on purely clinical 
grounds, but amebic serology is usually the key test in 
excluding or diagnosing amebic liver abscess. Abscesses 
that rupture into the pleural space may be accompanied 
by cough, sputum production, and dyspnea and may 
initially be diagnosed as bronchopneumonia.
Treatment	
 Amebiasis
The nitroimidazole compounds tinidazole and metro­
nidazole are the drugs of choice for the treatment of 
amebic colitis and amebic liver abscess (Table 32-1). 
To date, E. histolytica has not demonstrated resistance to 
any of the commonly used agents—a situation that greatly 
simplifies treatment. Tinidazole appears to be better  
tolerated and slightly more effective than metronidazole 
for amebic colitis and amebic liver abscess. Metronida­
zole is available as a parenteral formulation for patients 
who cannot take oral medications. Whenever possible, 
fulminant amebic colitis is managed conservatively, 
even in the presence of perforation, with the addition  
of antibiotics to treat gut bacteria and percutaneous  
catheter drainage of fluid collections if needed.
Remarkably, given the large size of amebic liver 
abscesses, treatment with tinidazole or metronida­
zole in the same doses used for amebic colitis is almost 
always successful. More than 90% of patients respond 
with a decrease in abdominal pain and fever within 72 h  
of the initiation of therapy. Drainage of amebic liver 
abscesses is rarely needed; in one large series, neither 
time to becoming afebrile nor length of hospitalization 
was significantly different for patients who underwent 
percutaneous radiography-guided aspiration of the 
abscess accompanied by medical therapy than for those 
who received medical therapy alone. Aspiration should 
be reserved for individuals in whom pyogenic abscess 
or a bacterial superinfection is suspected but whose 
diagnosis is uncertain, for patients failing to respond to 
tinidazole or metronidazole (i.e., those who have persis­
tent fever or abdominal pain after 4 days of treatment), 
for individuals with large liver abscesses in the left lobe 
(because of the risk of rupture into the pericardium), 
and for patients whose large abscesses and accelerated 
clinical course raise concerns about imminent rupture. 
In contrast, aspiration and/or percutaneous catheter 
drainage improves outcomes in patients with pleuro­
pulmonary amebiasis and empyema (where amebic 
liver abscesses have ruptured into the pleural space), 
and percutaneous catheter or surgical drainage is abso­
lutely indicated for cases of amebic pericarditis. Rupture 
of an amebic liver abscess into the peritoneum is gener­
ally managed conservatively, with medical therapy and 
percutaneous catheter drainage of fluid collections as 
needed.
Neither metronidazole nor tinidazole reaches high 
levels in the gut lumen; therefore, patients with amebic 
colitis or amebic liver abscess should also receive treat­
ment with a luminal agent (paromomycin or iodoquinol) 
to ensure eradication of the infection (Table 32-1).  
Paromomycin is the preferred agent. Asymptomatic 
individuals with documented E. histolytica infection 
Table 32-1 
Recommended Therapeutic Dosages of 
Antiamebic Drugs
Drug
Dosage
Duration, Days
Amebic Colitis or Amebic Liver Abscess
Tinidazole
2 g/d PO with food
3
Metronidazole
750 mg tid PO or IV
5–10
Entamoeba histolytica Luminal Infection
Paromomycin
30 mg/kg qd PO in  
3 divided doses
5–10
Iodoquinol
650 mg PO tid
20
 
CHAPTER 32
Amebiasis and Infection with Free-Living Amebas
311
should be treated because of the risks of developing 
amebic colitis or amebic liver abscess in the future and 
of transmitting the infection to others. Paromomycin 
or iodoquinol in the doses listed in the table should be 
used in these cases.
Nitazoxanide, a broad-spectrum antiparasitic drug, 
is efficacious against E. histolytica trophozoites in both 
tissue and gut lumen and may become an important 
addition to the therapeutic repertoire. However, clini­
cal experience with nitazoxanide for the treatment of  
E. histolytica infection remains limited at this point.
Prevention
Avoidance of the ingestion of food and water con-
taminated with human feces is the only way to prevent 
E. histolytica infection. Travelers to endemic areas 
should exercise the same measures used to reduce the 
risk of travelers’ diarrhea (Chap. 117). Treatment of 
asymptomatic persons who pass E. histolytica cysts in the 
stool may help reduce opportunities for disease trans-
mission. There is no evidence for any effective prophy-
laxis, and no vaccine is available.
Infection with Free-Living Amebas
In contrast to the trophozoites of the parasitic 
E. histolytica, which can survive only in humans 
and some other primate hosts, free-living amebas 
of the genera Naegleria, Acanthamoeba, and Balamuthia 
live in brackish or freshwater habitats around the world 
(including lakes, tap water, swimming pools, and air 
conditioning and heating ducts) and are accidental and 
opportunistic agents of disease.
Naegleria Infections
Naegleria (the “brain-eating ameba”) is the caus-
ative agent of primary amebic meningoencepha-
litis (PAM). Nearly always fatal but quite rare, 
cases of PAM have been reported from 15 countries and 
from all continents except Antarctica; 35 cases were 
reported in the United States between 1998 and 2009. 
Naegleria prefers warm freshwater, and most cases occur 
in otherwise healthy children, who usually have swum 
in lakes or swimming pools during the previous 
2 weeks. Naegleria enters the central nervous system via 
water inhaled or splashed into the nose, with trophozo-
ites disrupting the olfactory mucosa, invading through 
the cribriform plate, and ascending via the olfactory 
nerves into the brain. The earliest manifestations are 
anosmia (usually perceived as alterations in taste), head-
ache, fever, photophobia, nausea, and vomiting. Cranial 
nerve palsies, especially of the third, fourth, and sixth 
nerves, are documented and rapid progression of dis-
ease, with seizures, coma, and death within 7–10 days 
of the onset of symptoms, are common. Pathologic 
examination reveals hemorrhagic necrosis of brain tissue 
(often most prominent in the olfactory bulbs), evidence 
of increased intracranial pressure, scant purulent material 
that may contain a few amebas, and marked leptomen-
ingitis (Fig. 32-5).
The diagnosis of PAM is based on the finding of 
motile Naegleria trophozoites in wet mounts of freshly 
obtained cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). Laboratory findings 
in the CSF resemble those in bacterial meningitis, with 
high opening pressures, low glucose levels, high protein 
concentrations, and elevated polymorphonuclear cell–
predominant white blood cell counts. PAM should be 
suspected in any patient who has an appropriate history 
and purulent meningoencephalitis with negative gram 
stains, negative antigen detection and PCR tests for 
other pathogens, and negative bacterial cultures. Unfor-
tunately, the prognosis for PAM is dismal. The few 
survivors who have been reported were treated with 
high-dose amphotericin B and rifampin in combination.
Acanthamoeba Infections
Acanthamoeba species are free-living amebas that cause 
two major clinical syndromes: granulomatous ame-
bic encephalitis and keratitis. Granulomatous amebic 
encephalitis occurs in debilitated, chronically ill, and 
immunosuppressed individuals who may be undergoing 
chemotherapy, receiving glucocorticoids, or suffering 
from lymphoproliferative diseases, systemic lupus ery-
thematosus, or AIDS. It is believed that Acanthamoeba 
reaches the central nervous system through the blood-
stream, traveling from a primary site of infection in the 
nares, skin, sinuses, or lungs. The pace of infection is 
Figure 32-5 
Naegleria in a section of human brain tissue from a patient 
with primary amebic meningoencephalitis. (Courtesy of 
Dr. George Healy, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
SECTION IV
Infections of the Alimentary Tract
312
indolent compared with that of PAM. Granulomatous 
amebic encephalitis tends to present as a space-occupying 
lesion in the brain. Common symptoms include altered 
mental status, stiff neck, and headache along with 
focal findings including hemiparesis, ataxia, and cra-
nial nerve palsies. Seizures and coma often precede 
death. Pathologic findings in the brain include cerebral 
edema and multiple areas of necrosis and hemorrhage. 
Amebic trophozoites and cysts are scattered through-
out the tissue and are often located near blood vessels 
(Fig. 32-6). Multinucleated giant cells forming granu-
lomas give the syndrome its name but are seen less 
often in highly immunocompromised patients. The 
diagnosis is usually made by detection of Acanthamoeba 
trophozoites or cysts in biopsy specimens; a fluores-
cein-labeled antiserum is available from the Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) to help identify 
Acanthamoeba in microscopic sections. Acanthamoeba tro-
phozoites and cysts are occasionally seen in CSF, but 
samples from most patients with granulomatous ame-
bic encephalitis show mild lymphocyte-predominant 
pleocytosis, slightly elevated protein levels, and nor-
mal or slightly depressed glucose concentrations with-
out the presence of amebas. CT findings vary, with 
hypodense lesions that resemble infarcts in some patients 
and multiple enhancing lesions that resemble toxoplas-
mosis in others. Unfortunately, there are no therapies 
with proven efficacy against this disease, and almost all 
cases have ended in death. There have been case reports 
of survivors treated with multidrug combinations 
that included pentamidine, sulfadiazine, flucytosine, 
rifampin, and fluconazole.
Acanthamoeba keratitis is associated with corneal 
injuries complicated by exposure to water or soil 
and with the wearing of contact lenses. In contact 
lens–associated infection, extended wear, breaches in 
hygiene and disinfection procedures, swimming with 
contact lenses in place, and the use of homemade saline 
solutions contaminated with Acanthamoeba are impor-
tant risk factors. The incidence of Acanthamoeba kera-
titis varies from 1.65–2.01 cases per million contact 
lens users in the United States to 17.53–19.5 cases per 
million users in the United Kingdom. Unilateral pho-
tophobia, excessive tearing, redness, and foreign-body 
sensation are the earliest signs and symptoms; disease is 
bilateral in some contact lens users. Acanthamoeba kera-
titis can progress rapidly; abscesses, hypopyon, scleritis, 
and corneal perforation with vision loss can develop 
within weeks. The disease may be diagnosed by iden-
tification of the polygonal cyst form in corneal scrap-
ings or biopsy material, by culture of biopsy samples 
or contact lenses on Escherichia coli–seeded agar plates, 
by confocal microscopy, and by PCR. The differen-
tial diagnosis includes bacterial, fungal, mycobacterial, 
and viral (particularly herpetic) causes. Current therapy 
involves topical administration of a cationic antiseptic 
agent such as a biguanide or chlorhexidine, with or 
without a diamidine agent. The persistence of the cyst 
form of Acanthamoeba complicates treatment, and long 
durations of therapy (6 months to 1 year) are required. 
In severe cases, particularly when vision is threatened 
or already diminished, penetrating keratoplasty may be 
indicated.
Balamuthia Infections
Balamuthia mandrillaris is a free-living ameba that causes 
meningoencephalitis in both immunosuppressed and 
immunocompetent hosts, particularly children and the 
elderly. The disease presents similarly to granulomatous 
amebic encephalitis caused by Acanthamoeba, and essen-
tially all of the points made above with regard to the lat-
ter organism—in terms of clinical presentation, pathologic 
findings, and lack of proven therapies—apply to 
Balamuthia infections as well. Most cases are identified post 
mortem; the few cases identified before death have been 
found during histologic examination of brain biopsy speci-
mens. A specific antiserum is available from the CDC to 
aid in identifying B. mandrillaris in clinical specimens.
Figure 32-6 
Acanthamoeba cyst in brain tissue from a patient with 
granulomatous amebic encephalitis. (Courtesy of Dr. George 
Healy, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
 Peter F. Weller 
313
 ProToZoaL inFEcTions 
 giarDiasis 
 
Giardia intestinalis (also known as  G. lamblia or 
 G. duodenalis ) is a cosmopolitan protozoal para-
site that inhabits the small intestines of humans 
and other mammals. Giardiasis is one of the most com-
mon parasitic diseases in both developed and developing 
countries worldwide, causing both endemic and epi-
demic intestinal disease and diarrhea. 
 Life cycle and epidemiology 
 ( Fig. 33-1 ) Infection follows the ingestion of environ-
mentally hardy cysts, which excyst in the small intestine, 
releasing fl agellated trophozoites  ( Fig. 33-2 ) that multi-
ply by binary fi ssion.  Giardia remains a pathogen of the 
proximal small bowel and does not disseminate hema-
togenously. Trophozoites remain free in the lumen or 
attach to the mucosal epithelium by means of a ventral 
sucking disk. As a trophozoite encounters altered con-
ditions, it forms a morphologically distinct cyst, which 
is the stage of the parasite usually found in the feces. 
Trophozoites may be present and even predominate 
in loose or watery stools, but it is the resistant cyst that 
survives outside the body and is responsible for trans-
mission. Cysts do not tolerate heating, desiccation, or 
continued exposure to feces but do remain viable for 
months in cold fresh water. The number of cysts excreted 
varies widely but can approach 10 7 per gram of stool. 
 Ingestion of as few as 10 cysts is suffi cient to cause 
infection in humans. Because cysts are infectious when 
excreted, person-to-person transmission occurs where 
fecal hygiene is poor. Giardiasis (symptomatic or 
asymptomatic) is especially prevalent in day-care cen-
ters; person-to-person spread also takes place in other 
institutional settings with poor fecal hygiene and during 
 PROTOZOAL INTESTINAL INFECTIONS 
AND TRICHOMONIASIS 
 chaPTEr 33 
Cysts and trophozoites
are passed in the stool
into the environment.
Excystation follows
exposure to stomach acid
and intestinal proteases,
releasing trophozoite forms
that multiply by binary
fission and reside in the
upper small bowel adherent
to enterocytes.
Cysts are ingested (10-25 cysts)
in contaminated water or food or
by direct fecal-oral transmission
(as in day-care centers).
Causes: Asymptomatic infection,
acute diarrhea, or chronic diarrhea
and malabsorption. Small bowel may
demonstrate villous blunting, crypt
hypertrophy, and mucosal inflammation.
Encystation occurs under
conditions of bile salt
concentration changes and
alkaline pH.
Smooth-walled cysts can
contain two trophozoites.
Cysts can survive in the environment
(up to several weeks in cold water). They may
also infect nonhuman mammalian species.
 Figure 33-1  
life cycle of  Giardia. (Reprinted from RL Guerrant et al: Tropical 
Infectious Disease: Principles, Pathogens and Practice, 2nd ed, 
2006, p 987, with permission from Elsevier Science.) 
SECTION IV
Infections of the Alimentary Tract
314
anal-oral contact. If food is contaminated with Giardia 
cysts after cooking or preparation, food-borne trans-
mission can occur. Waterborne transmission accounts 
for episodic infections (e.g., in campers and travelers) 
and for major epidemics in metropolitan areas. Sur-
face water, ranging from mountain streams to large 
municipal reservoirs, can become contaminated with 
fecally derived Giardia cysts; outmoded water systems 
are subject to cross-contamination from leaking sewer 
lines. The efficacy of water as a means of transmission is 
enhanced by the small infectious inoculum of Giardia, 
the prolonged survival of cysts in cold water, and the 
resistance of cysts to killing by routine chlorination 
methods that are adequate for controlling bacteria. 
Viable cysts can be eradicated from water by either 
boiling or filtration. In the United States, Giardia (like 
Cryptosporidium; see below) is a common cause of 
waterborne epidemics of gastroenteritis. 
Giardia is common in developing countries, and 
infections may be acquired by travelers.
Giardia parasites genotypically similar to those in 
humans are found in many mammals, including beavers 
from reservoirs implicated in epidemics. The impor-
tance of dogs and cats as sources of infection for humans 
is unclear.
Giardiasis, like cryptosporidiosis, creates a significant 
economic burden because of the costs incurred in the 
installation of water filtration systems required to pre-
vent waterborne epidemics, in the management of 
epidemics that involve large communities, and in the 
evaluation and treatment of endemic infections.
Pathophysiology
The reasons that some, but not all, infected patients 
develop clinical manifestations and the mechanisms by 
which Giardia causes alterations in small-bowel function 
are largely unknown. Although trophozoites adhere to 
the epithelium, they do not cause invasive or locally 
destructive alterations. The lactose intolerance and, in 
a minority of infected adults and children, significant 
malabsorption that develop are clinical signs of the loss 
of brush-border enzyme activities. In most infections, 
the morphology of the bowel is unaltered; however, in 
a few cases (usually in chronically infected, symptom-
atic patients), the histopathologic findings (including 
flattened villi) and the clinical manifestations resemble 
those of tropical sprue and gluten-sensitive enteropathy. 
The pathogenesis of diarrhea in giardiasis is not known.
The natural history of Giardia infection varies markedly. 
Infections may be aborted, transient, recurrent, or 
chronic. Parasite as well as host factors may be impor-
tant in determining the course of infection and disease. 
Both cellular and humoral responses develop in human 
infections, but their precise roles in the control of infec-
tion and/or disease are unknown. Because patients 
with hypogammaglobulinemia suffer from prolonged, 
severe infections that are poorly responsive to treatment, 
humoral immune responses appear to be important. The 
greater susceptibility of the young than of the old and of 
newly exposed persons than of chronically exposed pop-
ulations suggests that at least partial protective immu-
nity may develop. Giardia isolates vary genotypically, 
biochemically, and biologically, and variations among 
isolates may contribute to different courses of infection.
Clinical manifestations
Disease manifestations of giardiasis range from asymp-
tomatic carriage to fulminant diarrhea and malabsorption. 
Most infected persons are asymptomatic, but in epidem-
ics the proportion of symptomatic cases may be higher. 
Symptoms may develop suddenly or gradually. In per-
sons with acute giardiasis, symptoms develop after an 
incubation period that lasts at least 5–6 days and usually 
1–3 weeks. Prominent early symptoms include diarrhea, 
abdominal pain, bloating, belching, flatus, nausea, and 
vomiting. Although diarrhea is common, upper intes-
tinal manifestations such as nausea, vomiting, bloating, 
and abdominal pain may predominate. The duration 
of acute giardiasis is usually >1 week, although diar-
rhea often subsides. Individuals with chronic giardiasis 
may present with or without having experienced an 
antecedent acute symptomatic episode. Diarrhea is not 
necessarily prominent, but increased flatus, loose stools, 
sulfurous belching, and (in some instances) weight loss 
occur. Symptoms may be continual or episodic and can 
persist for years. Some persons who have relatively mild 
symptoms for long periods recognize the extent of their 
discomfort only in retrospect. Fever, the presence of 
blood and/or mucus in the stools, and other signs and 
symptoms of colitis are uncommon and suggest a differ-
ent diagnosis or a concomitant illness. Symptoms tend 
to be intermittent yet recurring and gradually debilitat-
ing, in contrast with the acute disabling symptoms asso-
ciated with many enteric bacterial infections. Because 
Figure 33-2 
Flagellated, binucleate Giardia trophozoites.
 
CHAPTER 33
Protozoal Intestinal Infections and Trichomoniasis 
315
of the less severe illness and the propensity for chronic 
infections, patients may seek medical advice late in the 
course of the illness; however, disease can be severe, 
resulting in malabsorption, weight loss, growth retar-
dation, and dehydration. A number of extraintestinal 
manifestations have been described, such as urticaria, 
anterior uveitis, and arthritis; whether these are caused 
by giardiasis or concomitant processes is unclear.
Giardiasis can be severe in patients with hypogamma-
globulinemia and can complicate other preexisting intes-
tinal diseases, such as that occurring in cystic fibrosis. 
In patients with AIDS, Giardia can cause enteric illness 
that is refractory to treatment.
Diagnosis
(Table 33-1) Giardiasis is diagnosed by detection of 
parasite antigens in the feces or by identification of 
cysts in the feces or of trophozoites in the feces or small 
intestines. Cysts are oval, measure 8–12 μm × 7–10 μm, 
and characteristically contain four nuclei. Trophozo-
ites are pear-shaped, dorsally convex, flattened parasites 
with two nuclei and four pairs of flagella (Fig. 33-2). 
The diagnosis is sometimes difficult to establish. Direct 
examination of fresh or properly preserved stools as well 
as concentration methods should be used. Because cyst 
excretion is variable and may be undetectable at times, 
repeated examination of stool, sampling of duodenal 
fluid, and biopsy of the small intestine may be required 
to detect the parasite. Tests for parasitic antigens in stool 
are at least as sensitive and specific as good microscopic 
examinations and are easier to perform. All of these 
methods occasionally yield false-negative results.
Treatment	
Giardiasis
Cure rates with metronidazole (250 mg thrice daily 
for 5 days) are usually >90%. Tinidazole (2 g once by 
mouth) is reportedly more effective than metronidazole. 
Table 33-1 
Diagnosis of Intestinal Protozoal Infections
Parasite
Stool O+Pa
Fecal Acid-Fast 
Stain
Stool Antigen 
Immunoassays
Other
Giardia
+
+
Cryptosporidium
–
+
+
Isospora
–
+
Cyclospora
–
+
Microsporidia
–
Special fecal stains, tissue 
biopsies
aO+P, ova and parasites.
Nitazoxanide (500 mg twice daily for 3 days) is an alterna-
tive agent for treatment of giardiasis. Paromomycin, an oral 
aminoglycoside that is not well absorbed, can be given to 
symptomatic pregnant patients, although information is 
limited on how effectively this agent eradicates infection.
Almost all patients respond to therapy and are cured, 
although some with chronic giardiasis experience 
delayed resolution of symptoms after eradication of 
Giardia. For many of the latter patients, residual symp-
toms probably reflect delayed regeneration of intestinal 
brush-border enzymes. Continued infection should be 
documented by stool examinations before treatment is 
repeated. Patients who remain infected after repeated 
treatments should be evaluated for reinfection through 
family members, close personal contacts, and environ-
mental sources as well as for hypogammaglobulinemia. 
In cases refractory to multiple treatment courses, pro-
longed therapy with metronidazole (750 mg thrice daily 
for 21 days) has been successful.
Prevention
Although giardiasis is extremely infectious, disease can 
be prevented by consumption of noncontaminated food 
and water and by personal hygiene when caring for 
infected children. Boiling or filtering potentially con-
taminated water prevents infection.
Cryptosporidiosis
The coccidian parasite Cryptosporidium causes diarrheal dis-
ease that is self-limited in immunocompetent human hosts 
but can be severe in persons with AIDS or other forms 
of immunodeficiency. Two species of Cryptosporidium, 
C. hominis and C. parvum, cause most human infections.
Life cycle and epidemiology
Cryptosporidium species are widely distributed in 
the world. Cryptosporidiosis is acquired by the 
consumption of oocysts (50% infectious dose: 
SECTION IV
Infections of the Alimentary Tract
316
∼132 oocysts in nonimmune individuals), which excyst 
to liberate sporozoites that in turn enter and infect 
intestinal epithelial cells. The parasite’s further develop-
ment involves both asexual and sexual cycles, which 
produce forms capable of infecting other epithelial cells 
and of generating oocysts that are passed in the feces. 
Cryptosporidium species infect a number of animals, 
and C. parvum can spread from infected animals to 
humans. Since oocysts are immediately infectious when 
passed in feces, person-to-person transmission takes 
place in day-care centers and among household contacts 
and medical providers. Waterborne transmission (espe-
cially that of C. hominis) accounts for infections in trav-
elers and for common-source epidemics. Oocysts are 
quite hardy and resist killing by routine chlorination. 
Both drinking water and recreational water (e.g., pools, 
waterslides) have been increasingly recognized as 
sources of infection.
Pathophysiology
Although intestinal epithelial cells harbor cryptosporidia 
in an intracellular vacuole, the means by which secre-
tory diarrhea is elicited remain uncertain. No charac-
teristic pathologic changes are found by biopsy. The 
distribution of infection can be spotty within the prin-
cipal site of infection, the small bowel. Cryptosporidia 
are found in the pharynx, stomach, and large bowel of 
some patients and at times in the respiratory tract. Espe-
cially in patients with AIDS, involvement of the biliary 
tract can cause papillary stenosis, sclerosing cholangitis, 
or cholecystitis.
Clinical manifestations
Asymptomatic infections can occur in both immunocom-
petent and immunocompromised hosts. In immunocom-
petent persons, symptoms develop after an incubation 
period of ∼1 week and consist principally of watery non-
bloody diarrhea, sometimes in conjunction with abdomi-
nal pain, nausea, anorexia, fever, and/or weight loss. In 
these hosts, the illness usually subsides after 1–2 weeks. In 
contrast, in immunocompromised hosts (especially those 
with AIDS and CD4+ T cell counts <100/μL), diarrhea 
can be chronic, persistent, and remarkably profuse, caus-
ing clinically significant fluid and electrolyte depletion. 
Stool volumes may range from 1 to 25 L/d. Weight loss, 
wasting, and abdominal pain may be severe. Biliary tract 
involvement can manifest as midepigastric or right-upper-
quadrant pain.
Diagnosis
(Table 33-1) Evaluation starts with fecal examina-
tion for small oocysts, which are smaller (4–5 μm in 
diameter) than the fecal stages of most other parasites. 
Because conventional stool examination for ova and 
parasites does not detect Cryptosporidium, specific testing 
must be requested. Detection is enhanced by evaluation 
of stools (obtained on multiple days) by several 
techniques, including modified acid-fast and direct 
immunofluorescent stains and enzyme immunoassays. 
Cryptosporidia can also be identified by light and elec-
tron microscopy at the apical surfaces of intestinal epi-
thelium from biopsy specimens of the small bowel and, 
less frequently, the large bowel.
Treatment	
Cryptosporidiosis
Nitazoxanide is approved by the U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration for the treatment of cryptosporidi-
osis and is available in tablet form for adults (500 mg 
twice daily for 3 days) and as an elixir for children. To 
date, however, this agent has not been effective for the 
treatment of HIV-infected patients, in whom improved 
immune status due to antiretroviral therapy can lead 
to amelioration of cryptosporidiosis. Otherwise, treat-
ment includes supportive care with replacement of  
fluids and electrolytes and administration of anti­
diarrheal agents. Biliary tract obstruction may require 
papillotomy or T-tube placement. Prevention requires 
minimizing exposure to infectious oocysts in human or 
animal feces. Use of submicron water filters may mini-
mize acquisition of infection from drinking water.
Isosporiasis
The coccidian parasite Isospora belli causes human intes-
tinal disease. Infection is acquired by the consumption 
of oocysts, after which the parasite invades intestinal 
epithelial cells and undergoes both sexual and asexual 
cycles of development. Oocysts excreted in stool are 
not immediately infectious but must undergo further 
maturation.
Although I. belli infects many animals, little is 
known about the epidemiology or prevalence of 
this parasite in humans. It appears to be most 
common in tropical and subtropical countries. Acute 
infections can begin abruptly with fever, abdominal 
pain, and watery nonbloody diarrhea and can last for 
weeks or months. In patients who have AIDS or are 
immunocompromised for other reasons, infections 
often are not self-limited but rather resemble crypto-
sporidiosis, with chronic, profuse watery diarrhea. 
Eosinophilia, which is not found in other enteric proto-
zoan infections, may be detectable. The diagnosis 
(Table 33-1) is usually made by detection of the large 
(∼25-μm) oocysts in stool by modified acid-fast stain-
ing. Oocyst excretion may be low-level and intermit-
tent; if repeated stool examinations are unrevealing, 
 
CHAPTER 33
Protozoal Intestinal Infections and Trichomoniasis 
317
sampling of duodenal contents by aspiration or small-
bowel biopsy (often with electron-microscopic exami-
nation) may be necessary.
Treatment	
Isosporiasis
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX, 160/800 mg  
four times daily for 10 days; and for HIV-infected 
patients, then three times daily for 3 weeks) is effective. 
For patients intolerant of sulfonamides, pyrimethamine 
(50–75 mg/d) can be used. Relapses can occur in per-
sons with AIDS and necessitate maintenance therapy 
with TMP-SMX (160/800 mg three times per week).
Cyclosporiasis
Cyclospora cayetanensis, a cause of diarrheal illness, is glob-
ally distributed: illness due to C. cayetanensis has been 
reported in the United States, Asia, Africa, Latin America, 
and Europe. The epidemiology of this parasite has not 
yet been fully defined, but waterborne transmission and 
food-borne transmission by basil and imported raspber-
ries have been recognized. The full spectrum of illness 
attributable to Cyclospora has not been delineated. Some 
patients may harbor the infection without symptoms, 
but many have diarrhea, flulike symptoms, and flatu-
lence and belching. The illness can be self-limited, can 
wax and wane, or in many cases can involve prolonged 
diarrhea, anorexia, and upper gastrointestinal symptoms, 
with sustained fatigue and weight loss in some instances. 
Diarrheal illness may persist for >1 month. Cyclospora can 
cause enteric illness in patients infected with HIV.
The parasite is detectable in epithelial cells of small-
bowel biopsy samples and elicits secretory diarrhea by 
unknown means. The absence of fecal blood and leuko-
cytes indicates that disease due to Cyclospora is not caused 
by destruction of the small-bowel mucosa. The diagnosis 
(Table 33-1) can be made by detection of spherical 8- to 
10-μm oocysts in the stool, although routine stool ova 
andparasite (O+P) examinations are not sufficient. 
Specific fecal examinations must be requested to detect 
the oocysts, which are variably acid-fast and are fluo-
rescent when viewed with ultraviolet light microscopy. 
Cyclosporiasis should be considered in the differential 
diagnosis of prolonged diarrhea, with or without a his-
tory of travel by the patient to other countries.
Treatment	
Cyclosporiasis
Cyclosporiasis is treated with TMP-SMX (160/800 mg 
twice daily for 7 days). HIV-infected patients may experi-
ence relapses after such treatment and thus may require 
longer-term suppressive maintenance therapy.
Microsporidiosis
Microsporidia are obligate intracellular spore-forming 
protozoa that infect many animals and cause disease 
in humans, especially as opportunistic pathogens in 
AIDS. Microsporidia are members of a distinct phylum, 
Microspora, which contains dozens of genera and hun-
dreds of species. The various microsporidia are differen-
tiated by their developmental life cycles, ultrastructural 
features, and molecular taxonomy based on ribosomal 
RNA. The complex life cycles of the organisms result 
in the production of infectious spores (Fig. 33-3). 
Currently, eight genera of microsporidia—Encephalitozoon, 
Pleistophora, 
Nosema, 
Vittaforma, 
Trachipleistophora, 
Brachiola, Microsporidium, and Enterocytozoon—are rec-
ognized as causes of human disease. Although some 
microsporidia are probably prevalent causes of self- 
limited or asymptomatic infections in immunocompetent 
patients, little is known about how microsporidiosis is 
acquired.
Microsporidiosis is most common among patients 
with AIDS, less common among patients with other 
types of immunocompromise, and rare among immu-
nocompetent hosts. In patients with AIDS, intestinal 
infections with Enterocytozoon bieneusi and Encepha-
litozoon (formerly Septata) intestinalis are recognized 
to contribute to chronic diarrhea and wasting; these 
infections are found in 10–40% of patients with 
chronic diarrhea. Both organisms have been found 
in the biliary tracts of patients with cholecystitis. 
E. intestinalis may also disseminate to cause fever, 
diarrhea, sinusitis, cholangitis, and bronchiolitis. In 
patients with AIDS, Encephalitozoon hellem has caused 
superficial keratoconjunctivitis as well as sinusitis, 
respiratory tract disease, and disseminated infection. 
Myositis due to Pleistophora has been documented. 
Nosema, Vittaforma, and Microsporidium have caused 
stromal keratitis associated with trauma in immuno-
competent patients.
Microsporidia are small gram-positive organisms 
with mature spores measuring 0.5–2 μm × 1–4 μm. 
Diagnosis of microsporidial infections in tissue often 
requires electron microscopy, although intracellu-
lar spores can be visualized by light microscopy with 
hematoxylin and eosin, Giemsa, or tissue Gram’s stain. 
For the diagnosis of intestinal microsporidiosis, modi-
fied trichrome or chromotrope 2R-based staining and 
Uvitex 2B or calcofluor fluorescent staining reveal 
spores in smears of feces or duodenal aspirates. Defini-
tive therapies for microsporidial infections remain to 
be established. For superficial keratoconjunctivitis due 
to E. hellem, topical therapy with fumagillin suspen-
sion has shown promise (Chap. 208). For enteric infec-
tions with E. bieneusi and E. intestinalis in HIV-infected 
patients, therapy with albendazole may be efficacious 
(Chap. 208).
SECTION IV
Infections of the Alimentary Tract
318
Other Intestinal Protozoa
Balantidiasis
Balantidium coli is a large ciliated protozoal parasite 
that can produce a spectrum of large-intestinal 
disease analogous to amebiasis. The parasite is 
widely distributed in the world. Since it infects pigs, 
cases in humans are more common where pigs are raised. 
Infective cysts can be transmitted from person to person 
and through water, but many cases are due to the inges-
tion of cysts derived from porcine feces in association 
with slaughtering, with use of pig feces for fertilizer, or 
with contamination of water supplies by pig feces.
Ingested cysts liberate trophozoites, which reside 
and replicate in the large bowel. Many patients remain 
asymptomatic, but some have persisting intermittent 
diarrhea, and a few develop more fulminant dysen-
tery. In symptomatic individuals, the pathology in the 
bowel—both gross and microscopic—is similar to that 
seen in amebiasis, with varying degrees of mucosal inva-
sion, focal necrosis, and ulceration. Balantidiasis, unlike 
amebiasis, does not spread hematogenously to other 
organs. The diagnosis is made by detection of the 
trophozoite stage in stool or sampled colonic tissue. 
Tetracycline (500 mg four times daily for 10 days) is an 
effective therapeutic agent.
Blastocystis hominis infection
B. hominis, while believed by some to be a protozoan 
capable of causing intestinal disease, remains an organ-
ism of uncertain pathogenicity. Some patients who pass 
Intracellular
multiplication
via merogony and
sporogony
Microsporidia
Enterocytozoon bieneusi, Encephalitozoon spp., et al.
Encephalitozoon intestinalis 
in epithelial cells, endothelial 
cells, or macrophages
E. bieneusi
in epithelial cell
Polar tubule pierces
host epithelial cell,
injects sporoplasm
Presumed
ingestion or
respiratory
aquisition of
spores
Person-to-person,
zoonotic,
water-borne, or
food-borne
transmission?
Diagnostic spores present
in stool, urine, respiratory fluids,
cerebrospinal fluid, or
various tissue specimens
Sloughed cells
degenerate;
spores shed in
bodily fluids
Spore-laden
host epithelial
cells sloughed
into lumina of
gastrointestinal,
respiratory, or
genitourinary tract
While E. bieneusi is
primarily in the gastrointestinal tract,
other species may invade the lung
or eye or disseminate to cause:
Chronic diarrhea
Cholangitis
Sinusitis
Bronchitis
Nephritis
Cystitis/prostatitis
Keratoconjunctivitis
Encephalitis
Figure 33-3 
Life cycle of microsporidia. (Reprinted from RL Guerrant et al: Tropical Infectious Disease: Principles, Pathogens and Practice, 
2nd ed, 2006, p 1128, with permission from Elsevier Science.)
 
CHAPTER 33
Protozoal Intestinal Infections and Trichomoniasis 
319
B. hominis in their stools are asymptomatic, whereas 
others have diarrhea and associated intestinal symptoms. 
Diligent evaluation reveals other potential bacterial, 
viral, or protozoal causes of diarrhea in some but not all 
patients with symptoms. Because the pathogenicity of 
B. hominis is uncertain and because therapy for Blastocys-
tis infection is neither specific nor uniformly effective, 
patients with prominent intestinal symptoms should be 
fully evaluated for other infectious causes of diarrhea. 
If diarrheal symptoms associated with Blastocystis are 
prominent, either metronidazole (750 mg thrice daily 
for 10 days) or TMP-SMX (160 mg/800 mg twice 
daily for 7 days) can be used.
Dientamoeba fragilis infection
D. fragilis is unique among intestinal protozoa in that it 
has a trophozoite stage but not a cyst stage. How 
trophozoites survive to transmit infection is not known. 
When symptoms develop in patients with D. fragilis 
infection, they are generally mild and include intermit-
tent diarrhea, abdominal pain, and anorexia. The diag-
nosis is made by the detection of trophozoites in stool; 
the lability of these forms accounts for the greater yield 
when fecal samples are preserved immediately after 
collection. Since fecal excretion rates vary, examination 
of several samples obtained on alternate days increases 
the rate of detection. Iodoquinol (650 mg three times 
daily for 20 days), paromomycin (25–35 mg/kg per day 
in three doses for 7 days), metronidazole (500–750 mg 
three times daily for 10 days), or tetracycline (500 mg 
four times daily for 10 days) is appropriate for treatment.
Trichomoniasis
Various species of trichomonads can be found in the 
mouth (in association with periodontitis) and occasion-
ally in the gastrointestinal tract. Trichomonas vaginalis—
one of the most prevalent protozoal parasites in the 
United States—is a pathogen of the genitourinary tract 
and a major cause of symptomatic vaginitis.
Life cycle and epidemiology
T. vaginalis is a pear-shaped, actively motile organism 
that measures about 10 × 7 μm, replicates by binary fis-
sion, and inhabits the lower genital tract of females and 
the urethra and prostate of males. In the United States, 
it accounts for ∼3 million infections per year in women. 
While the organism can survive for a few hours in moist 
environments and could be acquired by direct contact, 
person-to-person venereal transmission accounts for vir-
tually all cases of trichomoniasis. Its prevalence is great-
est among persons with multiple sexual partners and 
among those with other sexually transmitted diseases 
(Chap. 130).
Clinical manifestations
Many men infected with T. vaginalis are asymptomatic, 
although some develop urethritis and a few have epi-
didymitis or prostatitis. In contrast, infection in women, 
which has an incubation period of 5–28 days, is usu-
ally symptomatic and manifests with malodorous vaginal 
discharge (often yellow), vulvar erythema and itching, 
dysuria or urinary frequency (in 30–50% of patients), 
and dyspareunia. These manifestations, however, do not 
clearly distinguish trichomoniasis from other types of 
infectious vaginitis.
Diagnosis
Detection of motile trichomonads by microscopic 
examination of wet mounts of vaginal or prostatic 
secretions has been the conventional means of diag-
nosis. Although this approach provides an immediate 
diagnosis, its sensitivity for the detection of T. vaginalis 
is only ∼50–60% in routine evaluations of vaginal secre-
tions. Direct immunofluorescent antibody staining is 
more sensitive (70–90%) than wet-mount examinations. 
T. vaginalis can be recovered from the urethra of both 
males and females and is detectable in males after pros-
tatic massage. Culture of the parasite is the most sensi-
tive means of detection; however, facilities for culture 
are not generally available, and detection of the organ-
ism takes 3–7 days.
Treatment	
Trichomoniasis
Metronidazole, given either as a single 2-g dose or in 
500-mg doses twice daily for 7 days, is usually effective. 
Tinidazole (a single 2-g dose) is also effective. All sexual  
partners must be treated concurrently to prevent  
reinfection, especially from asymptomatic males. In 
males with persistent symptomatic urethritis after 
therapy for nongonococcal urethritis, metronidazole 
therapy should be considered for possible trichomo-
niasis. Alternatives to metronidazole for treatment dur-
ing pregnancy are not readily available, although use of 
100-mg clotrimazole vaginal suppositories nightly for 
2 weeks may cure some infections in pregnant women.  
Reinfection often accounts for apparent treatment failures, 
but strains of T. vaginalis exhibiting high-level resistance 
to metronidazole have been encountered. Treatment of 
these resistant infections with higher oral doses, paren-
teral doses, or concurrent oral and vaginal doses of met-
ronidazole or with tinidazole has been successful.
 Peter F. Weller  I   Thomas B. Nutman 
320
 More than a billion persons worldwide are infected 
with one or more species of intestinal nematodes. 
 Table 34-1 summarizes biologic and clinical features of 
infections due to the major intestinal parasitic nematodes. 
These parasites are most common in regions with poor 
fecal sanitation, particularly in resource-poor countries 
in the tropics and subtropics, but they have also been 
seen with increasing frequency among immigrants and 
refugees to resource-rich countries. Although nema-
tode infections are not usually fatal, they contribute to 
malnutrition and diminished work capacity. It is inter-
esting that these helminth infections may protect some 
individuals from allergic disease. Humans may on occa-
sion be infected with nematode parasites that ordinar-
ily infect animals; these zoonotic infections produce dis-
eases such as trichostrongyliasis, anisakiasis, capillariasis, 
and abdominal angiostrongyliasis. 
 Intestinal nematodes are roundworms; they range in 
length from 1 mm to many centimeters when mature 
( Table 34-1 ). Their life cycles are complex and highly 
varied; some species, including  Strongyloides stercoralis
and  Enterobius vermicularis , can be transmitted directly 
from person to person, while others, such as  Ascaris 
lumbricoides ,  Necator americanus , and  Ancylostoma duodenale , 
require a soil phase for development. Because most hel-
minth parasites do not self-replicate, the acquisition of 
a heavy burden of adult worms requires repeated expo-
sure to the parasite in its infectious stage, whether larval 
or egg. Hence, clinical disease, as opposed to asymp-
tomatic infection, generally develops only with pro-
longed residence in an endemic area and is typically 
related to infection intensity. In persons with marginal 
nutrition, intestinal helminth infections may impair 
growth and development. Eosinophilia and elevated 
serum IgE levels are features of many helminth infec-
tions and, when unexplained, should always prompt 
a search for intestinal helminths. Signifi cant protec-
tive immunity to intestinal nematodes appears not to 
develop in humans, although mechanisms of parasite 
immune evasion and host immune responses to these 
infections have not been elucidated in detail. 
 aScariaSiS 
A. lumbricoides is the largest intestinal nematode para-
site of humans, reaching up to 40 cm in length. Most 
infected individuals have low worm burdens and are 
asymptomatic. Clinical disease arises from larval migra-
tion in the lungs or effects of the adult worms in the 
intestines. 
 life cycle 
 Adult worms live in the lumen of the small intestine. 
Mature female  Ascaris worms are extraordinarily fecund, 
each producing up to 240,000 eggs a day, which pass 
with the feces. Ascarid eggs, which are remarkably resis-
tant to environmental stresses, become infective after 
several weeks of maturation in the soil and can remain 
infective for years. After infective eggs are swallowed, 
larvae hatched in the intestine invade the mucosa, 
migrate through the circulation to the lungs, break into 
the alveoli, ascend the bronchial tree, and return—
through swallowing—to the small intestine, where they 
develop into adult worms. Between 2 and 3 months 
elapse between initial infection and egg production. 
Adult worms live for 1–2 years. 
 epidemiology 
Ascaris is widely distributed in tropical and sub-
tropical regions as well as in other humid areas, 
including the rural southeastern United States. 
Transmission typically occurs through fecally contami-
nated soil and is due either to a lack of sanitary facilities 
or to the use of human feces as fertilizer. With their 
propensity for hand-to-mouth fecal carriage, younger 
 INTESTINAL NEMATODE INFECTIONS 
 cHaPtEr 34 
 
CHAPTER 34
Intestinal Nematode Infections
321
children are most affected. Infection outside endemic 
areas, though uncommon, can occur when eggs on 
transported vegetables are ingested.
Clinical features
During the lung phase of larval migration, ∼9–12 days 
after egg ingestion, patients may develop an irritating 
nonproductive cough and burning substernal discomfort 
that is aggravated by coughing or deep inspiration. 
Dyspnea and blood-tinged sputum are less common. 
Fever is usually reported. Eosinophilia develops during 
this symptomatic phase and subsides slowly over weeks. 
Chest x-rays may reveal evidence of eosinophilic pneu-
monitis (Löffler’s syndrome), with rounded infiltrates 
a few millimeters to several centimeters in size. These 
infiltrates may be transient and intermittent, clearing 
after several weeks. Where there is seasonal transmission 
Table 34-1
Major Human Intestinal Parasitic Nematodes
Parasitic Nematode
Feature
Ascaris 
lumbricoides 
(Roundworm)
Necator 
americanus, 
Ancylostoma 
duodenale 
(Hookworm)
Strongyloides 
stercoralis
Trichuris 
trichiura 
(Whipworm)
Enterobius 
vermicularis 
(Pinworm)
Global prevalence in 
humans (millions)
807
576
100
604
209
Endemic areas
Worldwide
Hot, humid regions
Hot, humid  
regions
Worldwide
Worldwide
Infective stage
Egg
Filariform larva
Filariform larva
Egg
Egg
Route of infection
Oral
Percutaneous
Percutaneous or 
autoinfection
Oral
Oral
Gastrointestinal  
location of worms
Jejunal lumen
Jejunal mucosa
Small-bowel 
mucosa
Cecum, colonic 
mucosa
Cecum,  
appendix
Adult worm size
15–40 cm
7–12 mm
2 mm
30–50 mm
8–13 mm  
(female)
Pulmonary passage of 
larvae
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Incubation perioda 
(days)
60–75
40–100
17–28
70–90
35–45
Longevity
1 y
N. americanus: 2–5 y
A. duodenale: 6–8 y
Decades (owing to 
autoinfection)
5 y
2 months
Fecundity (eggs/day/
worm)
240,000
N. americanus: 
4000–10,000
A. duodenale: 
10,000–25,000
5000–10,000
3000–7000
2000
Principal symptoms
Rarely  
gastrointesti-
nal or biliary 
obstruction
Iron-deficiency 
anemia in heavy 
infection
Gastrointestinal 
symptoms;  
malabsorption  
or sepsis in  
hyperinfection
Gastrointestinal 
symptoms, 
anemia
Perianal  
pruritus
Diagnostic stage
Eggs in stool
Eggs in fresh stool, 
larvae in old stool
Larvae in stool or 
duodenal aspirate; 
sputum in  
hyperinfection
Eggs in stool
Eggs from  
perianal  
skin on  
cellulose  
acetate tape
Treatment
Mebendazole
Albendazole
Pyrantel 
pamoate
Ivermectin
Nitazoxanide
Mebendazole
Pyrantel pamoate
Albendazole
1. Ivermectin
2. Albendazole
Mebendazole
Albendazole
Ivermectin
Mebendazole
Pyrantel pamoate
Albendazole
aTime from infection to egg production by mature female worm.
SECTION IV
Infections of the Alimentary Tract
322
of the parasite, seasonal pneumonitis with eosinophilia 
may develop in previously infected and sensitized hosts.
In established infections, adult worms in the small 
intestine usually cause no symptoms. In heavy infec-
tions, particularly in children, a large bolus of entangled 
worms can cause pain and small-bowel obstruction, 
sometimes complicated by perforation, intussusception, 
or volvulus. Single worms may cause disease when they 
migrate into aberrant sites. A large worm can enter and 
occlude the biliary tree, causing biliary colic, cholecys-
titis, cholangitis, pancreatitis, or (rarely) intrahepatic 
abscesses. Migration of an adult worm up the esophagus 
can provoke coughing and oral expulsion of the worm. 
In highly endemic areas, intestinal and biliary ascariasis 
can rival acute appendicitis and gallstones as causes of 
surgical acute abdomen.
Laboratory findings
Most cases of ascariasis can be diagnosed by micro-
scopic detection of characteristic Ascaris eggs (65 by 
45 μm) in fecal samples. Occasionally, patients present 
after passing an adult worm—identifiable by its large 
size and smooth cream-colored surface—in the stool 
or through the mouth or nose. During the early trans-
pulmonary migratory phase, when eosinophilic pneu-
monitis occurs, larvae can be found in sputum or gas-
tric aspirates before diagnostic eggs appear in the stool. 
The eosinophilia that is prominent during this early 
stage usually decreases to minimal levels in established 
infection. Adult worms may be visualized, occasion-
ally serendipitously, on contrast studies of the gastroin-
testinal tract. A plain abdominal film may reveal masses 
of worms in gas-filled loops of bowel in patients with 
intestinal obstruction. Pancreaticobiliary worms can be 
detected by ultrasound and endoscopic retrograde chol-
angiopancreatography; the latter method also has been 
used to extract biliary Ascaris worms.
Treatment	
Ascariasis
Ascariasis should always be treated to prevent poten-
tially serious complications. Albendazole (400 mg once), 
mebendazole (100 g twice daily for 3 days or 500 mg 
once), or ivermectin (150–200 mg/kg once) is effective. 
These medications are contraindicated in pregnancy, 
however. Pyrantel pamoate (11 mg/kg once; maximum, 
1 g) is safe in pregnancy. Nitazoxanide (7.5 mg/kg once; 
maximum, 500 mg) has also been used in ascariasis. Mild 
diarrhea and abdominal pain are uncommon side effects 
of these agents. Partial intestinal obstruction should be 
managed with nasogastric suction, IV fluid administra-
tion, and instillation of piperazine through the nasogas-
tric tube, but complete obstruction and its severe com-
plications require immediate surgical intervention.
Hookworm
Two hookworm species (A. duodenale and N. americanus) 
are responsible for human infections. Most infected indi-
viduals are asymptomatic. Hookworm disease develops 
from a combination of factors—a heavy worm burden, a 
prolonged duration of infection, and an inadequate iron 
intake—and results in iron-deficiency anemia and, on 
occasion, hypoproteinemia.
Life cycle
Adult hookworms, which are ∼1 cm long, use buccal 
teeth (Ancylostoma) or cutting plates (Necator) to attach to 
the small-bowel mucosa and suck blood (0.2 mL/d per 
Ancylostoma adult) and interstitial fluid. The adult hook-
worms produce thousands of eggs daily. The eggs are 
deposited with feces in soil, where rhabditiform larvae 
hatch and develop over a 1-week period into infectious 
filariform larvae. Infective larvae penetrate the skin and 
reach the lungs by way of the bloodstream. There they 
invade alveoli and ascend the airways before being swal-
lowed and reaching the small intestine. The prepatent 
period from skin invasion to appearance of eggs in the 
feces is ∼6–8 weeks, but it may be longer with A. duodenale. 
Larvae of A. duodenale, if swallowed, can survive and 
develop directly in the intestinal mucosa. Adult hookworms 
may survive over a decade but usually live ∼6–8 years for 
A. duodenale and 2–5 years for N. americanus.
Epidemiology
A. duodenale is prevalent in southern Europe, 
North Africa, and northern Asia, and N. americanus 
is the predominant species in the Western 
Hemisphere and equatorial Africa. The two species 
overlap in many tropical regions, particularly Southeast 
Asia. In most areas, older children have the highest inci-
dence and greatest intensity of hookworm infection. In 
rural areas where fields are fertilized with human feces, 
older working adults also may be heavily infected.
Clinical features
Most hookworm infections are asymptomatic. Infective 
larvae may provoke pruritic maculopapular dermatitis 
(“ground itch”) at the site of skin penetration as well 
as serpiginous tracks of subcutaneous migration (similar 
to those of cutaneous larva migrans; Chap. 216) in 
previously sensitized hosts. Larvae migrating through 
the lungs occasionally cause mild transient pneumoni-
tis, but this condition develops less frequently in hook-
worm infection than in ascariasis. In the early intesti-
nal phase, infected persons may develop epigastric pain 
(often with postprandial accentuation), inflammatory 
diarrhea, or other abdominal symptoms accompanied 
 
CHAPTER 34
Intestinal Nematode Infections
323
by eosinophilia. The major consequence of chronic 
hookworm infection is iron deficiency. Symptoms 
are minimal if iron intake is adequate, but marginally 
nourished individuals develop symptoms of progressive 
iron-deficiency anemia and hypoproteinemia, including 
weakness and shortness of breath.
Laboratory findings
The diagnosis is established by the finding of character-
istic 40- by 60-μm oval hookworm eggs in the feces. 
Stool-concentration procedures may be required to 
detect light infections. Eggs of the two species are indis-
tinguishable by light microscopy. In a stool sample that 
is not fresh, the eggs may have hatched to release rhab-
ditiform larvae, which need to be differentiated from 
those of S. stercoralis. Hypochromic microcytic anemia, 
occasionally with eosinophilia or hypoalbuminemia, is 
characteristic of hookworm disease.
Treatment	
Hookworm Infection
Hookworm infection can be eradicated with several 
safe and highly effective antihelminthic drugs, includ-
ing albendazole (400 mg once), mebendazole (500 mg 
once), and pyrantel pamoate (11 mg/kg for 3 days). Mild 
iron-deficiency anemia can often be treated with oral 
iron alone. Severe hookworm disease with protein loss 
and malabsorption necessitates nutritional support and 
oral iron replacement along with deworming. There is 
some concern that the benzimidazoles (mebendazole 
and albendazole) are becoming less effective against 
human hookworms than in the past.
Ancylostoma caninum and Ancylostoma 
braziliense
A. caninum, the canine hookworm, has been identified 
as a cause of human eosinophilic enteritis, especially in 
northeastern Australia. In this zoonotic infection, adult 
hookworms attach to the small intestine (where they may 
be visualized by endoscopy) and elicit abdominal pain 
and intense local eosinophilia. Treatment with meben-
dazole (100 mg twice daily for 3 days) or albendazole 
(400 mg once) or endoscopic removal is effective. Both 
of these animal hookworm species can cause cutaneous 
larva migrans (“creeping eruption”; Chap. 216).
Strongyloidiasis
S. stercoralis is distinguished by its ability—unique 
among helminths (except for Capillaria; see below)—
to replicate in the human host. This capacity permits 
ongoing cycles of autoinfection as infective larvae are 
internally produced. Strongyloidiasis can thus persist for 
decades without further exposure of the host to exog-
enous infective larvae. In immunocompromised hosts, 
large numbers of invasive Strongyloides larvae can dis-
seminate widely and can be fatal.
Life cycle
In addition to a parasitic cycle of development, 
Strongyloides can undergo a free-living cycle of development 
in the soil (Fig. 34-1). This adaptability facilitates the 
parasite’s survival in the absence of mammalian hosts. 
Rhabditiform larvae passed in feces can transform into 
infectious filariform larvae either directly or after a free-
living phase of development. Humans acquire strongy-
loidiasis when filariform larvae in fecally contaminated 
soil penetrate the skin or mucous membranes. The larvae 
then travel through the bloodstream to the lungs, 
where they break into the alveolar spaces, ascend the 
bronchial tree, are swallowed, and thereby reach the 
small intestine. There the larvae mature into adult 
worms that penetrate the mucosa of the proximal small 
bowel. The minute (2-mm-long) parasitic adult female 
worms reproduce by parthenogenesis; adult males do 
not exist. Eggs hatch in the intestinal mucosa, releas-
ing rhabditiform larvae that migrate to the lumen and 
pass with the feces into soil. Alternatively, rhabditiform 
larvae in the bowel can develop directly into filariform 
larvae that penetrate the colonic wall or perianal skin 
and enter the circulation to repeat the migration that 
establishes ongoing internal reinfection. This autoinfec-
tion cycle allows strongyloidiasis to persist for decades.
Epidemiology
S. stercoralis is spottily distributed in tropical areas 
and other hot, humid regions and is particularly 
common in Southeast Asia, sub-Saharan Africa, 
and Brazil. In the United States, the parasite is endemic 
in parts of the Southeast and is found in immigrants, 
refugees, travelers, and military personnel who have 
lived in endemic areas.
Clinical features
In uncomplicated strongyloidiasis, many patients are 
asymptomatic or have mild cutaneous and/or abdominal 
symptoms. Recurrent urticaria, often involving the 
buttocks and wrists, is the most common cutaneous man-
ifestation. Migrating larvae can elicit a pathognomonic 
serpiginous eruption, larva currens (“running larva”). 
This pruritic, raised, erythematous lesion advances as 
rapidly as 10 cm/h along the course of larval migration. 
Adult parasites burrow into the duodenojejunal mucosa 
and can cause abdominal (usually midepigastric) pain, 
which resembles peptic ulcer pain except that it is 
SECTION IV
Infections of the Alimentary Tract
324
aggravated by food ingestion. Nausea, diarrhea, gastro-
intestinal bleeding, mild chronic colitis, and weight loss 
can occur. Small-bowel obstruction may develop with 
early, heavy infection. Pulmonary symptoms are rare in 
uncomplicated strongyloidiasis. Eosinophilia is common, 
with levels fluctuating over time.
The ongoing autoinfection cycle of strongyloidiasis is 
normally constrained by unknown factors of the host’s 
immune system. Abrogation of host immunity, espe-
cially with glucocorticoid therapy and much less com-
monly with other immunosuppressive medications, leads 
to hyperinfection, with the generation of large num-
bers of filariform larvae. Colitis, enteritis, or malab-
sorption may develop. In disseminated strongyloidiasis, 
larvae may invade not only gastrointestinal tissues and the 
lungs but also the central nervous system, peritoneum, 
liver, and kidneys. Moreover, bacteremia may develop 
because of the passage of enteric flora through disrupted 
mucosal barriers. Gram-negative sepsis, pneumonia, 
or meningitis may complicate or dominate the clinical 
course. Eosinophilia is often absent in severely infected 
patients. Disseminated strongyloidiasis, particularly in 
patients with unsuspected infection who are given glu-
cocorticoids, can be fatal. Strongyloidiasis is a frequent 
complication of infection with human T cell lympho-
tropic virus type I, but disseminated strongyloidiasis is 
not common among patients infected with HIV-1.
Diagnosis
In uncomplicated strongyloidiasis, the finding of 
rhabditiform larvae in feces is diagnostic. Rhabditiform 
larvae are ∼250 μm long, with a short buccal cav-
ity that distinguishes them from hookworm larvae. In 
uncomplicated infections, few larvae are passed and 
single stool examinations detect only about one-third 
of cases. Serial examinations and the use of the agar 
plate detection method improve the sensitivity of stool 
diagnosis. In uncomplicated strongyloidiasis (but not in 
hyperinfection), stool examinations may be repeatedly 
2-mm hermaphroditic
adult    s
penetrate small-bowel
mucosa and release eggs,
which hatch to
rhabditiform larvae.
Larvae shed in stool
Lung or intestinal stage may cause:
Free-living
1-mm adults
in soil
Eggs in soil
Indirect development
(heterogonic)
(can multiply outside host
for several generations) in soil
Direct development
Rhabditiform larvae
in soil
Eosinophilia and
intermittent
epigastric pain
Autoinfection:
Transform within the intestine
into filariform larvae, which
penetrate perianal skin
or bowel mucosa,
causing:
Pruritic larva currens
Eosinophilia
Hyperinfection:
With immunosuppression, larger
numbers of filariform larvae develop,
penetrate bowel, and disseminate,
causing:
Colitis, polymicrobial sepsis,
pneumonitis, or meningitis
Larvae migrate via
bloodstream or lymphatics
to lungs, ascend airway 
to trachea and pharynx,
and are swallowed.
Figure 34-1 
Life cycle of Strongyloides stercoralis. (Adapted from Guerrant RL et al (eds): Tropical Infectious Diseases: Principles, Pathogens 
and Practice, 2nd ed, p 1276. © 2006, with permission from Elsevier Science.)
 
CHAPTER 34
Intestinal Nematode Infections
325
negative. Strongyloides larvae may also be found by sam-
pling of the duodenojejunal contents by aspiration or 
biopsy. An enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay for 
serum antibodies to antigens of Strongyloides is a sensi-
tive method of diagnosing uncomplicated infections. 
Such serologic testing should be performed for patients 
whose geographic histories indicate potential exposure, 
especially those who exhibit eosinophilia and/or 
are candidates for glucocorticoid treatment of other 
conditions. In disseminated strongyloidiasis, filariform 
larvae should be sought in stool as well as in samples 
obtained from sites of potential larval migration, includ-
ing sputum, bronchoalveolar lavage fluid, or surgical 
drainage fluid.
Treatment	
Strongyloidiasis
Even in the asymptomatic state, strongyloidiasis must 
be treated because of the potential for subsequent fatal 
hyperinfection. Ivermectin (200 mg/kg daily for 2 days) 
is more effective than albendazole (400 mg daily for  
3 days). For disseminated strongyloidiasis, treatment 
with ivermectin should be extended for at least 5–7 days 
or until the parasites are eradicated.
Trichuriasis
Most infections with Trichuris trichiura are asymp-
tomatic, but heavy infections may cause gastroin-
testinal symptoms. Like the other soil-transmitted 
helminths, whipworm is distributed globally in the trop-
ics and subtropics and is most common among poor 
children from resource-poor regions of the world.
Life cycle
Adult Trichuris worms reside in the colon and cecum, 
the anterior portions threaded into the superficial 
mucosa. Thousands of eggs laid daily by adult female 
worms pass with the feces and mature in the soil. After 
ingestion, infective eggs hatch in the duodenum, releas-
ing larvae that mature before migrating to the large 
bowel. The entire cycle takes ∼3 months, and adult 
worms may live for several years.
Clinical features
Tissue reactions to Trichuris are mild. Most infected 
individuals have no symptoms or eosinophilia. Heavy 
infections may result in abdominal pain, anorexia, 
and bloody or mucoid diarrhea resembling inflam-
matory bowel disease. Rectal prolapse can result from 
massive infections in children, who often suffer from 
malnourishment and other diarrheal illnesses. Moder-
ately heavy Trichuris burdens also contribute to growth 
retardation.
Diagnosis and treatment
The characteristic 50- by 20-μm lemon-shaped Trichu-
ris eggs are readily detected on stool examination. Adult 
worms, which are 3–5 cm long, are occasionally seen on 
proctoscopy. Mebendazole (500 mg once) or albendazole 
(400 mg daily for 3 doses) is safe and moderately effec-
tive for treatment, with cure rates of 70–90%. Ivermec-
tin (200 mg/kg daily for 3 doses) is also safe but is not 
quite as efficacious as the benzimidazoles.
Enterobiasis (Pinworm)
E. vermicularis is more common in temperate 
countries than in the tropics. In the United States, 
∼40 million persons are infected with pinworms, 
with a disproportionate number of cases among children.
Life cycle and epidemiology
Enterobius adult worms are ∼1 cm long and dwell in the 
cecum. Gravid female worms migrate nocturnally into 
the perianal region and release up to 10,000 immature 
eggs each. The eggs become infective within hours 
and are transmitted by hand-to-mouth passage. From 
ingested eggs, larvae hatch and mature into adults. 
This life cycle takes ∼1 month, and adult worms sur-
vive for ∼2 months. Self-infection results from perianal 
scratching and transport of infective eggs on the hands 
or under the nails to the mouth. Because of the ease of 
person-to-person spread, pinworm infections are com-
mon among family members.
Clinical features
Most pinworm infections are asymptomatic. Perianal 
pruritus is the cardinal symptom. The itching, which is 
often worse at night as a result of the nocturnal migra-
tion of the female worms, may lead to excoriation and 
bacterial superinfection. Heavy infections have been 
claimed to cause abdominal pain and weight loss. On 
rare occasions, pinworms invade the female genital 
tract, causing vulvovaginitis and pelvic or peritoneal 
granulomas. Eosinophilia is uncommon.
Diagnosis
Since pinworm eggs are not released in feces, the diag-
nosis cannot be made by conventional fecal ova and par-
asite tests. Instead, eggs are detected by the application of 
SECTION IV
Infections of the Alimentary Tract
326
clear cellulose acetate tape to the perianal region in the 
morning. After the tape is transferred to a slide, micro-
scopic examination will detect pinworm eggs, which are 
oval, measure 55 by 25 μm, and are flattened along one 
side.
Treatment	
Enterobiasis
Infected children and adults should be treated with 
mebendazole (100 mg once), albendazole (400 mg 
once), or pyrantel pamoate (11 mg/kg once; maximum, 
1 g), with the same treatment repeated after 2 weeks. 
Treatment of household members is advocated to elimi-
nate asymptomatic reservoirs of potential reinfection.
Trichostrongyliasis
Trichostrongylus species, which are normally parasites 
of herbivorous animals, occasionally infect humans, 
particularly in Asia and Africa. Humans acquire 
the infection by accidentally ingesting Trichostrongylus 
larvae on contaminated leafy vegetables. The larvae do 
not migrate in humans but mature directly into adult 
worms in the small bowel. These worms ingest far less 
blood than hookworms; most infected persons are 
asymptomatic, but heavy infections may give rise to 
mild anemia and eosinophilia. Trichostrongylus eggs in 
stool examinations resemble those of hookworms but 
are larger (85 by 115 μm). Treatment consists of meben-
dazole or albendazole (Chap. 208).
Anisakiasis
Anisakiasis is a gastrointestinal infection caused 
by the accidental ingestion in uncooked saltwater 
fish of nematode larvae belonging to the family 
Anisakidae. The incidence of anisakiasis in the United 
States has increased as a result of the growing popularity 
of raw fish dishes. Most cases occur in Japan, the Neth-
erlands, and Chile, where raw fish—sashimi, pickled 
green herring, and ceviche, respectively—are national 
culinary staples. Anisakid nematodes parasitize large 
sea mammals such as whales, dolphins, and seals. As 
part of a complex parasitic life cycle involving marine 
food chains, infectious larvae migrate to the muscula-
ture of a variety of fish. Both Anisakis simplex and 
Pseudoterranova decipiens have been implicated in human 
anisakiasis, but an identical gastric syndrome may be 
caused by the red larvae of eustrongylid parasites of fish-
eating birds.
When humans consume infected raw fish, live larvae 
may be coughed up within 48 h. Alternatively, larvae 
may immediately penetrate the mucosa of the stomach. 
Within hours, violent upper abdominal pain accom-
panied by nausea and occasionally vomiting ensues, 
mimicking an acute abdomen. The diagnosis can be 
established by direct visualization on upper endoscopy, 
outlining of the worm by contrast radiographic stud-
ies, or histopathologic examination of extracted tissue. 
Extraction of the burrowing larvae during endoscopy 
is curative. In addition, larvae may pass to the small 
bowel, where they penetrate the mucosa and provoke 
a vigorous eosinophilic granulomatous response. Symp-
toms may appear 1–2 weeks after the infective meal, 
with intermittent abdominal pain, diarrhea, nausea, and 
fever resembling the manifestations of Crohn’s disease. 
The diagnosis may be suggested by barium studies and 
confirmed by curative surgical resection of a granuloma 
in which the worm is embedded. Anisakid eggs are 
not found in the stool, since the larvae do not mature 
in humans. Serologic tests have been developed but are 
not widely available.
Anisakid larvae in saltwater fish are killed by cooking 
to 60°C, freezing at –20°C for 3 days, or commercial 
blast freezing, but not usually by salting, marinating, or 
cold smoking. No medical treatment is available; surgical 
or endoscopic removal should be undertaken.
Capillariasis
Intestinal capillariasis is caused by ingestion of 
raw fish infected with Capillaria philippinensis. 
Subsequent autoinfection can lead to a severe 
wasting syndrome. The disease occurs in the Philippines 
and Thailand and, on occasion, elsewhere in Asia. The 
natural cycle of C. philippinensis involves fish from fresh 
and brackish water. When humans eat infected raw fish, 
the larvae mature in the intestine into adult worms, 
which produce invasive larvae that cause intestinal 
inflammation and villus loss. Capillariasis has an insidi-
ous onset with nonspecific abdominal pain and watery 
diarrhea. If untreated, progressive autoinfection can lead 
to protein-losing enteropathy, severe malabsorption, 
and ultimately death from cachexia, cardiac failure, or 
superinfection. The diagnosis is established by identifi-
cation of the characteristic peanut-shaped (20- by 
40-μm) eggs on stool examination. Severely ill patients 
require hospitalization and supportive therapy in addi-
tion to prolonged antihelminthic treatment with alben-
dazole (200 mg twice daily for 10 days; Chap. 208).
Abdominal Angiostrongyliasis
Abdominal angiostrongyliasis is found in Latin America 
and Africa. The zoonotic parasite Angiostrongylus 
 
CHAPTER 34
Intestinal Nematode Infections
327
costaricensis causes eosinophilic ileocolitis after the 
ingestion of contaminated vegetation. A. costaricensis 
normally parasitizes the cotton rat and other rodents, 
with slugs and snails serving as intermediate hosts. 
Humans become infected by accidentally ingesting 
infective larvae in mollusk slime deposited on fruits 
and vegetables; children are at highest risk. The larvae 
penetrate the gut wall and migrate to the mesenteric 
artery, where they develop into adult worms. Eggs 
deposited in the gut wall provoke an intense eosino-
philic granulomatous reaction, and adult worms may 
cause mesenteric arteritis, thrombosis, or frank bowel 
infarction. Symptoms may mimic those of appen-
dicitis, including abdominal pain and tenderness, 
fever, vomiting, and a palpable mass in the right iliac 
fossa. Leukocytosis and eosinophilia are prominent. 
CT with contrast medium typically shows inflamed 
bowel, often with concomitant obstruction, but a 
definitive diagnosis is usually made surgically with 
partial bowel resection. Pathologic study reveals a 
thickened bowel wall with eosinophilic granulomas 
surrounding the Angiostrongylus eggs. In nonsurgi-
cal cases, the diagnosis rests solely on clinical grounds 
because larvae and eggs cannot be detected in the 
stool. Medical therapy for abdominal angiostrongyli-
asis is of uncertain efficacy. Careful observation and 
surgical resection for severe symptoms are the main-
stays of treatment.
This page intentionally left blank 
Evaluation of the 
Patient with Liver  
Disease
SECTION V
 Marc Ghany  I   Jay h. hoofnagle 
330
 A diagnosis of liver disease usually can be made accu-
rately by a careful history, physical examination, and 
application of a few laboratory tests. In some circum-
stances, radiologic examinations are helpful or, indeed, 
diagnostic. Liver biopsy is considered the criterion stan-
dard in evaluation of liver disease but is now needed 
less for diagnosis than for grading and staging of 
disease. This chapter provides an introduction to diag-
nosis and management of liver disease, briefl y reviewing 
the structure and function of the liver; the major clini-
cal manifestations of liver disease; and the use of clinical 
history, physical examination, laboratory tests, imaging 
studies, and liver biopsy. 
 LIVEr STruCTurE aND fuNCTION 
 The liver is the largest organ of the body, weighing 
1–1.5 kg and representing 1.5–2.5% of the lean body 
mass. The size and shape of the liver vary and gener-
ally match the general body shape—long and lean or 
squat and square. The liver is located in the right upper 
quadrant of the abdomen under the right lower rib cage 
against the diaphragm and projects for a variable extent 
into the left upper quadrant. The liver is held in place 
by ligamentous attachments to the diaphragm, perito-
neum, great vessels, and upper gastrointestinal organs. It 
receives a dual blood supply; ∼20% of the blood fl ow 
is oxygen-rich blood from the hepatic artery, and 80% 
is nutrient-rich blood from the portal vein arising from 
the stomach, intestines, pancreas, and spleen. 
 The majority of cells in the liver are hepatocytes, 
which constitute two-thirds of the mass of the liver. 
The remaining cell types are Kupffer cells (members 
of the reticuloendothelial system), stellate (Ito or fat-
storing) cells, endothelial cells and blood vessels, bile 
ductular cells, and supporting structures. Viewed by light 
microscopy, the liver appears to be organized in lobules, 
with portal areas at the periphery and central veins in 
the center of each lobule. However, from a functional 
point of view, the liver is organized into acini, with 
both hepatic arterial and portal venous blood entering 
the acinus from the portal areas (zone 1) and then fl ow-
ing through the sinusoids to the terminal hepatic veins 
(zone 3); the intervening hepatocytes constituting zone 2. 
The advantage of viewing the acinus as the physiologic 
unit of the liver is that it helps to explain the morpho-
logic patterns and zonality of many vascular and biliary 
diseases not explained by the lobular arrangement. 
 Portal areas of the liver consist of small veins, arteries, 
bile ducts, and lymphatics organized in a loose stroma of 
supporting matrix and small amounts of collagen. Blood 
fl owing into the portal areas is distributed through the 
sinusoids, passing from zone 1 to zone 3 of the acinus and 
draining into the terminal hepatic veins (“central veins”). 
Secreted bile fl ows in the opposite direction, in a coun-
tercurrent pattern from zone 3 to zone 1. The sinusoids 
are lined by unique endothelial cells that have prominent 
fenestrae of variable size, allowing the free fl ow of plasma 
but not cellular elements. The plasma is thus in direct con-
tact with hepatocytes in the subendothelial space of Disse. 
 Hepatocytes have distinct polarity. The basolateral 
side of the hepatocyte lines the space of Disse and is 
richly lined with microvilli; it demonstrates endocytotic 
and pinocytotic activity, with passive and active uptake 
of nutrients, proteins, and other molecules. The apical 
pole of the hepatocyte forms the canalicular membranes 
through which bile components are secreted. The cana-
liculi of hepatocytes form a fi ne network, which fuses 
into the bile ductular elements near the portal areas. 
Kupffer cells usually lie within the sinusoidal vascu-
lar space and represent the largest group of fi xed mac-
rophages in the body. The stellate cells are located in 
the space of Disse but are not usually prominent unless 
activated, when they produce collagen and matrix. Red 
 APPROACH TO THE PATIENT WITH 
LIVER DISEASE 
 chapter 35 
 
CHAPTER 35
Approach to the Patient with Liver Disease
331
blood cells stay in the sinusoidal space as blood flows 
through the lobules, but white blood cells can migrate 
through or around endothelial cells into the space of 
Disse and from there to portal areas, where they can 
return to the circulation through lymphatics.
Hepatocytes perform numerous and vital roles in 
maintaining homeostasis and health. These functions 
include the synthesis of most essential serum proteins 
(albumin, carrier proteins, coagulation factors, many 
hormonal and growth factors), the production of bile and 
its carriers (bile acids, cholesterol, lecithin, phospholipids), 
the regulation of nutrients (glucose, glycogen, lipids, 
cholesterol, amino acids), and metabolism and conjuga-
tion of lipophilic compounds (bilirubin, anions, cations, 
drugs) for excretion in the bile or urine. Measurement 
of these activities to assess liver function is complicated 
by the multiplicity and variability of these functions. The 
most commonly used liver “function” tests are measure-
ments of serum bilirubin, albumin, and prothrombin 
time. The serum bilirubin level is a measure of hepatic 
conjugation and excretion, and the serum albumin level 
and prothrombin time are measures of protein synthesis. 
Abnormalities of bilirubin, albumin, and prothrombin 
time are typical of hepatic dysfunction. Frank liver fail-
ure is incompatible with life, and the functions of the 
liver are too complex and diverse to be subserved by a 
mechanical pump; dialysis membrane; or concoction of 
infused hormones, proteins, and growth factors.
Liver Diseases
While there are many causes of liver disease 
(Table 35-1), they generally present clinically in a 
Table 35-1
Liver Diseases
Inherited hyperbilirubinemia
Gilbert’s syndrome
Crigler-Najjar syndrome, types I and II
Dubin-Johnson syndrome
Rotor syndrome
Viral hepatitis
Hepatitis A
Hepatitis B
Hepatitis C
Hepatitis D
Hepatitis E
Others (mononucleosis, herpes, adenovirus hepatitis)
Cryptogenic hepatitis
Immune and autoimmune liver diseases
Primary biliary cirrhosis
Autoimmune hepatitis
Sclerosing cholangitis
Overlap syndromes
Graft-versus-host disease
Allograft rejection
Genetic liver diseases
α1 Antitrypsin deficiency
Hemochromatosis
Wilson’s disease
Benign recurrent intrahepatic cholestasis (BRIC)
Progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis (PFIC), types I-III
Others (galactosemia, tyrosinemia, cystic fibrosis,  
Newman-Pick disease, Gaucher’s disease)
Alcoholic liver disease
Acute fatty liver
Acute alcoholic hepatitis
Laënnec’s cirrhosis
Nonalcoholic fatty liver
Steatosis
Steatohepatitis
Acute fatty liver of pregnancy
Liver involvement in systemic diseases
Sarcoidosis
Amyloidosis
Glycogen storage diseases
Celiac disease
Tuberculosis
Mycobacterium avium intracellulare
Cholestatic syndromes
Benign postoperative cholestasis
Jaundice of sepsis
Total parenteral nutrition (TPN)-induced jaundice
Cholestasis of pregnancy
Cholangitis and cholecystitis
Extrahepatic biliary obstruction (stone, stricture, cancer)
Biliary atresia
Caroli’s disease
Cryptosporidiosis
Drug-induced liver disease
Hepatocellular patterns (isoniazid, acetaminophen)
Cholestatic patterns (methyltestosterone)
Mixed patterns (sulfonamides, phenytoin)
Micro- and macrovesicular steatosis (methotrexate, fialuridine)
Vascular injury
Venoocclusive disease
Budd-Chiari syndrome
Ischemic hepatitis
Passive congestion
Portal vein thrombosis
Nodular regenerative hyperplasia
Mass lesions
Hepatocellular carcinoma
Cholangiocarcinoma
Adenoma
Focal nodular hyperplasia
Metastatic tumors
Abscess
Cysts
Hemangioma
SECTION V
Evaluation of the Patient with Liver Disease
332
few distinct patterns, usually classified as hepatocellular, 
cholestatic (obstructive), or mixed. In hepatocellular dis-
eases (such as viral hepatitis or alcoholic liver disease), 
features of liver injury, inflammation, and necrosis pre-
dominate. In cholestatic diseases (such as gallstone or 
malignant obstruction, primary biliary cirrhosis, some 
drug-induced liver diseases), features of inhibition of 
bile flow predominate. In a mixed pattern, features of 
both hepatocellular and cholestatic injury are present 
(such as in cholestatic forms of viral hepatitis and many 
drug-induced liver diseases). The pattern of onset and 
prominence of symptoms can rapidly suggest a diagnosis, 
particularly if major risk factors are considered such as 
the age and sex of the patient and a history of exposure 
or risk behaviors.
Typical presenting symptoms of liver disease include 
jaundice, fatigue, itching, right upper quadrant pain, 
nausea, poor appetite, abdominal distention, and intes-
tinal bleeding. At present, however, many patients are 
diagnosed with liver disease who have no symptoms 
and who have been found to have abnormalities in bio-
chemical liver tests as a part of a routine physical exami-
nation or screening for blood donation or for insurance 
or employment. The wide availability of batteries of 
liver tests makes it relatively simple to demonstrate the 
presence of liver injury as well as to rule it out in some-
one suspected of liver disease.
Evaluation of patients with liver disease should be 
directed at (1) establishing the etiologic diagnosis, 
(2) estimating the disease severity (grading), and (3) 
establishing the disease stage (staging). Diagnosis should 
focus on the category of disease such as hepatocellular, 
cholestatic, or mixed injury, as well as on the specific 
etiologic diagnosis. Grading refers to assessing the sever-
ity or activity of disease—active or inactive, and mild, 
moderate, or severe. Staging refers to estimating the 
place in the course of the natural history of the disease, 
whether acute or chronic; early or late; precirrhotic, 
cirrhotic, or end-stage.
The goal of this chapter is to introduce general, 
salient concepts in the evaluation of patients with liver 
disease that help lead to the diagnoses discussed in sub-
sequent chapters.
Clinical History
The clinical history should focus on the symptoms 
of liver disease—their nature, patterns of onset, and 
progression—and on potential risk factors for liver dis-
ease. The symptoms of liver disease include consti-
tutional symptoms such as fatigue, weakness, nausea, 
poor appetite, and malaise and the more liver-specific 
symptoms of jaundice, dark urine, light stools, itching, 
abdominal pain, and bloating. Symptoms can also sug-
gest the presence of cirrhosis, end-stage liver disease, or 
complications of cirrhosis such as portal hypertension. 
Generally, the constellation of symptoms and their pat-
terns of onset rather than a specific symptom points to 
an etiology.
Fatigue is the most common and most characteris-
tic symptom of liver disease. It is variously described as 
lethargy, weakness, listlessness, malaise, increased need 
for sleep, lack of stamina, and poor energy. The fatigue 
of liver disease typically arises after activity or exercise 
and is rarely present or severe in the morning after ade-
quate rest (afternoon versus morning fatigue). Fatigue in 
liver disease is often intermittent and variable in severity 
from hour to hour and day to day. In some patients, it 
may not be clear whether fatigue is due to the liver dis-
ease or to other problems such as stress, anxiety, sleep 
disturbance, or a concurrent illness.
Nausea occurs with more severe liver disease and 
may accompany fatigue or be provoked by odors of 
food or eating fatty foods. Vomiting can occur but is 
rarely persistent or prominent. Poor appetite with 
weight loss occurs commonly in acute liver diseases 
but is rare in chronic disease, except when cirrhosis is 
present and advanced. Diarrhea is uncommon in liver 
disease, except with severe jaundice, where lack of bile 
acids reaching the intestine can lead to steatorrhea.
Right upper quadrant discomfort or ache (“liver 
pain”) occurs in many liver diseases and is usually 
marked by tenderness over the liver area. The pain 
arises from stretching or irritation of Glisson’s capsule, 
which surrounds the liver and is rich in nerve endings. 
Severe pain is most typical of gallbladder disease, liver 
abscess, and severe venoocclusive disease but is an occa-
sional accompaniment of acute hepatitis.
Itching occurs with acute liver disease, appearing 
early in obstructive jaundice (from biliary obstruction or 
drug-induced cholestasis) and somewhat later in hepa-
tocellular disease (acute hepatitis). Itching also occurs 
in chronic liver diseases, typically the cholestatic forms 
such as primary biliary cirrhosis and sclerosing cholan-
gitis where it is often the presenting symptom, occur-
ring before the onset of jaundice. However, itching can 
occur in any liver disease, particularly once cirrhosis is 
present.
Jaundice is the hallmark symptom of liver disease and 
perhaps the most reliable marker of severity. Patients 
usually report darkening of the urine before they notice 
scleral icterus. Jaundice is rarely detectable with a biliru-
bin level <43 μmol/L (2.5 mg/dL). With severe cho-
lestasis there will also be lightening of the color of the 
stools and steatorrhea. Jaundice without dark urine usually 
indicates indirect (unconjugated) hyperbilirubinemia 
and is typical of hemolytic anemia and the genetic 
disorders of bilirubin conjugation, the common and 
benign form being Gilbert’s syndrome and the rare and 
severe form being Crigler-Najjar syndrome. Gilbert’s 
syndrome affects up to 5% of the population; the jaundice 
is more noticeable after fasting and with stress.
 
CHAPTER 35
Approach to the Patient with Liver Disease
333
Major risk factors for liver disease that should be 
sought in the clinical history include details of alcohol 
use, medications (including herbal compounds, birth 
control pills, and over-the-counter medications), per-
sonal habits, sexual activity, travel, exposure to jaundiced 
or other high-risk persons, injection drug use, recent 
surgery, remote or recent transfusion with blood and 
blood products, occupation, accidental exposure to 
blood or needlestick, and familial history of liver disease.
For assessing the risk of viral hepatitis, a careful his-
tory of sexual activity is of particular importance and 
should include the number of lifetime sexual partners 
and, for men, a history of having sex with men. Sexual 
exposure is a common mode of spread of hepatitis B 
but is rare for hepatitis C. A family history of hepatitis, 
liver disease, and liver cancer is also important. Mater-
nal-infant transmission occurs with both hepatitis B 
and C. Vertical spread of hepatitis B can now be pre-
vented by passive and active immunization of the 
infant at birth. Vertical spread of hepatitis C is uncom-
mon, but there are no reliable means of prevention. 
Transmission is more common in HIV-co-infected 
mothers and is also linked to prolonged and difficult 
labor and delivery, early rupture of membranes, and 
internal fetal monitoring. A history of injection drug 
use, even in the remote past, is of great importance in 
assessing the risk for hepatitis B and C. Injection drug 
use is now the single most common risk factor for 
hepatitis C. Transfusion with blood or blood prod-
ucts is no longer an important risk factor for acute viral 
hepatitis. However, blood transfusions received before 
the introduction of sensitive enzyme immunoassays for 
antibody to hepatitis C virus (anti-HCV) in 1992 is an 
important risk factor for chronic hepatitis C. Blood 
transfusion before 1986, when screening for antibody 
to hepatitis B core antigen (anti-HBc) was introduced, 
is also a risk factor for hepatitis B. Travel to an under-
developed area of the world, exposure to persons with 
jaundice, and exposure to young children in day-care 
centers are risk factors for hepatitis A. Hepatitis E is 
one of the more common causes of jaundice in Asia 
and Africa but is uncommon in developed nations, 
although mild cases have been associated with eat-
ing raw or undercooked pork or game (deer and wild 
boars). Tattooing and body piercing (for hepatitis B 
and C) and eating shellfish (for hepatitis A) are fre-
quently mentioned but are actually quite rare types of 
exposure for acquiring hepatitis.
A history of alcohol intake is important in assessing 
the cause of liver disease and also in planning manage-
ment and recommendations. In the United States, for 
example, at least 70% of adults drink alcohol to some 
degree, but significant alcohol intake is less common; 
in population-based surveys, only 5% have more than 
two drinks per day, the average drink representing 
11–15 g alcohol. Alcohol consumption associated with 
an increased rate of alcoholic liver disease is probably 
more than two drinks (22–30 g) per day in women and 
three drinks (33–45 g) in men. Most patients with alco-
holic cirrhosis have a much higher daily intake and have 
drunk excessively for ≥10 years before onset of liver 
disease. In assessing alcohol intake, the history should 
also focus on whether alcohol abuse or dependence is 
present. Alcoholism is usually defined by the behavioral 
patterns and consequences of alcohol intake, not on the 
basis of the amount of alcohol intake. Abuse is defined 
by a repetitive pattern of drinking alcohol that has 
adverse effects on social, family, occupational, or health 
status. Dependence is defined by alcohol-seeking behav-
ior, despite its adverse effects. Many alcoholics dem-
onstrate both dependence and abuse, and dependence 
is considered the more serious and advanced form of 
alcoholism. A clinically helpful approach to diagnosis of 
alcohol dependence and abuse is the use of the CAGE 
questionnaire (Table 35-2), which is recommended in 
all medical history-taking.
Family history can be helpful in assessing liver 
disease. Familial causes of liver disease include Wilson’s 
disease; hemochromatosis and α1 antitrypsin (α1AT) 
deficiency; and the more uncommon inherited pedi-
atric liver diseases of familial intrahepatic cholestasis, 
benign recurrent intrahepatic cholestasis, and Alagille 
syndrome. Onset of severe liver disease in childhood 
or adolescence with a family history of liver disease or 
neuropsychiatric disturbance should lead to investiga-
tion for Wilson’s disease. A family history of cirrhosis, 
diabetes, or endocrine failure and the appearance of 
liver disease in adulthood should suggest hemochro-
matosis and lead to investigation of iron status. Adult 
patients with abnormal iron studies warrant genotyping 
of the HFE gene for the C282Y and H63D mutations 
typical of genetic hemochromatosis. In children and 
adolescents with iron overload, other non-HFE causes 
of hemochromatosis should be sought. A family history 
Table 35-2 
CAGE Questions*
Acronym
Question
C
Have you ever felt you ought to Cut down 
on your drinking?
A
Have people Annoyed you by criticizing 
your drinking?
G
Have you ever felt Guilty or bad about your 
drinking?
E
Have you ever had a drink first thing in the 
morning to steady your nerves or get rid 
of a hangover (Eyeopener)?
*One “yes” response should raise suspicion of an alcohol use problem, 
and more than one is a strong indication that abuse or dependence 
exists.
SECTION V
Evaluation of the Patient with Liver Disease
334
of emphysema should provoke investigation of α1AT 
levels and, if low, for Pi genotype.
Physical Examination
The physical examination rarely demonstrates evidence 
of liver dysfunction in a patient without symptoms or 
laboratory findings, nor are most signs of liver disease 
specific to one diagnosis. Thus, the physical examina-
tion complements rather than replaces the need for 
other diagnostic approaches. In many patients, the phys-
ical examination is normal unless the disease is acute or 
severe and advanced. Nevertheless, the physical exami-
nation is important in that it can be the first evidence 
for the presence of hepatic failure, portal hyperten-
sion, and liver decompensation. In addition, the physi-
cal examination can reveal signs that point to a specific 
diagnosis, either in risk factors or in associated diseases 
or findings.
Typical physical findings in liver disease are icterus, 
hepatomegaly, hepatic tenderness, splenomegaly, spider 
angiomata, palmar erythema, and excoriations. Signs of 
advanced disease include muscle wasting, ascites, edema, 
dilated abdominal veins, hepatic fetor, asterixis, mental 
confusion, stupor, and coma. In males with cirrhosis, 
particularly when related to alcohol, signs of hyperes-
trogenemia such as gynecomastia, testicular atrophy, and 
loss of male-pattern hair distribution may be found.
Icterus is best appreciated by inspecting the sclera 
under natural light. In fair-skinned individuals, a yellow 
color of the skin may be obvious. In dark-skinned indi-
viduals, the mucous membranes below the tongue can 
demonstrate jaundice. Jaundice is rarely detectable if the 
serum bilirubin level is <43 μmol/L (2.5 mg/dL) but 
may remain detectable below this level during recovery 
from jaundice (because of protein and tissue binding of 
conjugated bilirubin).
Spider angiomata and palmar erythema occur in both 
acute and chronic liver disease and may be especially 
prominent in persons with cirrhosis, but they can occur 
in normal individuals and are frequently present dur-
ing pregnancy. Spider angiomata are superficial, tortu-
ous arterioles and, unlike simple telangiectases, typically 
fill from the center outward. Spider angiomata occur 
only on the arms, face, and upper torso; they can be 
pulsatile and may be difficult to detect in dark-skinned 
individuals.
Hepatomegaly is not a very reliable sign of liver dis-
ease, because of the variability of the size and shape of 
the liver and the physical impediments to assessing liver 
size by percussion and palpation. Marked hepatomegaly 
is typical of cirrhosis, venoocclusive disease, infiltrative 
disorders such as amyloidosis, metastatic or primary cancers 
of the liver, and alcoholic hepatitis. Careful assess-
ment of the liver edge may also demonstrate unusual 
firmness, irregularity of the surface, or frank nodules. 
Perhaps the most reliable physical finding in examining 
the liver is hepatic tenderness. Discomfort on touch-
ing or pressing on the liver should be carefully sought 
with percussive comparison of the right and left upper 
quadrants.
Splenomegaly occurs in many medical conditions but 
can be a subtle but significant physical finding in liver 
disease. The availability of ultrasound (US) assessment 
of the spleen allows for confirmation of the physical 
finding.
Signs of advanced liver disease include muscle-wasting 
and weight loss as well as hepatomegaly, bruising, ascites, 
and edema. Ascites is best appreciated by attempts to 
detect shifting dullness by careful percussion. US exami-
nation will confirm the finding of ascites in equivocal 
cases. Peripheral edema can occur with or without asci-
tes. In patients with advanced liver disease, other factors 
frequently contribute to edema formation, including 
hypoalbuminemia, venous insufficiency, heart failure, 
and medications.
Hepatic failure is defined as the occurrence of signs 
or symptoms of hepatic encephalopathy in a person with 
severe acute or chronic liver disease. The first signs of 
hepatic encephalopathy can be subtle and nonspecific—
change in sleep patterns, change in personality, irrita-
bility, and mental dullness. Thereafter, confusion, dis-
orientation, stupor, and eventually coma supervene. In 
acute liver failure, excitability and mania may be pres-
ent. Physical findings include asterixis and flapping 
tremors of the body and tongue. Fetor hepaticus refers 
to the slightly sweet, ammoniacal odor that can occur 
in patients with liver failure, particularly if there is portal- 
venous shunting of blood around the liver. Other causes 
of coma and disorientation should be excluded, mainly 
electrolyte imbalances, sedative use, and renal or respi-
ratory failure. The appearance of hepatic encepha-
lopathy during acute hepatitis is the major criterion for 
diagnosis of fulminant hepatitis and indicates a poor 
prognosis. In chronic liver disease, encephalopathy is 
usually triggered by a medical complication such as gas-
trointestinal bleeding, over-diuresis, uremia, dehydra-
tion, electrolyte imbalance, infection, constipation, or 
use of narcotic analgesics.
A helpful measure of hepatic encephalopathy is a 
careful mental status examination and use of the trail-
making test, which consists of a series of 25 numbered 
circles that the patient is asked to connect as rapidly 
as possible using a pencil. The normal range for the 
connect-the-dot test is 15–30 seconds; it is consider-
ably delayed in patients with early hepatic encepha-
lopathy. Other tests include drawing abstract objects 
or comparison of a signature to previous examples. 
More sophisticated testing such as with electroen-
cephalography and visual evoked potentials can detect 
mild forms of encephalopathy, but are rarely clinically 
useful.
 
CHAPTER 35
Approach to the Patient with Liver Disease
335
Other signs of advanced liver disease include umbili-
cal hernia from ascites, hydrothorax, prominent veins 
over the abdomen, and caput medusa, which consists of 
collateral veins seen radiating from the umbilicus and 
resulting from the recanulation of the umbilical vein. 
Widened pulse pressure and signs of a hyperdynamic 
circulation can occur in patients with cirrhosis as a result 
of fluid and sodium retention, increased cardiac output, 
and reduced peripheral resistance. Patients with long-
standing cirrhosis and portal hypertension are prone to 
develop the hepatopulmonary syndrome, defined by the 
triad of liver disease, hypoxemia, and pulmonary arte-
riovenous shunting. The hepatopulmonary syndrome is 
characterized by platypnea and orthodeoxia, represent-
ing shortness of breath and oxygen desaturation that 
occur paradoxically upon assuming an upright position. 
Measurement of oxygen saturation by pulse oximetry is 
a reliable screening test for the presence of hepatopul-
monary syndrome.
Several skin disorders and changes occur com-
monly in liver disease. Hyperpigmentation is typical of 
advanced chronic cholestatic diseases such as primary 
biliary cirrhosis and sclerosing cholangitis. In these same 
conditions, xanthelasma and tendon xanthomata occur 
as a result of retention and high serum levels of lipids 
and cholesterol. A slate-gray pigmentation to the skin 
also occurs with hemochromatosis if iron levels are high 
for a prolonged period. Mucocutaneous vasculitis with 
palpable purpura, especially on the lower extremities, is 
typical of cryoglobulinemia of chronic hepatitis C but 
can also occur in chronic hepatitis B.
Some physical signs point to specific liver diseases. 
Kayser-Fleischer rings occur in Wilson’s disease and 
consist of a golden-brown copper pigment depos-
ited in Descemet’s membrane at the periphery of the 
cornea; they are best seen by slit-lamp examination. 
Dupuytren contracture and parotid enlargement are 
suggestive of chronic alcoholism and alcoholic liver 
disease. In metastatic liver disease or primary hepato-
cellular carcinoma, signs of cachexia and wasting may 
be prominent, as well as firm hepatomegaly and a 
hepatic bruit.
Laboratory Testing
Diagnosis in liver disease is greatly aided by the avail-
ability of reliable and sensitive tests of liver injury and 
function. A typical battery of blood tests used for ini-
tial assessment of liver disease includes measuring levels 
of serum alanine and aspartate aminotransferases (ALT 
and AST), alkaline phosphatase (AlkP), direct and 
total serum bilirubin, and albumin and assessing pro-
thrombin time. The pattern of abnormalities generally 
points to hepatocellular versus cholestatic liver disease 
and will help to decide whether the disease is acute or 
chronic and whether cirrhosis and hepatic failure are 
present. Based on these results, further testing over 
time may be necessary. Other laboratory tests may be 
helpful, such as γ-glutamyl transpeptidase (gGT) to 
define whether alkaline phosphatase elevations are due 
to liver disease; hepatitis serology to define the type of 
viral hepatitis; and autoimmune markers to diagnose 
primary biliary cirrhosis (antimitochondrial antibody; 
AMA), sclerosing cholangitis (peripheral antineutrophil 
cytoplasmic antibody; P-ANCA), and autoimmune 
hepatitis (antinuclear, smooth-muscle, and liver-kidney 
microsomal antibody). A simple delineation of labora-
tory abnormalities and common liver diseases is given 
in Table 35-3.
The use and interpretation of liver function tests is 
summarized in Chap. 302.
Table 35-3
Important Diagnostic Tests in Common  
Liver Diseases
Disease
Diagnostic Test
Hepatitis A
Anti-HAV IgM
Hepatitis B
  Acute
HBsAg and anti-HBc IgM
  Chronic
HBsAg and HBeAg and/or HBV 
DNA
Hepatitis C
Anti-HCV and HCV RNA
Hepatitis D (delta)
HBsAg and anti-HDV
Hepatitis E
Anti-HEV
Autoimmune hepatitis
ANA or SMA, elevated IgG levels, 
and compatible histology
Primary biliary  
cirrhosis
Mitochondrial antibody, elevated 
IgM levels, and compatible  
histology
Primary sclerosing 
cholangitis
P-ANCA, cholangiography
Drug-induced liver 
disease
History of drug ingestion
Alcoholic liver  
disease
History of excessive alcohol 
intake and compatible histology
Nonalcoholic  
steatohepatitis
Ultrasound or CT evidence of 
fatty liver and compatible  
histology
α1 Antitrypsin disease
Reduced α1 antitrypsin levels, 
phenotypes PiZZ or PiSZ
Wilson’s disease
Decreased serum ceruloplasmin 
and increased urinary copper; 
increased hepatic copper level
Hemochromatosis
Elevated iron saturation and 
serum ferritin; genetic testing for 
HFE gene mutations
Hepatocellular cancer
Elevated α-fetoprotein level >500; 
US or CT image of mass
Abbreviations: HAV, HBV, HCV, HDV, HEV: hepatitis A, B, C, D, or 
E virus; HBsAg, hepatitis B surface antigen; anti-HBc, antibody to 
hepatitis B core (antigen); HBeAg, hepatitis e antigen; ANA, antinuclear 
antibodies; SMA, smooth-muscle antibody; P-ANCA, peripheral anti-
neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody.
SECTION V
Evaluation of the Patient with Liver Disease
336
Diagnostic Imaging
There have been great advances made in hepatic imag-
ing, although no method is suitably accurate in demon-
strating underlying cirrhosis. There are many modalities 
available for imaging the liver. US, CT, and MRI are 
the most commonly employed and are complemen-
tary to each other. In general, US and CT have a high 
sensitivity for detecting biliary duct dilatation and are 
the first-line options for investigating the patient with 
suspected obstructive jaundice. All three modalities 
can detect a fatty liver, which appears bright on imag-
ing studies. Modifications of CT and MRI can be used 
to quantify liver fat, which may ultimately be valuable 
in monitoring therapy in patients with fatty liver disease. 
Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) 
and endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography 
(ERCP) are the procedures of choice for visualization 
of the biliary tree. MRCP offers several advantages 
over ERCP; there is no need for contrast media or ion-
izing radiation, images can be acquired faster, it is less 
operator dependent, and it carries no risk of pancre-
atitis. MRCP is superior to US and CT for detecting 
choledocholithiasis but less specific. It is useful in the 
diagnosis of bile duct obstruction and congenital biliary 
abnormalities, but ERCP is more valuable in evaluat-
ing ampullary lesions and primary sclerosing cholan-
gitis. ERCP allows for biopsy, direct visualization of 
the ampulla and common bile duct, and intraductal 
ultrasonography. It also provides several therapeutic 
options in patients with obstructive jaundice such as 
sphincterotomy, stone extraction, and placement of 
nasobiliary catheters and biliary stents. Doppler US and 
MRI are used to assess hepatic vasculature and hemo-
dynamics and to monitor surgically or radiologically 
placed vascular shunts such as transjugular intrahepatic 
portosystemic shunts. CT and MRI are indicated for 
the identification and evaluation of hepatic masses, stag-
ing of liver tumors, and preoperative assessment. With 
regard to mass lesions, sensitivity of hepatic imaging 
continues to increase; unfortunately, specificity remains 
a problem, and often two and sometimes three studies 
are needed before a diagnosis can be reached. Recently, 
methods using elastography have been developed to 
measure hepatic stiffness as a means of assessing hepatic 
fibrosis. US and MR elastrography are now under-
going evaluation for their ability to detect different 
degrees of hepatic fibrosis and to obviate the need for 
liver biopsy in assessing disease stage. If found to be reli-
able, hepatic elastography may be an appropriate means 
of monitoring fibrosis and disease progression. Finally, 
interventional radiologic techniques allow the biopsy of 
solitary lesions, performance of radiofrequency ablation 
and chemoembolization of cancerous lesions, insertion 
of drains into hepatic abscesses, measurement of portal 
pressure, and creation of vascular shunts in patients with 
portal hypertension. Which modality to use depends on 
factors such as availability, cost, and experience of the 
radiologist with each technique.
Liver Biopsy
Liver biopsy remains the criterion standard in the 
evaluation of patients with liver disease, particu-
larly in patients with chronic liver diseases. In selected 
instances, liver biopsy is necessary for diagnosis but is 
more often useful in assessing the severity (grade) and 
stage of liver damage, in predicting prognosis, and in 
monitoring response to treatment. The size of the liver 
biopsy is an important determinant of its reliability; a 
length of 1.5–2 cm being necessary for accurate assess-
ment of fibrosis. In the future, noninvasive means of 
assessing disease activity (batteries of blood tests) and 
fibrosis (elastography and fibrosis markers) may replace 
liver biopsy in assessing stage and grade of disease.
Diagnosis of Liver Disease
The major causes of liver disease and key diagnostic fea-
tures are outlined in Table 35-3, and an algorithm for 
evaluation of the patient with suspected liver disease is 
given in Fig. 35-1. Specifics of diagnosis are discussed 
in later chapters. The most common causes of acute 
liver disease are viral hepatitis (particularly hepatitis 
A, B, and C), drug-induced liver injury, cholangitis, 
and alcoholic liver disease. Liver biopsy is usually not 
needed in the diagnosis and management of acute liver 
disease, exceptions being situations where the diagnosis 
remains unclear despite thorough clinical and laboratory 
investigation. Liver biopsy can be helpful in the diagno-
sis of drug-induced liver disease and in establishing the 
diagnosis of acute alcoholic hepatitis.
The most common causes of chronic liver disease in 
general order of frequency are chronic hepatitis C, alcoholic 
liver disease, nonalcoholic steatohepatitis, chronic hepa-
titis B, autoimmune hepatitis, sclerosing cholangitis, pri-
mary biliary cirrhosis, hemochromatosis, and Wilson’s 
disease. Strict diagnostic criteria have not been devel-
oped for most liver diseases, but liver biopsy plays an 
important role in the diagnosis of autoimmune hepati-
tis, primary biliary cirrhosis, nonalcoholic and alcoholic 
steatohepatitis, and Wilson’s disease (with a quantitative 
hepatic copper level).
Grading and Staging of Liver Disease
Grading refers to an assessment of the severity or activ-
ity of liver disease, whether acute or chronic; active 
or inactive; and mild, moderate, or severe. Liver 
biopsy is the most accurate means of assessing severity, 
 
CHAPTER 35
Approach to the Patient with Liver Disease
337
particularly in chronic liver disease. Serum amino-
transferase levels are used as convenient and noninvasive 
means to follow disease activity, but aminotransfer-
ase levels are not always reliable in reflecting disease 
severity. Thus, normal serum aminotransferase levels 
in patients with hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) in 
serum may indicate the inactive HBsAg carrier state or 
may reflect mild chronic hepatitis B or hepatitis B with 
fluctuating disease activity. Serum testing for hepatitis B 
e antigen and hepatitis B virus DNA can help resolve 
these different patterns, but these markers can also fluc-
tuate and change over time. Similarly, in chronic hepa-
titis C, serum aminotransferase levels can be normal 
despite moderate activity of disease. Finally, in both 
alcoholic and nonalcoholic steatohepatitis, aminotrans-
ferase levels are quite unreliable in reflecting severity. 
In these conditions, liver biopsy is helpful in guiding 
management and recommending therapy, particularly 
Suspected Liver Disease
Abnormal liver tests
Acute
< 6 months
Chronic
> 6 months
Diagnostic
evaluation
1. IgM Anti-HAV
2. HBsAg
3. IgM Anti-HBc
4. Anti-HCV
5. ANA, SMA
6. Monospot,
    heterophile
7. Ceruloplasmin
8. Alcohol history
9. Drug history
Diagnostic
evaluation
1. AMA
2. Drug history
3. Ultrasound/MRI
4. MRCP/ERCP
Liver biopsy in acute liver disease:
Reserved for patients in whom the diagnosis
remains unclear despite medical evaluation
Liver biopsy in chronic liver disease:
Often valuable for diagnosis as well as
staging and grading liver disease
Diagnostic
evaluation
1. HBsAg
2. Anti-HCV
3. Fe saturation,
    ferritin
4. Ceruloplasmin
5. α1AT
6. ANA, SMA
7. Ultrasound
8. Alcohol history
Diagnostic
evaluation
1. Drug history
2. AMA
3. P-ANCA
4. Ultrasound
5. MRCP/ERCP
Hepatitic: ⇑⇑ALT
Mixed: ↑ALT,
             ↑AlkP 
Cholestatic:
   ⇑⇑AlkP,
   ⇑⇑gGT,
   ↑ALT
Hepatitic: ⇑⇑ALT
Mixed: ↑ALT,
             ↑AlkP 
Cholestatic:
   ⇑⇑AlkP,
   ⇑⇑gGT,
   ↑ALT
EVALUATION OF ABNORMAL LIVER TESTS
Figure 35-1 
Algorithm for evaluation of abnormal liver tests. For 
patients with suspected liver disease, an appropriate 
approach to evaluation is initial testing for routine liver tests 
such as bilirubin, albumin, alanine aminotransferase (ALT), 
aspartate aminotransferase (AST), and alkaline phosphatase 
(AlkP). These results (sometimes complemented by testing 
of γ-glutamyl transpeptidase; gGT) will establish whether the 
pattern of abnormalities is hepatic, cholestatic, or mixed. 
In addition, the duration of symptoms or abnormalities will 
show whether the disease is acute or chronic. If the disease 
is acute and if history, laboratory tests, and imaging studies 
do not reveal a diagnosis, liver biopsy is appropriate to help 
establish the diagnosis. If the disease is chronic, liver biopsy 
can be helpful not only for diagnosis but also to grade the 
activity and stage the progression of disease. This approach 
is largely applicable to patients without immune deficiency. 
In patients with HIV infection or after bone marrow or solid 
organ transplantation, diagnostic evaluation should also 
include evaluation of opportunistic infections (adenovirus, 
cytomegalovirus, coccidioidomycosis, etc.) as well as vas-
cular and immunologic conditions (venoocclusive disease, 
graft-versus-host disease). HAV, HCV: hepatitis A or C virus; 
HBsAg, hepatitis B surface antigen; anti-HBc, antibody 
to hepatitis B core (antigen); ANA, antinuclear antibodies; 
SMA, smooth-muscle antibody; MRCP, magnetic resonance 
cholangiopancreatography; ERCP, endoscopic retrograde 
cholangiopancreatography; α1AT, α1 antitrypsin; AMA; anti-
mitochondrial antibody; P-ANCA, peripheral antineutrophil 
cytoplasmic antibody.
SECTION V
Evaluation of the Patient with Liver Disease
338
if therapy is difficult, prolonged, and expensive as is 
often the case in chronic viral hepatitis. There are sev-
eral well-verified numerical scales for grading activity in 
chronic liver disease, the most common being the his-
tology activity index and the Ishak histology scale.
Liver biopsy is also the most accurate means of assess-
ing stage of disease as early or advanced, precirrhotic, 
and cirrhotic. Staging of disease pertains largely to 
chronic liver diseases in which progression to cirrhosis 
and end-stage liver disease can occur, but which may 
require years or decades to develop. Clinical features, 
biochemical tests, and hepatic imaging studies are help-
ful in assessing stage but generally become abnormal 
only in the middle to late stages of cirrhosis. Noninva-
sive tests that suggest advanced fibrosis include mild ele-
vations of bilirubin, prolongation of prothrombin time, 
slight decreases in serum albumin, and mild thrombo-
cytopenia (which is often the first indication of wors-
ening fibrosis). Combinations of blood test results have 
been used to create models for predicting advanced liver 
disease, but these are not reliable enough to use on a 
regular basis and they only separate advanced from early 
disease. Recently, elastography and noninvasive breath 
tests using 13C-labeled compounds have been proposed 
as a means of detecting early stages of fibrosis and liver 
dysfunction, but their reliability and reproducibility 
remain to be proven. Thus, at present, mild to moder-
ate stages of hepatic fibrosis are detectable only by liver 
biopsy. In assessing stage, the degree of fibrosis is usually 
used as its quantitative measure. The amount of fibrosis 
is generally staged on a 0 to 4+ (Metavir scale) or 0 to 
6+ scale (Ishak scale). The importance of staging relates 
primarily to prognosis and to guiding management of 
complications. Patients with cirrhosis are candidates for 
screening and surveillance for esophageal varices and 
hepatocellular carcinoma. Patients without advanced 
fibrosis need not undergo screening.
Cirrhosis can also be staged clinically. A reliable stag-
ing system is the modified Child-Pugh classification 
with a scoring system of 5–15: scores of 5 and 6 being 
Child-Pugh class A (consistent with “compensated 
cirrhosis”), scores of 7–9 indicating class B, and 
10–15 indicating class C (Table 35-4). This scoring 
system was initially devised to stratify patients into risk 
groups prior to undergoing portal decompressive surgery. 
The Child-Pugh score is a reasonably reliable predictor 
of survival in many liver diseases and predicts the likeli-
hood of major complications of cirrhosis such as bleed-
ing from varices and spontaneous bacterial peritonitis. 
It was used to assess prognosis in cirrhosis and to pro-
vide the standard criteria for listing liver transplantation 
(Child-Pugh class B). Recently the Child-Pugh system 
has been replaced by the model for end-stage liver dis-
ease (MELD) score for assessing the need for liver trans-
plantation. The MELD score is a prospectively derived 
Table 35-4
Child-Pugh Classification of Cirrhosis
Factor
Units
1
2
3
Serum  
bilirubin
μmol/L
mg/dL
<34
<2.0
34-51
2.0-3.0
>51
>3.0
Serum  
albumin
g/L
g/dL
>35
>3.5
30-35
3.0-3.5
<30
<3.0
Prothrombin 
time
seconds
prolonged
INR
0-4
<1.7
4-6
1.7-2.3
>6
>2.3
Ascites
None
Easily 
con-
trolled
Poorly 
controlled
Hepatic 
encepha-
lopathy
None
Minimal
Advanced
Note: The Child-Pugh score is calculated by adding the scores of 
the five factors and can range from 5 to 15. Child-Pugh class can be 
A (a score of 5-6), B (7-9), or C (10 or above). Decompensation indi-
cates cirrhosis with a Child-Pugh score of ≥7 (class B). This level has 
been the accepted criterion for listing liver transplantation.
scoring system designed to predict prognosis of patients 
with liver disease and portal hypertension. It is calcu-
lated using three noninvasive variables—the prothrom-
bin time expressed as international normalized ratio 
(INR), serum bilirubin, and serum creatinine (http://
www.unos.org/resources/meldPeldCalculator.asp).
MELD provides a more objective means of assess-
ing disease severity and has less center-to-center varia-
tion than the Child-Pugh score and has a wider range 
of values. MELD is currently used to establish prior-
ity listing for liver transplantation in the United States. 
A similar system using bilirubin, INR, serum albumin, 
age, and nutritional status is used for children below 
the age of 12 years [pediatric end-stage liver disease 
(PELD)].
Thus, liver biopsy is helpful not only in diagnosis but 
also in management of chronic liver disease and assess-
ment of prognosis. Because liver biopsy is an invasive 
procedure and not without complications, it should be 
used only when it will contribute materially to manage-
ment and therapeutic decisions.
Nonspecific Issues in 
Management of Patients  
with Liver Disease
Specifics on management of different forms of acute or 
chronic liver disease are given in subsequent chapters, 
but certain issues are applicable to any patient with liver 
disease. These include advice regarding alcohol use, 
 
CHAPTER 35
Approach to the Patient with Liver Disease
339
medications, vaccination, and surveillance for compli-
cations of liver disease. Alcohol should be used spar-
ingly, if at all, by patients with liver disease. Abstinence 
from alcohol should be encouraged for all patients with 
alcohol-related liver disease and in patients with cir-
rhosis and those receiving interferon-based therapy for 
hepatitis B or C. Regarding vaccinations, all patients 
with liver disease should receive hepatitis A vaccine and 
those with risk factors should receive hepatitis B vac-
cination as well. Influenza and pneumococcal vacci-
nation should also be encouraged. Patients with liver 
disease should be careful using any medications, other 
than the most necessary. Drug-induced hepatotox-
icity can mimic many forms of liver disease and can 
cause exacerbations of chronic hepatitis and cirrhosis; 
drugs should be suspected in any situation in which the 
cause of exacerbation is unknown. Finally, consider-
ation should be given to surveillance for complications 
of chronic liver disease such as variceal hemorrhage and 
hepatocellular carcinoma. Patients with cirrhosis war-
rant upper endoscopy to assess the presence of varices 
and should be given chronic therapy with beta blockers 
or offered endoscopic obliteration if large varices are 
found. Patients with cirrhosis also warrant screening and 
long-term surveillance for development of hepatocel-
lular carcinoma. While the optimal regimen for such 
surveillance has not been established, an appropriate 
approach is US of the liver at 6- to 12-month intervals.
 Daniel S. Pratt  I   Marshall M. Kaplan 
340
 Several biochemical tests are useful in the evalu-
ation and management of patients with hepatic 
 dysfunction. These tests can be used to (1) detect the 
presence of liver disease, (2) distinguish among dif-
ferent types of liver disorders, (3) gauge the extent of 
known liver damage, and (4) follow the response to 
treatment. 
 Liver tests have shortcomings. They can be normal 
in patients with serious liver disease and abnormal in 
patients with diseases that do not affect the liver. Liver 
tests rarely suggest a specifi c diagnosis; rather, they sug-
gest a general category of liver disease, such as hepato-
cellular or cholestatic, which then further directs the 
evaluation. 
 The liver carries out thousands of biochemical func-
tions, most of which cannot be easily measured by 
blood tests. Laboratory tests measure only a limited 
number of these functions. In fact, many tests, such as 
the aminotransferases or alkaline phosphatase, do not 
measure liver function at all. Rather, they detect liver 
cell damage or interference with bile fl ow. Thus, no one 
test enables the clinician to accurately assess the liver’s 
total functional capacity. 
 To increase both the sensitivity and the specifi city 
of laboratory tests in the detection of liver disease, it is 
best to use them as a battery. Tests usually employed in 
clinical practice include the bilirubin, aminotransferases, 
alkaline phosphatase, albumin, and prothrombin time 
tests. When more than one of these tests provide abnor-
mal fi ndings or the fi ndings are persistently abnormal on 
serial determinations, the probability of liver disease is 
high. When all test results are normal, the probability of 
missing occult liver disease is low. 
 When evaluating patients with liver disorders, it 
is helpful to group these tests into general categories. 
The classifi cation we have found most useful is given 
below. 
 TesTs BAseD on DeToXiFicATion AnD 
eXcreTory FuncTions 
 Serum bilirubin 
(See also  Chap. 42 ) Bilirubin, a breakdown product 
of the porphyrin ring of heme-containing proteins, is 
found in the blood in two fractions—conjugated and 
unconjugated. The unconjugated fraction, also termed 
the  indirect fraction , is insoluble in water and is bound 
to albumin in the blood. The conjugated (direct) bili-
rubin fraction is water soluble and can therefore be 
excreted by the kidney. When measured by modifi ca-
tions of the original van den Bergh method, normal 
values of total serum bilirubin are reported between 
1 and 1.5 mg/dL with 95% of a normal population 
falling between 0.2 and 0.9 mg/dL. If the direct-acting 
fraction is less than 15% of the total, the bilirubin can 
be considered to all be indirect. The most frequently 
reported upper limit of normal for conjugated biliru-
bin is 0.3 mg/dL. 
 Elevation of the unconjugated fraction of biliru-
bin is rarely due to liver disease. An isolated elevation 
of unconjugated bilirubin is seen primarily in hemolytic 
disorders and in a number of genetic conditions such 
as Crigler-Najjar and Gilbert’s syndromes  ( Chap. 42 ) . 
Isolated unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia (bilirubin 
elevated but <15% direct) should prompt a workup for 
hemolysis  ( Fig. 36-1 ) . In the absence of hemolysis, 
an isolated, unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia in an 
otherwise healthy patient can be attributed to Gilbert’s 
syndrome, and no further evaluation is required. 
 In contrast, conjugated hyperbilirubinemia almost 
always implies liver or biliary tract disease. The rate-
limiting step in bilirubin metabolism is not conjuga-
tion of bilirubin, but rather the transport of conju-
gated bilirubin into the bile canaliculi. Thus, elevation 
of the conjugated fraction may be seen in any type of 
 EVALUATION OF LIVER FUNCTION 
 CHAPTER 36 
 
CHAPTER 36
Evaluation of Liver Function
341
liver disease. In most liver diseases, both conjugated 
and unconjugated fractions of the bilirubin tend to be 
elevated. Except in the presence of a purely uncon-
jugated hyperbilirubinemia, fractionation of the bili-
rubin is rarely helpful in determining the cause of 
jaundice.
While the degree of elevation of the serum bilirubin 
has not been critically assessed as a prognostic marker, it 
important in a number of conditions. In viral hepatitis, 
the higher the serum bilirubin, the greater the hepato-
cellular damage. Total serum bilirubin correlates with 
poor outcomes in alcoholic hepatitis. It is also a critical 
component of the Model for Endstage Liver Disease 
(MELD) score, a tool used to estimate survival of 
patients with end-stage liver disease. An elevated total 
serum bilirubin in patients with drug-induced liver dis-
ease indicates more severe injury.
Urine bilirubin
Unconjugated bilirubin always binds to albumin in the 
serum and is not filtered by the kidney. Therefore, any 
bilirubin found in the urine is conjugated bilirubin; the 
presence of bilirubinuria implies the presence of liver 
disease. A urine dipstick test can theoretically give the 
same information as fractionation of the serum bilirubin. 
This test is almost 100% accurate. Phenothiazines may 
give a false-positive reading with the Ictotest tablet. In 
patients recovering from jaundice, the urine bilirubin 
clears prior to the serum bilirubin.
Blood ammonia
Ammonia is produced in the body during normal pro-
tein metabolism and by intestinal bacteria, primar-
ily those in the colon. The liver plays a role in the 
Review drug list
Hepatitis C antibody
Hepatitis B surface Ag
Iron, TIBC, ferritin
ANA, SPEP
Ceruloplasmin
  (if patient < 40)
Ultrasound to look 
  for fatty liver
R/O Celiac disease
<15% Direct
Gilbert’s
  syndrome
Isolated elevation
of the bilirubin
Hepatocellular
pattern
(see Table 302-1)
W/U negative
W/U negative
W/U negative
Dilated ducts or
W/U negative
W/U
positive
Isolated elevation
of the alkaline
phosphatase
Cholestatic pattern
(see Table 302-1)
Consider liver biopsy
ERCP/Liver Bx
CT/ERCP
Liver Bx
Ducts not
dilated
Dilated ducts
AMA positive
AMA
  negative
Alkaline phos.
  of liver origin
Alkaline phos.
  of bone origin
Bone Eval
Ducts not dilated, but
  parenchyma abnormal
  and/or AMA positive
ERCP
Evaluation for
  hemolysis
Dubin-Johnson or
  Rotor’s syndrome
Hemolysis
Fractionate
  bilirubin
>15% Direct
Check AMA
Review drugs
Ultrasound
Liver Tests
Fractionate the alkaline
  phosphatase or check
  GGT or 5' nucleotidase
  to assess origin of
  alkaline phosphatase
Ultrasound
Review drug list
Check AMA
Liver biopsy
EVALUATION OF CHRONICALLY ABNORMAL LIVER TESTS
Figure 36-1 
Algorithm for the evaluation of chronically abnormal liver 
tests. ERCP, endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatog-
raphy; CT, computed tomography; AMA, antimitochondrial 
antibody; 
ANA, 
antinuclear 
antibody; 
SPEP, 
serum 
protein electrophoresis; TIBC, total iron-binding capacity; 
GGT, α glutamyl transpeptidase; W/U, work up.
SECTION V
Evaluation of the Patient with Liver Disease
342
detoxification of ammonia by converting it to urea, 
which is excreted by the kidneys. Striated muscle 
also plays a role in detoxification of ammonia, which 
is combined with glutamic acid to form glutamine. 
Patients with advanced liver disease typically have sig-
nificant muscle wasting, which likely contributes to 
hyperammonemia in these patients. Some physicians 
use the blood ammonia for detecting encephalopathy or 
for monitoring hepatic synthetic function, although its 
use for either of these indications has problems. There 
is very poor correlation between either the presence or 
the severity of acute encephalopathy and elevation of 
blood ammonia; it can be occasionally useful for iden-
tifying occult liver disease in patients with mental status 
changes. There is also a poor correlation of the blood 
serum ammonia and hepatic function. The ammonia 
can be elevated in patients with severe portal hyperten-
sion and portal blood shunting around the liver even in 
the presence of normal or near-normal hepatic function. 
Elevated arterial ammonia levels have been shown to 
correlate with outcome in fulminant hepatic failure.
Serum enzymes
The liver contains thousands of enzymes, some of 
which are also present in the serum in very low con-
centrations. These enzymes have no known function in 
the serum and behave like other serum proteins. They 
are distributed in the plasma and in interstitial fluid and 
have characteristic half-lives, which are usually mea-
sured in days. Very little is known about the catabolism 
of serum enzymes, although they are probably cleared 
by cells in the reticuloendothelial system. The elevation 
of a given enzyme activity in the serum is thought to 
primarily reflect its increased rate of entrance into serum 
from damaged liver cells.
Serum enzyme tests can be grouped into three 
categories: (1) enzymes whose elevation in serum 
reflects damage to hepatocytes, (2) enzymes whose ele-
vation in serum reflects cholestasis, and (3) enzyme tests 
that do not fit precisely into either pattern.
Enzymes that reflect damage to hepatocytes
The aminotransferases (transaminases) are sensitive indi-
cators of liver cell injury and are most helpful in rec-
ognizing acute hepatocellular diseases such as hepatitis. 
They include the aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and 
the alanine aminotransferase (ALT). AST is found in 
the liver, cardiac muscle, skeletal muscle, kidneys, brain, 
pancreas, lungs, leukocytes, and erythrocytes in decreas-
ing order of concentration. ALT is found primarily in 
the liver and is therefore a more specific indicator of 
liver injury. The aminotransferases are normally present 
in the serum in low concentrations. These enzymes are 
released into the blood in greater amounts when there is 
damage to the liver cell membrane resulting in increased 
permeability. Liver cell necrosis is not required for the 
release of the aminotransferases, and there is a poor cor-
relation between the degree of liver cell damage and the 
level of the aminotransferases. Thus, the absolute eleva-
tion of the aminotransferases is of no prognostic signifi-
cance in acute hepatocellular disorders.
The normal range for aminotransferases varies widely 
among laboratories, but generally ranges from 10-40 U/L. 
The inter-laboratory variation in normal range is due to 
technical reasons; no reference standards exist to estab-
lish upper limits of normal for ALT and AST. Some 
have recommended revisions of normal limits of the 
aminotransferases adjustments for sex and BMI, but oth-
ers have noted the potential costs and unclear benefits of 
implementing this change.
Any type of liver cell injury can cause modest ele-
vations in the serum aminotransferases. Levels of up to 
300 U/L are nonspecific and may be found in any type 
of liver disorder. Minimal ALT elevations in asymp-
tomatic blood donors rarely indicate severe liver disease; 
studies have shown that fatty liver disease is the most 
likely explanation. Striking elevations—i.e., aminotrans-
ferases >1000 U/L—occur almost exclusively in disor-
ders associated with extensive hepatocellular injury such 
as (1) viral hepatitis, (2) ischemic liver injury (prolonged 
hypotension or acute heart failure), or (3) toxin- or 
drug-induced liver injury.
The pattern of the aminotransferase elevation can be 
helpful diagnostically. In most acute hepatocellular dis-
orders, the ALT is higher than or equal to the AST. 
While the AST:ALT ratio is typically less than 1 in 
patients with chronic viral hepatitis and non-alcoholic 
fatty liver disease, a number of groups have noted that 
as cirrhosis develops this ratio rises to greater than 1. An 
AST:ALT ratio >2:1 is suggestive, while a ratio >3:1 
is highly suggestive of alcoholic liver disease. The AST 
in alcoholic liver disease is rarely >300 U/L, and the 
ALT is often normal. A low level of ALT in the serum 
is due to an alcohol-induced deficiency of pyridoxal 
phosphate.
The aminotransferases are usually not greatly elevated 
in obstructive jaundice. One notable exception occurs 
during the acute phase of biliary obstruction caused by 
the passage of a gallstone into the common bile duct. In 
this setting, the aminotransferases can briefly be in the 
1000–2000 U/L range. However, aminotransferase lev-
els decrease quickly, and the liver-function tests rapidly 
evolve into one typical of cholestasis.
Enzymes that reflect cholestasis
The activities of three enzymes—alkaline phosphatase, 
5′-nucleotidase, and γ-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT)—
are usually elevated in cholestasis. Alkaline phospha-
tase and 5′-nucleotidase are found in or near the bile 
 
CHAPTER 36
Evaluation of Liver Function
343
canalicular membrane of hepatocytes, while GGT is 
located in the endoplasmic reticulum and in bile duct 
epithelial cells. Reflecting its more diffuse localization 
in the liver, GGT elevation in serum is less specific for 
cholestasis than are elevations of alkaline phosphatase or 
5′-nucleotidase. Some have advocated the use of GGT 
to identify patients with occult alcohol use. Its lack of 
specificity makes its use in this setting questionable.
The normal serum alkaline phosphatase consists 
of many distinct isoenzymes found in the liver; bone; 
placenta; and, less commonly, small intestine. Patients 
over age 60 can have a mildly elevated alkaline phos-
phatase (1–1½ times normal), while individuals with 
blood types O and B can have an elevation of the 
serum alkaline phosphatase after eating a fatty meal 
due to the influx of intestinal alkaline phosphatase into 
the blood. It is also nonpathologically elevated in 
children and adolescents undergoing rapid bone 
growth, because of bone alkaline phosphatase, and late 
in normal pregnancies due to the influx of placental 
alkaline phosphatase.
Elevation of liver-derived alkaline phosphatase is 
not totally specific for cholestasis, and a less than three-
fold elevation can be seen in almost any type of liver 
disease. Alkaline phosphatase elevations greater than 
four times normal occur primarily in patients with cho-
lestatic liver disorders, infiltrative liver diseases such as 
cancer and amyloidosis, and bone conditions character-
ized by rapid bone turnover (e.g., Paget’s disease). In 
bone diseases, the elevation is due to increased amounts 
of the bone isoenzymes. In liver diseases, the elevation 
is almost always due to increased amounts of the liver 
isoenzyme.
If an elevated serum alkaline phosphatase is the 
only abnormal finding in an apparently healthy 
person, or if the degree of elevation is higher than 
expected in the clinical setting, identification of the 
source of elevated isoenzymes is helpful (Fig. 36-1). 
This problem can be approached in several ways. 
First, and most precise, is the fractionation of the 
alkaline phosphatase by electrophoresis. The sec-
ond approach is based on the observation that alka-
line phosphatases from individual tissues differ in 
susceptibility to inactivation by heat. The finding 
of an elevated serum alkaline phosphatase level in a 
patient with a heat-stable fraction strongly suggests 
that the placenta or a tumor is the source of the ele-
vated enzyme in serum. Susceptibility to inactivation 
by heat increases, respectively, for the intestinal, 
liver, and bone alkaline phosphatases, bone being 
by far the most sensitive. The third, best substanti-
ated, and most available approach involves the mea-
surement of serum 5′-nucleotidase or GGT. These 
enzymes are rarely elevated in conditions other than 
liver disease.
In the absence of jaundice or elevated aminotrans-
ferases, an elevated alkaline phosphatase of liver origin 
often, but not always, suggests early cholestasis and, less 
often, hepatic infiltration by tumor or granulomata. 
Other conditions that cause isolated elevations of the 
alkaline phosphatase include Hodgkin’s disease, diabe-
tes, hyperthyroidism, congestive heart failure, amyloi-
dosis, and inflammatory bowel disease.
The level of serum alkaline phosphatase elevation is 
not helpful in distinguishing between intrahepatic and 
extrahepatic cholestasis. There is essentially no differ-
ence among the values found in obstructive jaundice 
due to cancer, common duct stone, sclerosing cholan-
gitis, or bile duct stricture. Values are similarly increased 
in patients with intrahepatic cholestasis due to drug-
induced hepatitis; primary biliary cirrhosis; rejection of 
transplanted livers; and, rarely, alcohol-induced steato-
hepatitis. Values are also greatly elevated in hepatobiliary 
disorders seen in patients with AIDS (e.g., AIDS chol-
angiopathy due to cytomegalovirus or cryptosporidial 
infection and tuberculosis with hepatic involvement).
Tests that Measure Biosynthetic 
Function of the Liver
Serum albumin
Serum albumin is synthesized exclusively by hepato-
cytes. Serum albumin has a long half-life: 18–20 days, 
with ∼4% degraded per day. Because of this slow turn-
over, the serum albumin is not a good indicator of acute 
or mild hepatic dysfunction; only minimal changes in 
the serum albumin are seen in acute liver conditions 
such as viral hepatitis, drug-related hepatoxicity, and 
obstructive jaundice. In hepatitis, albumin levels <3 g/dL 
should raise the possibility of chronic liver disease. 
Hypoalbuminemia is more common in chronic liver 
disorders such as cirrhosis and usually reflects severe 
liver damage and decreased albumin synthesis. One 
exception is the patient with ascites in whom synthe-
sis may be normal or even increased, but levels are low 
because of the increased volume of distribution. How-
ever, hypoalbuminemia is not specific for liver disease 
and may occur in protein malnutrition of any cause, 
as well as protein-losing enteropathies, nephrotic syn-
drome, and chronic infections that are associated with 
prolonged increases in levels of serum interleukin 1 
and/or tumor necrosis factor, cytokines that inhibit 
albumin synthesis. Serum albumin should not be mea-
sured for screening in patients in whom there is no sus-
picion of liver disease. A general medical clinic study of 
consecutive patients in whom no indications were pres-
ent for albumin measurement showed that while 12% 
of patients had abnormal test results, the finding was of 
clinical importance in only 0.4%.
SECTION V
Evaluation of the Patient with Liver Disease
344
Serum globulins
Serum globulins are a group of proteins made up of 
γ globulins (immunoglobulins) produced by B lym-
phocytes and α and β globulins produced primarily in 
hepatocytes. γ Globulins are increased in chronic liver 
disease, such as chronic hepatitis and cirrhosis. In cir-
rhosis, the increased serum gamma globulin concentra-
tion is due to the increased synthesis of antibodies, some 
of which are directed against intestinal bacteria. This 
occurs because the cirrhotic liver fails to clear bacte-
rial antigens that normally reach the liver through the 
hepatic circulation.
Increases in the concentration of specific isotypes of 
γ globulins are often helpful in the recognition of cer-
tain chronic liver diseases. Diffuse polyclonal increases 
in IgG levels are common in autoimmune hepatitis; 
increases >100% should alert the clinician to this 
possibility. Increases in the IgM levels are common in 
primary biliary cirrhosis, while increases in the IgA lev-
els occur in alcoholic liver disease.
Coagulation Factors
With the exception of factor VIII, which is produced 
by vascular endothelial cells, the blood clotting factors 
are made exclusively in hepatocytes. Their serum half-
lives are much shorter than albumin, ranging from 6 h 
for factor VII to 5 days for fibrinogen. Because of their 
rapid turnover, measurement of the clotting factors is 
the single best acute measure of hepatic synthetic func-
tion and helpful in both the diagnosis and assessing the 
prognosis of acute parenchymal liver disease. Useful for 
this purpose is the serum prothrombin time, which collec-
tively measures factors II, V, VII, and X. Biosynthesis of 
factors II, VII, IX, and X depends on vitamin K. The 
international normalized ratio (INR) is used to express 
the degree of anticoagulation on warfarin therapy. 
The INR standardizes prothrombin time measurement 
according to the characteristics of the thromboplastin 
reagent used in a particular lab which is expressed as an 
International Sensitivity Index (ISI); the ISI is then used 
in calculating the INR. Because the ISI is validated only 
for patients on vitamin K antagonists, there has been 
concern regarding the validity of using it for patients 
with chronic liver disease.
The prothrombin time may be elevated in hepatitis 
and cirrhosis as well as in disorders that lead to vitamin K 
 deficiency such as obstructive jaundice or fat malab-
sorption of any kind. Marked prolongation of the pro-
thrombin time, >5 s above control and not corrected 
by parenteral vitamin K administration, is a poor prog-
nostic sign in acute viral hepatitis and other acute and 
chronic liver diseases. The INR, along with the total 
serum bilirubin and creatinine, are components of the 
MELD score which is used to allocate organs for liver 
transplantation.
Other Diagnostic Tests
While tests may direct the physician to a category of 
liver disease, additional radiologic testing and proce-
dures are often necessary to make the proper diagnosis, 
as shown in Fig. 36-1. The two most commonly used 
ancillary tests are reviewed here.
Percutaneous liver biopsy
Percutaneous biopsy of the liver is a safe procedure 
that can be easily performed at the bedside with local 
anesthesia and ultrasound guidance. Liver biopsy is of 
proven value in the following situations: (1) hepatocel-
lular disease of uncertain cause, (2) prolonged hepatitis 
with the possibility of chronic active hepatitis, (3) unex-
plained hepatomegaly, (4) unexplained splenomegaly, 
(5) hepatic filling defects by radiologic imaging, 
(6) fever of unknown origin, (7) staging of malignant 
lymphoma. Liver biopsy is most accurate in disorders 
causing diffuse changes throughout the liver and is 
subject to sampling error in focal infiltrative disorders 
such as hepatic metastases. Liver biopsy should not be 
the initial procedure in the diagnosis of cholestasis. The 
biliary tree should first be assessed for signs of obstruc-
tion. Contraindications to performing a percutaneous 
liver biopsy include significant ascites and prolonged 
INR. Under these circumstances, the biopsy can be 
performed via the transjugular approach.
Ultrasonography
Ultrasonography is the first diagnostic test to use in 
patients whose liver tests suggest cholestasis, to look 
for the presence of a dilated intrahepatic or extrahe-
patic biliary tree or to identify gallstones. In addition, 
it shows space-occupying lesions within the liver, 
enables the clinician to distinguish between cystic and 
solid masses, and helps direct percutaneous biopsies. 
Ultrasound with Doppler imaging can detect the 
patency of the portal vein, hepatic artery, and hepatic 
veins and determine the direction of blood flow. This 
is the first test ordered in patients suspected of having 
Budd-Chiari syndrome.
Use of Liver Tests
As previously noted, the best way to increase the sen-
sitivity and specificity of laboratory tests in the detec-
tion of liver disease is to employ a battery of tests that 
includes the aminotransferases, alkaline phosphatase, 
 
CHAPTER 36
Evaluation of Liver Function
345
bilirubin, albumin, and prothrombin time along with 
the judicious use of the other tests described in this 
chapter. Table 36-1 shows how patterns of liver tests 
can lead the clinician to a category of disease that will 
direct further evaluation. However, it is important to 
remember that no single set of liver tests will necessarily 
provide a diagnosis. It is often necessary to repeat these 
tests on several occasions over days to weeks for a diag-
nostic pattern to emerge. Figure 36-1 is an algorithm 
for the evaluation of chronically abnormal liver tests.
Table 36-1 
Liver Test Patterns in Hepatobiliary Disorders
Type of Disorder
Bilirubin
Aminotransferases
Alkaline 
Phosphatase
Albumin
Prothrombin Time
Hemolysis/Gilbert’s 
syndrome
Normal to 86 μmol/L 
(5 mg/dL)
85% due to indirect 
fractions
No bilirubinuria
Normal
Normal
Normal
Normal
Acute  
hepatocellular 
necrosis (viral and 
drug hepatitis, 
hepatotoxins, acute 
heart failure)
Both fractions may 
be elevated
Peak usually follows 
aminotransferases
Bilirubinuria
Elevated, often  
>500 IU ALT >AST
Normal to  
<3 times nor-
mal elevation
Normal
Usually normal. If 
>5X above control 
and not corrected 
by parenteral  
vitamin K,  
suggests poor 
prognosis
Chronic  
hepatocellular  
disorders
Both fractions may 
be elevated
Bilirubinuria
Elevated, but usually 
<300 IU
Normal to  
<3 times nor-
mal elevation
Often 
decreased
Often prolonged 
Fails to correct 
with parenteral 
vitamin K
Alcoholic hepatitis 
Cirrhosis
Both fractions may 
be elevated
Bilirubinuria
AST:ALT > 2 suggests 
alcoholic hepatitis or 
cirrhosis
Normal to  
<3 times nor-
mal elevation
Often 
decreased
Often prolonged 
Fails to correct 
with parenteral 
vitamin K
Intra- and  
extra-hepatic  
cholestasis 
(Obstructive  
jaundice)
Both fractions may 
be elevated
Bilirubinuria
Normal to moderate 
elevation
Rarely >500 IU
Elevated, often 
>4 times nor-
mal elevation
Normal, 
unless 
chronic
Normal
If prolonged, will 
correct with  
parenteral vitamin K
Infiltrative  
diseases (tumor, 
granulomata); partial 
bile duct obstruction
Usually normal
Normal to slight 
elevation
Elevated, often 
>4 times  
normal  
elevation
Fractionate, or 
confirm liver 
origin with  
5′ nucleotidase 
or γ glutamyl 
transpeptidase
Normal
Normal
This page intentionally left blank 
Disorders of  
the Liver and  
Biliary Tree
SECTION VI
 allan W. Wolkoff 
348
 BiliruBin MetaBolisM 
 The details of bilirubin metabolism are presented in 
 Chap. 42 . However, the hyperbilirubinemias are best 
understood in terms of perturbations of specifi c aspects 
of bilirubin metabolism and transport, and these will be 
briefl y reviewed here as depicted in  Fig. 37-1 . 
 Bilirubin is the end product of heme degradation. 
Some 70–90% of bilirubin is derived from degrada-
tion of the hemoglobin of senescent red blood cells. 
Bilirubin produced in the periphery is transported to the 
liver within the plasma, where, due to its insolubility in 
 THE HYPERBILIRUBINEMIAS 
 cHapter 37 
aqueous solutions, it is tightly bound to albumin. Under 
normal circumstances, bilirubin is removed from the 
circulation rapidly and effi ciently by hepatocytes. Trans-
fer of bilirubin from blood to bile involves four distinct 
but interrelated steps ( Fig. 37-1 ). 
1. Hepatocellular uptake: Uptake of bilirubin by the 
hepatocyte has carrier-mediated kinetics. Although a 
number of candidate bilirubin transporters have been 
proposed, the actual transporter remains elusive. 
2. Intracellular binding: Within the hepatocyte, bilirubin 
is kept in solution by binding as a nonsubstrate 
ligand to several of the glutathione-S-transferases, 
formerly called ligandins. 
3. Conjugation: Bilirubin is conjugated with one or 
two glucuronic acid moieties by a specifi c UDP-
glucuronosyltransferase to form bilirubin mono- and 
diglucuronide, respectively. Conjugation disrupts 
the internal hydrogen bonding that limits aque-
ous solubility of bilirubin, and the resulting gluc-
uronide conjugates are highly soluble in water. 
Conjugation is obligatory for excretion of bilirubin 
across the bile canalicular membrane into bile. The 
UDP-glucuronosyltransferases have been classifi ed 
into gene families based on the degree of homology 
among the mRNAs for the various isoforms. Those 
that conjugate bilirubin and certain other substrates 
have been designated the  UGT1 family. These are 
expressed from a single gene complex by alternative 
promoter usage. This gene complex contains mul-
tiple substrate-specifi c fi rst exons, designated A1, 
A2, etc.  ( Fig. 37-2 ) , each with its own promoter 
and each encoding the amino-terminal half of a spe-
cifi c isoform. In addition, there are four common 
exons (exons 2–5) that encode the shared carboxyl-
terminal half of all of the  UGT1 isoforms. The vari-
ous fi rst exons encode the specifi c aglycone substrate 
binding sites for each isoform, while the shared 
exons encode the binding site for the sugar donor, 
UDP-glucuronic acid, and the transmembrane 
BMG
BMG
BDG
BDG
MRP2
UCB
BT
ALB
UCB
Sinusoid
ALB:UCB
Space
of
Disse
UCB
+
GST
GST:UCB
MRP2
UGT1A1
UGT1A1
 Figure 37-1  
hepatocellular bilirubin transport. Albumin-bound bilirubin 
in sinusoidal blood passes through endothelial cell fenestrae 
to reach the hepatocyte surface, entering the cell by both 
facilitated and simple diffusional processes. Within the cell 
it is bound to glutathione-S-transferases and conjugated by 
bilirubin-UDP-glucuronosyltransferase (UGT1A1) to mono-
and diglucuronides, which are actively transported across 
the canalicular membrane into the bile. ALB, albumin; 
BDG, bilirubin diglucuronide; BMG, bilirubin monoglucuro-
nide; BT, proposed bilirubin transporter; GST, glutathione-S-
transferase; MRP2, multidrug resistance–associated protein 
2; UCB, unconjugated bilirubin; UGT1A1, bilirubin-UDP-
glucuronosyltransferase. 
 
CHAPTER 37
The Hyperbilirubinemias
349
domain. Exon A1 and the four common exons, col-
lectively designated the UGT1A1 gene (Fig. 37-2), 
encode the physiologically critical enzyme bilirubin-
UDP-glucuronosyltransferase (UGT1A1). A func-
tional corollary of the organization of the UGT1 
gene is that a mutation in one of the first exons 
will affect only a single enzyme isoform. By con-
trast, a mutation in exons 2–5 will alter all isoforms 
encoded by the UGT1 gene complex.
4.	 Biliary excretion: Bilirubin mono- and diglucuronides 
are excreted across the canalicular plasma membrane 
into the bile canaliculus by an ATP-dependent 
transport process mediated by a canalicular mem-
brane protein called multidrug resistance–associated 
protein 2 (MRP2). Mutations of MRP2 result in the 
Dubin-Johnson syndrome (see below).
Extrahepatic Aspects of  
Bilirubin Disposition
Bilirubin in the gut
Following secretion into bile, conjugated bilirubin 
reaches the duodenum and passes down the gastro-
intestinal tract without reabsorption by the intestinal 
mucosa. An appreciable fraction is converted by bacte-
rial metabolism in the gut to the water-soluble color-
less compound urobilinogen. Urobilinogen undergoes 
enterohepatic cycling. Urobilinogen not taken up by 
the liver reaches the systemic circulation, from which 
some is cleared by the kidneys. Unconjugated bilirubin 
ordinarily does not reach the gut except in neonates or, by 
ill-defined alternative pathways, in the presence of severe 
unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia [e.g., Crigler-Najjar 
syndrome, type I (CN-I)]. Unconjugated bilirubin that 
reaches the gut is partly reabsorbed, amplifying any 
underlying hyperbilirubinemia. Recent reports suggest 
that oral administration of calcium phosphate with or 
without the lipase inhibitor orlistat may be an efficient 
means to interrupt bilirubin enterohepatic cycling to 
reduce serum bilirubin levels in this situation. Although 
orlistat administration for 4–6 weeks to 16 patients with 
Crigler-Najjar syndrome was associated with a 10-20% 
decrease in serum bilirubin in 7 patients, the cost and 
side effects (i.e., diarrhea) may obviate the small benefit 
achievable with this treatment.
Renal excretion of bilirubin conjugates
Unconjugated bilirubin is not excreted in urine, as it is 
too tightly bound to albumin for effective glomerular 
filtration and there is no tubular mechanism for its renal 
secretion. In contrast, the bilirubin conjugates are read-
ily filtered at the glomerulus and can appear in urine in 
disorders characterized by increased bilirubin conjugates 
in the circulation.
Disorders of Bilirubin Metabolism 
Leading to Unconjugated 
Hyperbilirubinemia
Increased Bilirubin Production
Hemolysis
Increased destruction of erythrocytes leads to increased 
bilirubin turnover and unconjugated hyperbilirubi-
nemia; the hyperbilirubinemia is usually modest in 
500 kb
A13 A12 A11 A10
A9
A8
A7
A6
A5
A4
A3
A2
A1
Common Exons
2
3
4
5
~245 AA
~286 AA
TATA Box
A(TA)6TAA
Variable (Substrate Specific) First Exons
5
3
Figure 37-2 
Structural organization of the human UGT1 gene 
complex. This large complex on chromosome 2 contains at 
least 13 substrate-specific first exons (A1, A2, etc.). Since 
four of these are pseudogenes, nine UGT1 isoforms with 
differing substrate specificities are expressed. Each exon 
1 has its own promoter and encodes the amino-terminal 
substrate-specific ∼286 amino acids of the various UGT1-
encoded isoforms, and common exons 2–5 that encode the 
245 carboxyl-terminal amino acids common to all of the 
isoforms. mRNAs for specific isoforms are assembled by 
splicing a particular first exon such as the bilirubin-specific 
exon A1 to exons 2 to 5. The resulting message encodes 
a complete enzyme, in this particular case bilirubin-UDP-
glucuronosyltransferase (UGT1A1). Mutations in a first exon 
affect only a single isoform. Those in exons 2–5 affect all 
enzymes encoded by the UGT1 complex.
SECTION VI
Disorders of the Liver and Biliary Tree
350
the presence of normal liver function. In particular, 
the bone marrow is only capable of a sustained eight-
fold increase in erythrocyte production in response to 
a hemolytic stress. Therefore, hemolysis alone cannot 
result in a sustained hyperbilirubinemia of more than 
∼68 μmol/L (4 mg/dL). Higher values imply concom-
itant hepatic dysfunction. When hemolysis is the only 
abnormality in an otherwise healthy individual, the 
result is a purely unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia, with 
the direct-reacting fraction as measured in a typical clin-
ical laboratory being ≤15% of the total serum bilirubin. 
In the presence of systemic disease, which may include 
a degree of hepatic dysfunction, hemolysis may produce a 
component of conjugated hyperbilirubinemia in addition 
to an elevated unconjugated bilirubin concentration. 
Prolonged hemolysis may lead to the precipitation 
of bilirubin salts within the gallbladder or biliary tree, 
resulting in the formation of gallstones in which biliru-
bin, rather than cholesterol, is the major component. 
Such pigment stones may lead to acute or chronic cho-
lecystitis, biliary obstruction, or any other biliary tract 
consequence of calculous disease.
Ineffective erythropoiesis
During erythroid maturation, small amounts of hemo-
globin may be lost at the time of nuclear extrusion, 
and a fraction of developing erythroid cells is destroyed 
within the marrow. These processes normally account 
for a small proportion of bilirubin that is produced. In 
various disorders, including thalassemia major, megalo-
blastic anemias due to folate or vitamin B12 deficiency, 
congenital erythropoietic porphyria, lead poisoning, 
and various congenital and acquired dyserythropoi-
etic anemias, the fraction of total bilirubin production 
derived from ineffective erythropoiesis is increased, 
reaching as much as 70% of the total. This may be suf-
ficient to produce modest degrees of unconjugated 
hyperbilirubinemia.
Miscellaneous
Degradation of the hemoglobin of extravascular collec-
tions of erythrocytes, such as those seen in massive tis-
sue infarctions or large hematomas, may lead transiently 
to unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia.
Decreased Hepatic Bilirubin 
Clearance
Decreased hepatic uptake
Decreased hepatic bilirubin uptake is believed to con-
tribute to the unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia of 
Gilbert’s syndrome (GS), although the molecular basis 
for this finding remains unclear (see below). Several 
drugs, including flavaspidic acid, novobiocin, and 
rifampin, as well as various cholecystographic contrast 
agents, have been reported to inhibit bilirubin uptake. 
The resulting unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia resolves 
with cessation of the medication.
Impaired conjugation
Physiologic neonatal jaundice
Bilirubin produced by the fetus is cleared by the pla-
centa and eliminated by the maternal liver. Immediately 
after birth, the neonatal liver must assume responsibility 
for bilirubin clearance and excretion. However, many 
hepatic physiologic processes are incompletely devel-
oped at birth. Levels of UGT1A1 are low, and alterna-
tive excretory pathways allow passage of unconjugated 
bilirubin into the gut. Since the intestinal flora that 
convert bilirubin to urobilinogen are also undeveloped, 
an enterohepatic circulation of unconjugated bilirubin 
ensues. As a consequence, most neonates develop mild 
unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia between days 2 and 
5 after birth. Peak levels are typically <85–170 μmol/L 
(5–10 mg/dL) and decline to normal adult concentra-
tions within 2 weeks, as mechanisms required for bili-
rubin disposition mature. Prematurity, often associated 
with more profound immaturity of hepatic function 
and hemolysis, can result in higher levels of unconju-
gated hyperbilirubinemia. A rapidly rising unconjugated 
bilirubin concentration, or absolute levels >340 μmol/L 
(20 mg/dL), puts the infant at risk for bilirubin encepha-
lopathy, or kernicterus. Under these circumstances, 
bilirubin crosses an immature blood-brain barrier and 
precipitates in the basal ganglia and other areas of the 
brain. The consequences range from appreciable neu-
rologic deficits to death. Treatment options include 
phototherapy, which converts bilirubin into water-sol-
uble photoisomers that are excreted directly into bile, 
and exchange transfusion. The canalicular mechanisms 
responsible for bilirubin excretion are also immature 
at birth, and their maturation may lag behind that of 
UGT1A1; this can lead to transient conjugated neonatal 
hyperbilirubinemia, especially in infants with hemolysis.
Acquired conjugation defects
A modest reduction in bilirubin-conjugating capacity 
may be observed in advanced hepatitis or cirrhosis. 
However, in this setting, conjugation is better preserved 
than other aspects of bilirubin disposition, such as cana-
licular excretion. Various drugs, including pregnanediol, 
novobiocin, chloramphenicol, and gentamicin, may 
produce unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia by inhibiting 
UGT1A1 activity. Bilirubin conjugation may be inhib-
ited by certain fatty acids that are present in breast milk 
but not serum of mothers whose infants have exces-
sive neonatal hyperbilirubinemia (breast milk jaundice). 
Alternatively, there may be increased enterohepatic 
 
CHAPTER 37
The Hyperbilirubinemias
351
circulation of bilirubin in these infants. A recent study 
has correlated epidermal growth factor (EGF) content 
of breast milk with elevated bilirubin levels in these 
infants; however, a cause and effect relationship remains 
to be established. The pathogenesis of breast milk jaundice 
appears to differ from that of transient familial neona-
tal hyperbilirubinemia (Lucey-Driscoll syndrome), in 
which there is a UGT1A1 inhibitor in maternal serum.
Hereditary Defects in Bilirubin 
Conjugation
Three familial disorders characterized by differing 
degrees of unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia have long 
been recognized. The defining clinical features of each 
are described below (Table 37-1). While these disor-
ders have been recognized for decades to reflect dif-
fering degrees of deficiency in the ability to conjugate 
bilirubin, recent advances in the molecular biology of 
the UGT1 gene complex have elucidated their inter­
relationships and clarified previously puzzling features.
Crigler-Najjar syndrome, type I
CN-I is characterized by striking unconjugated hyper-
bilirubinemia of about 340–765 μmol/L (20–45 mg/dL) 
that appears in the neonatal period and persists for life. 
Other conventional hepatic biochemical tests such as 
serum aminotransferases and alkaline phosphatase are 
normal, and there is no evidence of hemolysis. Hepatic 
histology is also essentially normal except for the occa-
sional presence of bile plugs within canaliculi. Bili-
rubin glucuronides are virtually absent from the bile, 
and there is no detectable constitutive expression of 
UGT1A1 activity in hepatic tissue. Neither UGT1A1 
activity nor the serum bilirubin concentration responds 
to administration of phenobarbital or other enzyme 
inducers. In the absence of conjugation, unconjugated 
bilirubin accumulates in plasma, from which it is elimi-
nated very slowly by alternative pathways that include 
direct passage into the bile and small intestine. These 
account for the small amounts of urobilinogen found in 
feces. No bilirubin is found in the urine. First described 
in 1952, the disorder is rare (estimated prevalence, 
0.6–1.0 per million). Many patients are from geographically 
or socially isolated communities in which consanguinity 
is common, and pedigree analyses show an autosomal 
recessive pattern of inheritance. The majority of patients 
(type IA) exhibit defects in the glucuronide conjuga-
tion of a spectrum of substrates in addition to bilirubin, 
including various drugs and other xenobiotics. These 
individuals have mutations in one of the common exons 
(2–5) of the UGT1 gene (Fig. 37-2). In a smaller subset 
(type IB), the defect is limited largely to bilirubin con-
jugation, and the causative mutation is in the bilirubin-
specific exon A1. Estrogen glucuronidation is mediated 
by UGT1A1 and is defective in all CN-I patients. More 
than 30 different genetic lesions of UGT1A1 respon-
sible for CN-I have been identified, including dele-
tions, insertions, alterations in intron splice donor and 
Table 37-1
Principal Differential Characteristics of Gilbert’s and Crigler-Najjar Syndromes
Crigler-Najjar Syndrome
Feature
Type I
Type II
Gilbert’s Syndrome
Total serum bilirubin, 
μmol/L (mg/dL)
310–755 (usually >345)
[18–45 (usually >20)]
100–430 (usually ≤345)
[6–25 (usually ≤20)]
Typically ≤70 μmol/L (≤4 mg/dL) in 
absence of fasting or hemolysis
Routine liver tests
Normal
Normal
Normal
Response to phenobarbital
None
Decreases bilirubin by >25%
Decreases bilirubin to normal
Kernicterus
Usual
Rare
No
Hepatic histology
Normal
Normal
Usually normal; increased lipofuscin 
pigment in some
Bile characteristics
Color
Pale or colorless
Pigmented
Normal dark color
Bilirubin fractions
>90% unconjugated
Largest fraction (mean: 57%) 
monoconjugates
Mainly diconjugates but  
monoconjugates increased  
(mean: 23%)
Bilirubin UDP- 
glucuronosyltransferase 
activity
Typically absent; traces 
in some patients
Markedly reduced: 0–10% of 
normal
Reduced: typically 10–33% of  
normal
Inheritance (all autosomal)
Recessive
Predominantly recessive
Promoter mutation: recessive
Missense mutations: 7 of 8 dominant; 
1 reportedly recessive
SECTION VI
Disorders of the Liver and Biliary Tree
352
acceptor sites, exon skipping, and point mutations that 
introduce premature stop codons or alter critical amino 
acids. Their common feature is that they all encode 
proteins with absent or, at most, traces of bilirubin-
UDP-glucuronosyltransferase enzymatic activity.
Prior to the availability of phototherapy, most 
patients with CN-I died of bilirubin encephalopathy 
(kernicterus) in infancy or early childhood. A few lived 
as long as early adult life without overt neurologic 
damage, although more subtle testing usually indicated 
mild but progressive brain damage. In the absence of 
liver transplantation, death eventually supervened from 
late-onset bilirubin encephalopathy, which often fol-
lowed a nonspecific febrile illness. Although isolated 
hepatocyte transplantation has been used in a small 
number of cases of CN-I, early liver transplantation 
(Chap. 310) remains the best hope to prevent brain 
injury and death.
Crigler-Najjar syndrome, type II (CN-II)
This condition was recognized as a distinct entity in 
1962 and is characterized by marked unconjugated 
hyperbilirubinemia in the absence of abnormalities of 
other conventional hepatic biochemical tests, hepatic 
histology, or hemolysis. It differs from CN-I in several 
specific ways (Table 37-1): (1) Although there is con-
siderable overlap, average bilirubin concentrations are 
lower in CN-II; (2) accordingly, CN-II is only infre-
quently associated with kernicterus; (3) bile is deeply 
colored, and bilirubin glucuronides are present, with 
a striking, characteristic increase in the proportion of 
monoglucuronides; (4) UGT1A1 in liver is usually pres-
ent at reduced levels (typically ≤10% of normal) but 
may be undetectable by older, less sensitive assays; 
(5) while typically detected in infancy, hyperbilirubinemia 
was not recognized in some cases until later in life and, 
in one instance, at age 34. As with CN-I, most CN-II 
cases exhibit abnormalities in the conjugation of other 
compounds, such as salicylamide and menthol, but in 
some instances the defect appears limited to bilirubin. 
Reduction of serum bilirubin concentrations by >25% 
in response to enzyme inducers such as phenobarbital 
distinguishes CN-II from CN-I, although this response 
may not be elicited in early infancy and often is 
not accompanied by measurable UGT1A1 induction. 
Bilirubin concentrations during phenobarbital adminis-
tration do not return to normal but are typically in the 
range of 51–86 μmol/L (3–5 mg/dL). Although the 
incidence of kernicterus in CN-II is low, instances have 
occurred, not only in infants but also in adolescents and 
adults, often in the setting of an intercurrent illness, fast-
ing, or another factor that temporarily raises the serum 
bilirubin concentration above baseline and reduces 
serum albumin levels. For this reason, phenobarbital 
therapy is widely recommended, a single bedtime dose 
often sufficing to maintain clinically safe plasma biliru-
bin concentrations.
Over 77 different mutations in the UGT1 gene have 
been identified as causing CN-I or CN-II. It was found 
that missense mutations are more common in CN-II 
patients, as would be expected in this less severe phe-
notype. Their common feature is that they encode for a 
bilirubin-UDP-glucuronosyltransferase with markedly 
reduced, but detectable, enzymatic activity. The spectrum 
of residual enzyme activity explains the spectrum of 
phenotypic severity of the resulting hyperbilirubinemia. 
Molecular analysis has established that a large majority 
of CN-II patients are either homozygotes or compound 
heterozygotes for CN-II mutations and that individu-
als carrying one mutated and one entirely normal allele 
have normal bilirubin concentrations.
Gilbert’s syndrome
This syndrome is characterized by mild unconju-
gated hyperbilirubinemia, normal values for standard 
hepatic biochemical tests, and normal hepatic histol-
ogy other than a modest increase of lipofuscin pigment 
in some patients. Serum bilirubin concentrations are 
most often <51 μmol/L (<3 mg/dL), although both 
higher and lower values are frequent. The clinical spec-
trum of hyperbilirubinemia fades into that of CN-II 
at serum bilirubin concentrations of 86–136 μmol/L 
(5–8 mg/dL). At the other end of the scale, the dis-
tinction between mild cases of GS and a normal state 
is often blurred. Bilirubin concentrations may fluctuate 
substantially in any given individual, and at least 25% 
of patients will exhibit temporarily normal values dur-
ing prolonged follow-up. More elevated values are asso-
ciated with stress, fatigue, alcohol use, reduced caloric 
intake, and intercurrent illness, while increased caloric 
intake or administration of enzyme-inducing agents 
produces lower bilirubin levels. GS is most often diag-
nosed at or shortly after puberty or in adult life during 
routine examinations that include multichannel bio-
chemical analyses. UGT1A1 activity is typically reduced 
to 10–35% of normal, and bile pigments exhibit a char-
acteristic increase in bilirubin monoglucuronides. Studies 
of radiobilirubin kinetics indicate that hepatic biliru-
bin clearance is reduced to an average of one-third of 
normal. Administration of phenobarbital normalizes 
both the serum bilirubin concentration and hepatic bili-
rubin clearance; however, failure of UGT1A1 activity 
to improve in many such instances suggests the pos-
sible coexistence of an additional defect. Compartmen-
tal analysis of bilirubin kinetic data suggests that GS 
patients have a defect in bilirubin uptake as well as in 
conjugation. Defect(s) in the hepatic uptake of other 
organic anions that at least partially share an uptake 
 
CHAPTER 37
The Hyperbilirubinemias
353
mechanism with bilirubin, such as sulfobromophtha-
lein and indocyanine green (ICG), are observed in a 
minority of patients. The metabolism and transport of 
bile acids that do not utilize the bilirubin uptake mech-
anism, are normal. The magnitude of changes in the 
plasma bilirubin concentration induced by provocation 
tests such as 48 hours of fasting or the IV administration 
of nicotinic acid have been reported to be of help in 
separating GS patients from normal individuals. Other 
studies dispute this assertion. Moreover, on theoreti-
cal grounds, the results of such studies should provide 
no more information than simple measurements of the 
baseline plasma bilirubin concentration. Family studies 
indicate that GS and hereditary hemolytic anemias such 
as hereditary spherocytosis, glucose-6-phosphate dehy-
drogenase deficiency, and β-thalassemia trait sort inde-
pendently. Reports of hemolysis in up to 50% of GS 
patients are believed to reflect better case finding, since 
patients with both GS and hemolysis have higher biliru-
bin concentrations, and are more likely to be jaundiced, 
than patients with either defect alone.
GS is common, with many series placing its preva-
lence at ≥8%. Males predominate over females by 
reported ratios ranging from 1.5:1 to >7:1. However, 
these ratios may have a large artifactual component 
since normal males have higher mean bilirubin levels 
than normal females, but the diagnosis of GS is often 
based on comparison to normal ranges established in 
men. The high prevalence of GS in the general popula-
tion may explain the reported frequency of mild uncon-
jugated hyperbilirubinemia in liver transplant recipients. 
The disposition of most xenobiotics metabolized by 
glucuronidation appears to be normal in GS, as is oxida-
tive drug metabolism in the majority of reported stud-
ies. The principal exception is the metabolism of the 
antitumor agent irinotecan (CPT-11), whose active 
metabolite (SN-38) is glucuronidated specifically by 
bilirubin-UDP-glucuronosyltransferase. Administration of 
CPT-11 to patients with GS has resulted in several tox-
icities, including intractable diarrhea and myelosup-
pression. Some reports also suggest abnormal disposition 
of menthol, estradiol benzoate, acetaminophen, tolbuta-
mide, and rifamycin SV. Although some of these studies 
have been disputed, and there have been no reports of 
clinical complications from use of these agents in GS, 
prudence should be exercised in prescribing them, or 
any agents metabolized primarily by glucuronidation, 
in this condition. It should also be noted that the HIV 
protease inhibitors indinavir and atazanavir (Chap. 189) 
can inhibit UGT1A1, resulting in hyperbilirubinemia 
that is most pronounced in patients with preexisting GS.
Most older pedigree studies of GS were consistent 
with autosomal dominant inheritance with variable 
expressivity. However, studies of the UGT1 gene in 
GS have indicated a variety of molecular genetic bases 
for the phenotypic picture and several different pat-
terns of inheritance. Studies in Europe and the United 
States found that nearly all patients had normal cod-
ing regions for UGT1A1 but were homozygous for 
the insertion of an extra TA (i.e., A[TA]7TAA rather 
than A[TA]6TAA) in the promoter region of the first 
exon. This appeared to be necessary, but not suffi-
cient, for clinically expressed GS, since 15% of normal 
controls were also homozygous for this variant. While 
normal by standard criteria, these individuals had some-
what higher bilirubin concentrations than the rest of 
the controls studied. Heterozygotes for this abnormality 
had bilirubin concentrations identical to those homozy-
gous for the normal A[TA]6TAA allele. The prevalence 
of the A[TA]7TAA allele in a general Western popula-
tion is 30%, in which case 9% would be homozygotes. 
This is slightly higher than the prevalence of GS based 
on purely phenotypic parameters. It was suggested that 
additional variables, such as mild hemolysis or a defect 
in bilirubin uptake, might be among the factors enhanc-
ing phenotypic expression of the defect.
Phenotypic expression of GS due solely to the 
A[TA]7TAA promoter abnormality is inherited as an 
autosomal recessive trait. A number of CN-II kindreds 
have been identified in whom there is also an allele 
containing a normal coding region but the A[TA]7TAA 
promoter abnormality. CN-II heterozygotes who have 
the A[TA]6TAA promoter are phenotypically normal, 
whereas those with the A[TA]7TAA promoter express 
the phenotypic picture of GS. GS in such kindreds may 
also result from homozygosity for the A[TA]7TAA pro-
moter abnormality. Seven different missense mutations 
in the UGT1 gene that reportedly cause GS with domi-
nant inheritance have been found in Japanese individu-
als. Another Japanese patient with mild unconjugated 
hyperbilirubinemia was homozygous for a missense 
mutation in exon 5. GS in her family appeared to be 
recessive. Missense mutations causing GS have not been 
reported outside of certain Asian populations.
Disorders of Bilirubin 
Metabolism Leading to Mixed 
or Predominantly Conjugated 
Hyperbilirubinemia
In hyperbilirubinemia due to acquired liver disease 
(e.g., acute hepatitis, common bile duct stone), there 
are usually elevations in the serum concentrations of 
both conjugated and unconjugated bilirubin. Although 
biliary tract obstruction or hepatocellular cholestatic 
injury may present on occasion with a predominantly 
conjugated hyperbilirubinemia, it is generally not pos-
sible to differentiate intrahepatic from extrahepatic 
causes of jaundice based on the serum levels or relative 
SECTION VI
Disorders of the Liver and Biliary Tree
354
proportions of unconjugated and conjugated bilirubin. 
The major reason for determining the amounts of con-
jugated and unconjugated bilirubin in the serum is for 
the initial differentiation of hepatic parenchymal and 
obstructive disorders (mixed conjugated and uncon-
jugated hyperbilirubinemia) from the inheritable and 
hemolytic disorders discussed above that are associated 
with unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia.
Familial Defects in Hepatic 
Excretory Function
Dubin-Johnson syndrome (DJS)
This benign, relatively rare disorder is characterized by 
low-grade, predominantly conjugated hyperbilirubinemia 
(Table 37-2). Total bilirubin concentrations are typi-
cally between 34 and 85 μmol/L (2 and 5 mg/dL) but 
on occasion can be in the normal range or as high as 
340–430 μmol/L (20–25 mg/dL) and can fluctuate 
widely in any given patient. The degree of hyperbili-
rubinemia may be increased by intercurrent illness, oral 
contraceptive use, and pregnancy. As the hyperbilirubi-
nemia is due to a predominant rise in conjugated biliru-
bin, bilirubinuria is characteristically present. Aside from 
elevated serum bilirubin levels, other routine laboratory 
tests are normal. Physical examination is usually normal 
except for jaundice, although an occasional patient may 
have hepatosplenomegaly.
Patients with DJS are usually asymptomatic, although 
some may have vague constitutional symptoms. These 
latter patients have usually undergone extensive and 
often unnecessary diagnostic examinations for unex-
plained jaundice and have high levels of anxiety. In 
women, the condition may be subclinical until the 
patient becomes pregnant or receives oral contra-
ceptives, at which time chemical hyperbilirubinemia 
becomes frank jaundice. Even in these situations, other 
routine liver function tests, including serum alkaline 
phosphatase and transaminase activities, are normal.
A cardinal feature of DJS is the accumulation in the 
lysosomes of centrilobular hepatocytes of dark, coarsely 
granular pigment. As a result, the liver may be grossly 
black in appearance. This pigment is thought to be 
derived from epinephrine metabolites that are not 
excreted normally. The pigment may disappear dur-
ing bouts of viral hepatitis, only to reaccumulate slowly 
after recovery.
Biliary excretion of a number of anionic compounds 
is compromised in DJS. These include various cho-
lecystographic agents, as well as sulfobromophthalein 
(Bromsulphalein, BSP), a synthetic dye formerly used in 
a test of liver function. In this test, the rate of disap-
pearance of BSP from plasma was determined following 
bolus IV administration. BSP is conjugated with gluta-
thione in the hepatocyte; the resulting conjugate is nor-
mally excreted rapidly into the bile canaliculus. Patients 
with DJS exhibit characteristic rises in plasma concen-
trations at 90 minutes after injection, due to reflux of 
conjugated BSP into the circulation from the hepato-
cyte. Dyes such as ICG that are taken up by hepatocytes 
but are not further metabolized prior to biliary excre-
tion do not show this reflux phenomenon. Continuous 
BSP infusion studies suggest a reduction in the tmax for 
Table 37-2
Principal Differential Characteristics of Inheritable Disorders of Bile Canalicular Function
DJS
Rotor
PFIC1
BRIC1
PFIC2
BRIC2
PFIC3
Gene
ABCCA
?
ATP8B1
ATP8B1
ABCB11
ABCB11
ABCB4
Protein
MRP2
?
FIC1
FIC1
BSEP
BSEP
MDR3
Cholestasis
No
No
Yes
Episodic
Yes
Episodic
Yes
Serum γ-GT
Normal
Normal
Normal
Normal
Normal
Normal
↑↑
Serum bile 
acids
Normal
Normal
↑↑
↑↑ during 
episodes
↑↑
↑↑ during 
episodes
↑↑
Clinical  
features
Mild conjugated 
hyperbilirubine-
mia; otherwise 
normal liver 
function; dark 
pigment in liver; 
characteristic 
pattern  
of urinary  
coproporphyrins
Mild conjugated 
hyperbilirubine-
mia; otherwise 
normal liver 
function; liver  
without  
abnormal  
pigmentation
Severe  
cholestasis 
beginning 
in child-
hood
Recurrent 
episodes 
of  
cholestasis 
beginning 
at any age
Severe  
cholestasis 
beginning 
in child-
hood
Recurrent 
episodes of 
cholestasis 
beginning 
at any age
Severe  
cholestasis 
beginning in 
childhood; 
decreased 
phospho­
lipids in bile
Abbreviations: BRIC, benign recurrent intrahepatic cholestasis; BSEP, bile salt excretory protein; DJS, Dubin-Johnson syndrome; 
γ-GT, γ-glutamyltransferase; MRP2, multidrug resistance–associated protein 2; PFIC, progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis; ↑↑, increased.
 
CHAPTER 37
The Hyperbilirubinemias
355
biliary excretion. Bile acid disposition, including hepa-
tocellular uptake and biliary excretion, is normal in DJS. 
These patients have normal serum and biliary bile acid 
concentrations and do not have pruritus.
By analogy with findings in several mutant rat strains, 
the selective defect in biliary excretion of bilirubin con-
jugates and certain other classes of organic compounds, 
but not of bile acids, that characterizes DJS in humans 
was found to reflect defective expression of MRP2, 
an ATP-dependent canalicular membrane transporter. 
Several different mutations in the MRP2 gene produce 
the Dubin-Johnson phenotype, which has an autoso-
mal recessive pattern of inheritance. Although MRP2 
is undoubtedly important in the biliary excretion of 
conjugated bilirubin, the fact that this pigment is still 
excreted in the absence of MRP2 suggests that other, 
as yet uncharacterized, transport proteins may serve in a 
secondary role in this process.
Patients with DJS also have a diagnostic abnormal-
ity in urinary coproporphyrin excretion. There are two 
naturally occurring coproporphyrin isomers, I and III. 
Normally, ∼75% of the coproporphyrin in urine is 
isomer III. In urine from DJS patients, total copro-
porphyrin content is normal, but >80% is isomer I. 
Heterozygotes for the syndrome show an intermediate 
pattern. The molecular basis for this phenomenon 
remains unclear.
Rotor syndrome
This benign, autosomal recessive disorder is clinically 
similar to DJS (Table 37-2), although it is seen even less 
frequently. A major phenotypic difference is that the 
liver in patients with Rotor syndrome has no increased 
pigmentation and appears totally normal. The only 
abnormality in routine laboratory tests is an elevation of 
total serum bilirubin, due to a predominant rise in con-
jugated bilirubin. This is accompanied by bilirubinuria. 
Several additional features differentiate Rotor syndrome 
from DJS. In Rotor syndrome, the gallbladder is usu-
ally visualized on oral cholecystography, in contrast to 
the nonvisualization that is typical of DJS. The pat-
tern of urinary coproporphyrin excretion also differs. 
The pattern in Rotor syndrome resembles that of many 
acquired disorders of hepatobiliary function, in which 
coproporphyrin I, the major coproporphyrin isomer in 
bile, refluxes from the hepatocyte back into the circula-
tion and is excreted in urine. Thus, total urinary copro-
porphyrin excretion is substantially increased in Rotor 
syndrome, in contrast to the normal levels seen in DJS. 
Although the fraction of coproporphyrin I in urine is 
elevated, it is usually <70% of the total, compared with 
≥80% in DJS. The disorders also can be distinguished by 
their patterns of BSP excretion. Although clearance of 
BSP from plasma is delayed in Rotor syndrome, there 
is no reflux of conjugated BSP back into the circulation 
as seen in DJS. Kinetic analysis of plasma BSP infusion 
studies suggests the presence of a defect in intrahepato-
cellular storage of this compound. This has never been 
demonstrated directly, and the molecular basis of Rotor 
syndrome remains unknown.
Benign recurrent intrahepatic  
cholestasis (BRIC)
This rare disorder is characterized by recurrent attacks of 
pruritus and jaundice. The typical episode begins with 
mild malaise and elevations in serum aminotransferase 
levels, followed rapidly by rises in alkaline phospha-
tase and conjugated bilirubin and onset of jaundice and 
itching. The first one or two episodes may be misdiag-
nosed as acute viral hepatitis. The cholestatic episodes, 
which may begin in childhood or adulthood, can vary 
in duration from several weeks to months, followed by 
a complete clinical and biochemical resolution. Intervals 
between attacks may vary from several months to years. 
Between episodes, physical examination is normal, as are 
serum levels of bile acids, bilirubin, transaminases, and 
alkaline phosphatase. The disorder is familial and has 
an autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance. BRIC is 
considered a benign disorder in that it does not lead to 
cirrhosis or end-stage liver disease. However, the epi-
sodes of jaundice and pruritus can be prolonged and 
debilitating, and some patients have undergone liver 
transplantation to relieve the intractable and disabling 
symptoms. Treatment during the cholestatic episodes is 
symptomatic; there is no specific treatment to prevent 
or shorten the occurrence of episodes.
A gene termed FIC1 was recently identified 
and found to be mutated in patients with BRIC. 
Curiously, this gene is expressed strongly in the small 
intestine but only weakly in the liver. The protein 
encoded by FIC1 shows little similarity to those that 
have been shown to play a role in bile canalicular 
excretion of various compounds. Rather, it appears to 
be a member of a P-type ATPase family that transports 
aminophospholipids from the outer to the inner leaflet 
of a variety of cell membranes. Its relationship to the 
pathobiology of this disorder remains unclear. A sec-
ond phenotypically identical form of BRIC, termed 
BRIC type 2, has been described resulting from muta-
tions in the bile salt excretory protein (BSEP), the 
protein that is defective in progressive familial intra-
hepatic cholestasis type 2 (Table 37-2). How some 
mutations in this protein result in the episodic BRIC 
phenotype is unknown.
Progressive familial intrahepatic  
cholestasis (FIC)
This name is applied to three phenotypically related 
syndromes (Table 37-2). Progressive FIC type 1 (Byler 
SECTION VI
Disorders of the Liver and Biliary Tree
356
disease) presents in early infancy as cholestasis that may 
be initially episodic. However, in contrast to BRIC, 
Byler’s disease progresses to malnutrition, growth retar-
dation, and end-stage liver disease during childhood. 
This disorder is also a consequence of an FIC1 muta-
tion. The functional relationship of the FIC1 protein 
to the pathogenesis of cholestasis in these disorders is 
unknown. Two other types of progressive FIC (types 
2 and 3) have been described. Progressive FIC type 
2 is associated with a mutation in the protein named 
sister of p-glycoprotein, which is the major bile canalicu-
lar exporter of bile acids and is also known as bile salt 
excretory protein. As noted above, some mutations of this 
protein are associated with BRIC type 2, rather than 
the progressive FIC type 2 phenotype. Progressive FIC 
type 3 has been associated with a mutation of MDR3, 
a protein that is essential for normal hepatocellular 
excretion of phospholipids across the bile canaliculus. 
Although all three types of progressive FIC have similar 
clinical phenotypes, only type 3 is associated with high 
serum levels of γ-glutamyltransferase activity. In con-
trast, activity of this enzyme is normal or only mildly 
elevated in symptomatic BRIC and progressive FIC 
types 1 and 2.
 Jules L. Dienstag 
357
 Acute viral hepatitis is a systemic infection affecting 
the liver predominantly. Almost all cases of acute viral 
hepatitis are caused by one of fi ve viral agents: hepatitis 
A virus (HAV), hepatitis B virus (HBV), hepatitis C 
virus (HCV), the HBV-associated delta agent or hepatitis 
D virus (HDV), and hepatitis E virus (HEV). Other 
transfusion-transmitted agents (e.g., “hepatitis G” virus 
and “TT” virus) have been identifi ed but do not cause 
hepatitis. All these human hepatitis viruses are RNA 
viruses, except for hepatitis B, which is a DNA virus. 
Although these agents can be distinguished by their 
molecular and antigenic properties, all types of viral 
hepatitis produce clinically similar illnesses. These range 
from asymptomatic and inapparent to fulminant and 
fatal acute infections common to all types, on the one 
hand, and from subclinical persistent infections to rap-
idly progressive chronic liver disease with cirrhosis and 
even hepatocellular carcinoma, common to the blood-
borne types (HBV, HCV, and HDV), on the other. 
 Virology ANd etiology 
 Hepatitis A 
 Hepatitis A virus is a nonenveloped 27-nm, heat-, 
acid-, and ether-resistant RNA virus in the  Hepatovirus
genus of the picornavirus family  ( Fig. 38-1 ) . Its virion 
contains four capsid polypeptides, designated VP1 
to VP4, which are cleaved posttranslationally from 
the polyprotein product of a 7500-nucleotide genome. 
Inactivation of viral activity can be achieved by boil-
ing for 1 min, by contact with formaldehyde and 
chlorine, or by ultraviolet irradiation. Despite nucleo-
tide sequence variation of up to 20% among isolates of 
HAV, and despite the recognition of four genotypes 
affecting humans, all strains of this virus are immuno-
logically indistinguishable and belong to one serotype. 
Hepatitis A has an incubation period of ∼4 weeks. Its 
replication is limited to the liver, but the virus is pres-
ent in the liver, bile, stools, and blood during the late 
 ACUTE VIRAL HEPATITIS 
 CHAPTER 38 
 Figure 38-1 
electron micrographs of hepatitis A virus particles 
and serum from a patient with hepatitis B.  Left : 27-nm 
hepatitis A virus particles purifi ed from stool of a patient with 
acute hepatitis A and aggregated by antibody to hepatitis A 
virus.  Right : Concentrated serum from a patient with hepatitis B, 
demonstrating the 42-nm virions, tubular forms, and spherical 
22-nm particles of hepatitis B surface antigen. 132,000×. 
(Hepatitis D resembles 42-nm virions of hepatitis B but is 
smaller, 35–37 nm; hepatitis E resembles hepatitis A virus but 
is slightly larger, 32–34 nm; hepatitis C has been visualized as 
a 55-nm particle.) 
SECTION VI
Disorders of the Liver and Biliary Tree
358
incubation period and acute preicteric phase of illness. 
Despite persistence of virus in the liver, viral shedding 
in feces, viremia, and infectivity diminish rapidly once 
jaundice becomes apparent. HAV can be cultivated 
reproducibly in vitro.
Antibodies to HAV (anti-HAV) can be detected 
during acute illness when serum aminotransferase activ-
ity is elevated and fecal HAV shedding is still occur-
ring. This early antibody response is predominantly of 
the IgM class and persists for several months, rarely for 
6–12 months. During convalescence, however, anti-
HAV of the IgG class becomes the predominant antibody 
(Fig. 38-2). Therefore, the diagnosis of hepatitis A is 
made during acute illness by demonstrating anti-HAV of 
the IgM class. After acute illness, anti-HAV of the IgG 
class remains detectable indefinitely, and patients with 
serum anti-HAV are immune to reinfection. Neutral-
izing antibody activity parallels the appearance of anti-
HAV, and the IgG anti-HAV present in immune glob-
ulin accounts for the protection it affords against HAV 
infection.
Hepatitis B
Hepatitis B virus is a DNA virus with a remarkably 
compact genomic structure; despite its small, circular, 
3200-bp size, HBV DNA codes for four sets of viral 
products with a complex, multiparticle structure. HBV 
achieves its genomic economy by relying on an effi-
cient strategy of encoding proteins from four overlap-
ping genes: S, C, P, and X (Fig. 38-3), as detailed later. 
Once thought to be unique among viruses, HBV is now 
recognized as one of a family of animal viruses, hepad-
naviruses (hepatotropic DNA viruses), and is classified 
as hepadnavirus type 1. Similar viruses infect certain 
species of woodchucks, ground and tree squirrels, and 
Pekin ducks, to mention the most carefully characterized. 
Like HBV, all have the same distinctive three mor-
phologic forms, have counterparts to the envelope and 
nucleocapsid virus antigens of HBV, replicate in the 
liver but exist in extrahepatic sites, contain their own 
endogenous DNA polymerase, have partially double-
strand and partially single-strand genomes, are associated 
with acute and chronic hepatitis and hepatocellular car-
cinoma, and rely on a replicative strategy unique among 
DNA viruses but typical of retroviruses. Instead of DNA 
replication directly from a DNA template, hepad-
naviruses rely on reverse transcription (effected by 
the DNA polymerase) of minus-strand DNA from a 
“pregenomic” RNA intermediate. Then plus-strand 
DNA is transcribed from the minus-strand DNA tem-
plate by the DNA-dependent DNA polymerase and 
converted in the hepatocyte nucleus to a covalently 
closed circular DNA, which serves as a template for 
messenger RNA and pregenomic RNA. Viral proteins 
are translated by the messenger RNA, and the proteins 
and genome are packaged into virions and secreted from 
the hepatocyte. Although HBV is difficult to cultivate 
in vitro in the conventional sense from clinical material, 
several cell lines have been transfected with HBV DNA. 
Such transfected cells support in vitro replication of the 
intact virus and its component proteins.
Viral proteins and particles
Of the three particulate forms of HBV (Table 38-1), 
the most numerous are the 22-nm particles, which 
Pre-S2
Pre-S1
Pre-C
C
X
S
P
Figure 38-3 
Compact genomic structure of HBV. This structure, with 
overlapping genes, permits HBV to code for multiple 
proteins. The S gene codes for the “major” envelope protein, 
HBsAg. Pre-S1 and pre-S2, upstream of S, combine with 
S to code for two larger proteins, “middle” protein, the 
product of pre-S2 + S, and “large” protein, the product of 
pre-S1 + pre-S2 + S. The largest gene, P, codes for DNA 
polymerase. The C gene codes for two nucleocapsid pro-
teins, HBeAg, a soluble, secreted protein (initiation from 
the pre-C region of the gene), and HBcAg, the intracellular 
core protein (initiation after pre-C). The X gene codes for 
HBxAg, which can transactivate the transcription of cellu-
lar and viral genes; its clinical relevance is not known, but 
it may contribute to carcinogenesis by binding to p53.
IgG Anti-HAV
IgM Anti-HAV
Jaundice
ALT
Fecal HAV
0
4
8
12
16
20
Weeks after exposure
Figure 38-2 
Scheme of typical clinical and laboratory features of 
hepatitis A.
Table 38-1
Nomenclature and Features of Hepatitis Viruses
Hepatitis 
Type
Virus 
Particle, nm
Morphology
Genomea
Classification
Antigen(s)
Antibodies
Remarks
HAV
27
Icosahedral 
nonenveloped
7.5-kb RNA, 
linear, ss, +
Hepatovirus
HAV
Anti-HAV
Early fecal shedding
Diagnosis: IgM anti-HAV
Previous infection: IgG anti-HAV
HBV
42
Double-shelled 
virion (surface 
and core) 
spherical
3.2-kb DNA, 
circular,  
ss/ds
Hepadnavirus
HBsAg
HBcAg
HBeAg
Anti-HBs
Anti-HBc
Anti-HBe
Bloodborne virus; carrier state
Acute diagnosis: HBsAg, IgM anti-HBc
Chronic diagnosis: IgG anti-HBc, HBsAg
Markers of replication: HBeAg, HBV DNA
Liver, lymphocytes, other organs
27
Nucleocapsid 
core
HBcAg
HBeAg
Anti-HBc
Anti-HBe
Nucleocapsid contains DNA and DNA polymerase; 
present in hepatocyte nucleus; HBcAg does not 
circulate; HBeAg (soluble, nonparticulate) and HBV 
DNA circulate—correlate with infectivity and  
complete virions
22
Spherical and 
filamentous; 
represents 
excess virus 
coat material
HBsAg
Anti-HBs
HBsAg detectable in >95% of patients with  
acute hepatitis B; found in serum, body fluids,  
hepatocyte cytoplasm; anti-HBs appears following 
infection—protective antibody
HCV
Approx. 
40–60
Enveloped
9.4-kb RNA, 
linear, ss, +
Hepacivirus
HCV
C100-3
C33c
C22-3
NS5
Anti-HCV
Bloodborne agent, formerly labeled non-A, non-B 
hepatitis
Acute diagnosis: anti-HCV (C33c, C22-3, NS5), HCV RNA
Chronic diagnosis: anti-HCV (C100-3, C33c, C22-3, NS5) 
and HCV RNA; cytoplasmic location in hepatocytes
HDV
35–37
Enveloped 
hybrid  
particle with 
HBsAg coat 
and HDV core
1.7-kb RNA, 
circular, ss, −
Resembles 
viroids and plant 
satellite viruses
HBsAg
HDV antigen
Anti-HBs
Anti-HDV
Defective RNA virus, requires helper function of HBV 
(hepadnaviruses); HDV antigen present in hepatocyte 
nucleus
Diagnosis: anti-HDV, HDV RNA; HBV/HDV coinfection—
IgM anti-HBc and anti-HDV; HDV superinfection—IgG 
anti-HBc and anti-HDV
HEV
32–34
Nonenveloped 
icosahedral
7.6-kb RNA, 
linear, ss, +
Hepevirus
HEV antigen
Anti-HEV
Agent of enterically transmitted hepatitis; rare in USA; 
occurs in Asia, Mediterranean countries, Central America
Diagnosis: IgM/IgG anti-HEV (assays not routinely 
available); virus in stool, bile, hepatocyte cytoplasm
ass, single-strand; ss/ds, partially single-strand, partially double-strand; −, minus-strand; +, plus-strand.
359
SECTION VI
Disorders of the Liver and Biliary Tree
360
appear as spherical or long filamentous forms; these are 
antigenically indistinguishable from the outer surface 
or envelope protein of HBV and are thought to rep-
resent excess viral envelope protein. Outnumbered in 
serum by a factor of 100 or 1000 to 1 compared with 
the spheres and tubules are large, 42-nm, double-shelled 
spherical particles, which represent the intact hepatitis B 
virion (Fig. 38-1). The envelope protein expressed 
on the outer surface of the virion and on the smaller 
spherical and tubular structures is referred to as hepatitis B 
surface antigen (HBsAg). The concentration of HBsAg 
and virus particles in the blood may reach 500 μg/mL 
and 10 trillion particles per milliliter, respectively. The 
envelope protein, HBsAg, is the product of the S gene 
of HBV.
A number of different HBsAg subdeterminants have 
been identified. There is a common group-reactive 
antigen, a, shared by all HBsAg isolates. In addition, 
HBsAg may contain one of several subtype-specific 
antigens—namely, d or y, w or r—as well as other more 
recently characterized specificities. Hepatitis B isolates 
fall into one of at least eight subtypes and eight geno-
types (A–H). Geographic distribution of genotypes and 
subtypes varies; genotypes A (corresponding to subtype 
adw) and D (ayw) predominate in the United States and 
Europe, while genotypes B (adw) and C (adr) predomi-
nate in Asia. Clinical course and outcome are indepen-
dent of subtype, but preliminary reports suggest that 
genotype B is associated with less rapidly progressive 
liver disease and a lower likelihood, or delayed appear-
ance, of hepatocellular carcinoma than genotype C. 
Patients with genotype A appear to be more likely to 
clear circulating viremia and to achieve HBsAg sero-
conversion, both spontaneously and in response to 
antiviral therapy. In addition, “precore” mutations are 
favored by certain genotypes (discussed later).
Upstream of the S gene are the pre-S genes 
(Fig. 38-3), which code for pre-S gene products, includ-
ing receptors on the HBV surface for polymerized 
human serum albumin and for hepatocyte mem-
brane proteins. The pre-S region actually consists of 
both pre-S1 and pre-S2. Depending on where transla-
tion is initiated, three potential HBsAg gene products 
are synthesized. The protein product of the S gene is 
HBsAg (major protein), the product of the S region plus 
the adjacent pre-S2 region is the middle protein, and the 
product of the pre-S1 plus pre-S2 plus S regions is the 
large protein. Compared with the smaller spherical and 
tubular particles of HBV, complete 42-nm virions are 
enriched in the large protein. Both pre-S proteins and 
their respective antibodies can be detected during HBV 
infection, and the period of pre-S antigenemia appears 
to coincide with other markers of virus replication, as 
detailed later.
The intact 42-nm virion contains a 27-nm nucleo-
capsid core particle. Nucleocapsid proteins are coded 
for by the C gene. The antigen expressed on the sur-
face of the nucleocapsid core is referred to as hepatitis B 
core antigen (HBcAg), and its corresponding antibody is 
anti-HBc. A third HBV antigen is hepatitis B e antigen 
(HBeAg), a soluble, nonparticulate, nucleocapsid pro-
tein that is immunologically distinct from intact HBcAg 
but is a product of the same C gene. The C gene 
has two initiation codons, a precore and a core region 
(Fig. 38-3). If translation is initiated at the precore region, 
the protein product is HBeAg, which has a signal pep-
tide that binds it to the smooth endoplasmic reticulum 
and leads to its secretion into the circulation. If transla-
tion begins with the core region, HBcAg is the protein 
product; it has no signal peptide, it is not secreted, but it 
assembles into nucleocapsid particles, which bind to and 
incorporate RNA, and which, ultimately, contain HBV 
DNA. Also packaged within the nucleocapsid core is a 
DNA polymerase, which directs replication and repair 
of HBV DNA. When packaging within viral proteins 
is complete, synthesis of the incomplete plus strand 
stops; this accounts for the single-strand gap and for dif-
ferences in the size of the gap. HBcAg particles remain 
in the hepatocyte, where they are readily detectable by 
immunohistochemical staining, and are exported after 
encapsidation by an envelope of HBsAg. Therefore, 
naked core particles do not circulate in the serum. The 
secreted nucleocapsid protein, HBeAg, provides a con-
venient, readily detectable, qualitative marker of HBV 
replication and relative infectivity.
HBsAg-positive serum containing HBeAg is more 
likely to be highly infectious and to be associated with 
the presence of hepatitis B virions (and detectable HBV 
DNA, discussed later) than HBeAg-negative or anti-HBe-
positive serum. For example, HBsAg carrier mothers who 
are HBeAg-positive almost invariably (>90%) transmit 
hepatitis B infection to their offspring, whereas HBsAg 
carrier mothers with anti-HBe rarely (10–15%) infect 
their offspring.
Early during the course of acute hepatitis B, HBeAg 
appears transiently; its disappearance may be a harbinger 
of clinical improvement and resolution of infection. 
Persistence of HBeAg in serum beyond the first three 
months of acute infection may be predictive of the 
development of chronic infection, and the presence of 
HBeAg during chronic hepatitis B is associated with 
ongoing viral replication, infectivity, and inflammatory 
liver injury.
The third of the HBV genes is the largest, the P gene 
(Fig. 38-3), which codes for the DNA polymerase; as 
noted earlier, this enzyme has both DNA-dependent 
DNA polymerase and RNA-dependent reverse tran-
scriptase activities. The fourth gene, X, codes for 
a small, nonparticulate protein, hepatitis B x antigen 
(HBxAg), that is capable of transactivating the tran-
scription of both viral and cellular genes (Fig. 38-3). In 
the cytoplasm, HBxAg effects calcium release (possibly 
 
CHAPTER 38
Acute Viral Hepatitis
361
from mitochondria), which activates signal-transduction 
pathways that lead to stimulation of HBV reverse tran-
scription and HBV DNA replication. Such transactiva-
tion may enhance the replication of HBV, leading to 
the clinical association observed between the expression 
of HBxAg and antibodies to it in patients with severe 
chronic hepatitis and hepatocellular carcinoma. The 
transactivating activity can enhance the transcription 
and replication of other viruses besides HBV, such as 
HIV. Cellular processes transactivated by X include the 
human interferon γ gene and class I major histocompat-
ibility genes; potentially, these effects could contribute 
to enhanced susceptibility of HBV-infected hepatocytes 
to cytolytic T cells. The expression of X can also induce 
programmed cell death (apoptosis).
Serologic and virologic markers
After a person is infected with HBV, the first virologic 
marker detectable in serum within 1–12 weeks, usually 
between 8–12 weeks, is HBsAg (Fig. 38-4). Circulat-
ing HBsAg precedes elevations of serum aminotrans-
ferase activity and clinical symptoms by 2–6 weeks and 
remains detectable during the entire icteric or symp-
tomatic phase of acute hepatitis B and beyond. In typi-
cal cases, HBsAg becomes undetectable 1–2 months 
after the onset of jaundice and rarely persists beyond 
6 months. After HBsAg disappears, antibody to HBsAg 
(anti-HBs) becomes detectable in serum and remains 
detectable indefinitely thereafter. Because HBcAg is 
intracellular and, when in the serum, sequestered within 
an HBsAg coat, naked core particles do not circulate in 
serum and, therefore, HBcAg is not detectable routinely 
in the serum of patients with HBV infection. By con-
trast, anti-HBc is readily demonstrable in serum, begin-
ning within the first 1–2 weeks after the appearance of 
HBsAg and preceding detectable levels of anti-HBs by 
weeks to months. Because variability exists in the time 
of appearance of anti-HBs after HBV infection, occa-
sionally a gap of several weeks or longer may separate 
the disappearance of HBsAg and the appearance of anti-
HBs. During this “gap” or “window” period, anti-HBc 
may represent the only serologic evidence of current 
or recent HBV infection, and blood containing anti-
HBc in the absence of HBsAg and anti-HBs has been 
implicated in the development of transfusion-associated 
hepatitis B. In part because the sensitivity of immuno-
assays for HBsAg and anti-HBs has increased, however, 
this window period is rarely encountered. In some per-
sons, years after HBV infection, anti-HBc may persist in 
the circulation longer than anti-HBs. Therefore, isolated 
anti-HBc does not necessarily indicate active virus rep-
lication; most instances of isolated anti-HBc represent 
hepatitis B infection in the remote past. Rarely, how-
ever, isolated anti-HBc represents low-level hepatitis B 
viremia, with HBsAg below the detection threshold; 
occasionally, isolated anti-HBc represents a cross-reacting 
or false-positive immunologic specificity. Recent and 
remote HBV infections can be distinguished by deter-
mination of the immunoglobulin class of anti-HBc. 
Anti-HBc of the IgM class (IgM anti-HBc) predomi-
nates during the first 6 months after acute infection, 
whereas IgG anti-HBc is the predominant class of anti-
HBc beyond 6 months. Therefore, patients with cur-
rent or recent acute hepatitis B, including those in the 
anti-HBc window, have IgM anti-HBc in their serum. 
In patients who have recovered from hepatitis B in the 
remote past as well as those with chronic HBV infec-
tion, anti-HBc is predominantly of the IgG class. Infre-
quently, in ≤1–5% of patients with acute HBV infection, 
levels of HBsAg are too low to be detected; in such 
cases, the presence of IgM anti-HBc establishes the 
diagnosis of acute hepatitis B. When isolated anti-HBc 
occurs in the rare patient with chronic hepatitis B 
whose HBsAg level is below the sensitivity threshold of 
contemporary immunoassays (a low-level carrier), the 
anti-HBc is of the IgG class. Generally, in persons who 
have recovered from hepatitis B, anti-HBs and anti-
HBc persist indefinitely.
The temporal association between the appearance 
of anti-HBs and resolution of HBV infection as well as 
the observation that persons with anti-HBs in serum are 
protected against reinfection with HBV suggests that 
anti-HBs is the protective antibody. Therefore, strategies 
for prevention of HBV infection are based on provid-
ing susceptible persons with circulating anti-HBs (dis-
cussed later). Occasionally, in 10–20% of patients with 
chronic hepatitis B, low-level, low-affinity anti-HBs 
can be detected. This antibody is directed against a sub-
type determinant different from that represented by 
the patient’s HBsAg; its presence is thought to reflect 
the stimulation of a related clone of antibody-forming 
cells, but it has no clinical relevance and does not signal 
100
0
Jaundice
ALT
HBeAg
Anti-HBe
IgG Anti-HBc
HBsAg
IgM Anti-HBc
Anti-HBs
4
8
12
16
20
24
28
32
36
52
Weeks after exposure
Figure 38-4 
Scheme of typical clinical and laboratory features of 
acute hepatitis B.
SECTION VI
Disorders of the Liver and Biliary Tree
362
imminent clearance of hepatitis B. These patients with 
HBsAg and such nonneutralizing anti-HBs should be 
categorized as having chronic HBV infection.
The other readily detectable serologic marker of 
HBV infection, HBeAg, appears concurrently with or 
shortly after HBsAg. Its appearance coincides tempo-
rally with high levels of virus replication and reflects 
the presence of circulating intact virions and detectable 
HBV DNA (with the notable exception of patients with 
precore mutations who cannot synthesize HBeAg—
see “Molecular Variants”). Pre-S1 and pre-S2 proteins 
are also expressed during periods of peak replication, 
but assays for these gene products are not routinely 
available. In self-limited HBV infections, HBeAg 
becomes undetectable shortly after peak elevations in 
aminotransferase activity, before the disappearance of 
HBsAg, and anti-HBe then becomes detectable, coin-
ciding with a period of relatively lower infectivity 
(Fig. 38-4). Because markers of HBV replication appear 
transiently during acute infection, testing for such mark-
ers is of little clinical utility in typical cases of acute 
HBV infection. In contrast, markers of HBV replication 
provide valuable information in patients with protracted 
infections.
Departing from the pattern typical of acute HBV 
infections, in chronic HBV infection, HBsAg remains 
detectable beyond 6 months, anti-HBc is primarily of 
the IgG class, and anti-HBs is either undetectable or 
detectable at low levels (see “Laboratory Features”) 
(Fig. 38-5). During early chronic HBV infection, 
HBV DNA can be detected both in serum and in 
hepatocyte nuclei, where it is present in free or epi-
somal form. This replicative stage of HBV infection is the 
time of maximal infectivity and liver injury; HBeAg 
is a qualitative marker and HBV DNA a quantitative 
marker of this replicative phase, during which all three 
forms of HBV circulate, including intact virions. Over 
time, the replicative phase of chronic HBV infection 
gives way to a relatively nonreplicative phase. This occurs 
at a rate of ∼10% per year and is accompanied by sero-
conversion from HBeAg-positive to anti-HBe-positive. 
In most cases, this seroconversion coincides with a tran-
sient, acute hepatitis-like elevation in aminotransferase 
activity, believed to reflect cell-mediated immune clear-
ance of virus-infected hepatocytes. In the nonreplicative 
phase of chronic infection, when HBV DNA is demon-
strable in hepatocyte nuclei, it tends to be integrated 
into the host genome. In this phase, only spherical 
and tubular forms of HBV, not intact virions, circulate, 
and liver injury tends to subside. Most such patients would 
be characterized as inactive HBV carriers. In reality, the des-
ignations replicative and nonreplicative are only relative; 
even in the so-called nonreplicative phase, HBV repli-
cation can be detected at levels of ∼≤103 virions with 
highly sensitive amplification probes such as the poly-
merase chain reaction (PCR); below this replication 
threshold, liver injury and infectivity of HBV are lim-
ited to negligible. Still, the distinctions are pathophysi-
ologically and clinically meaningful. Occasionally, 
nonreplicative HBV infection converts back to rep-
licative infection. Such spontaneous reactivations are 
accompanied by re-expression of HBeAg and HBV 
DNA, and sometimes of IgM anti-HBc, as well as by 
exacerbations of liver injury. Because high-titer IgM 
anti-HBc can reappear during acute exacerbations of 
chronic hepatitis B, relying on IgM anti-HBc versus IgG 
anti-HBc to distinguish between acute and chronic hepa-
titis B infection, respectively, may not always be reliable; 
in such cases, patient history is invaluable in helping to 
distinguish de novo acute hepatitis B infection from 
acute exacerbation of chronic hepatitis B infection.
Molecular variants
Variation occurs throughout the HBV genome, and 
clinical isolates of HBV that do not express typical viral 
proteins have been attributed to mutations in individual 
or even multiple gene locations. For example, vari-
ants have been described that lack nucleocapsid proteins, 
envelope proteins, or both. Two categories of naturally 
occurring HBV variants have attracted the most attention. 
One of these was identified initially in Mediterranean 
countries among patients with an unusual serologic 
clinical profile. They have severe chronic HBV infec-
tion and detectable HBV DNA but with anti-HBe 
0
ALT
1 2 3 4 5
HBsAg
HBeAg
Anti-HBe
HBV   DNA
6
12
24
36
48
60
120
Months after exposure
Anti-HBc
IgM   anti-HBc
Figure 38-5 
Scheme of typical laboratory features of wild-type 
chronic hepatitis B. HBeAg and HBV DNA can be detected 
in serum during the replicative phase of chronic infection, 
which is associated with infectivity and liver injury. Sero-
conversion from the replicative phase to the nonreplicative 
phase occurs at a rate of ∼10% per year and is heralded by 
an acute hepatitis–like elevation of ALT activity; during the 
nonreplicative phase, infectivity and liver injury are limited. In 
HBeAg-negative chronic hepatitis B associated with muta-
tions in the precore region of the HBV genome, replicative 
chronic hepatitis B occurs in the absence of HBeAg.
 
CHAPTER 38
Acute Viral Hepatitis
363
instead of HBeAg. These patients were found to be 
infected with an HBV mutant that contained an altera-
tion in the precore region rendering the virus incapable 
of encoding HBeAg. Although several potential muta-
tion sites exist in the pre-C region, the region of the 
C gene necessary for the expression of HBeAg (see 
“Virology and Etiology”), the most commonly encoun-
tered in such patients is a single base substitution, from 
G to A, which occurs in the second to last codon of the 
pre-C gene at nucleotide 1896. This substitution results 
in the replacement of the TGG tryptophan codon by 
a stop codon (TAG), which prevents the translation 
of HBeAg. Another mutation, in the core-promoter 
region, prevents transcription of the coding region for 
HBeAg and yields an HBeAg-negative phenotype. 
Patients with such mutations in the precore region and 
who are unable to secrete HBeAg tend to have severe 
liver disease that progresses more rapidly to cirrhosis 
or, alternatively, they are identified clinically later in 
the course of the natural history of chronic hepatitis B, 
when the disease is more advanced. Both “wild-type” 
HBV and precore-mutant HBV can coexist in the same 
patient, or mutant HBV may arise late during wild-type 
HBV infection. In addition, clusters of fulminant hepatitis 
B in Israel and Japan have been attributed to common- 
source infection with a precore mutant. Fulminant 
hepatitis B in North America and western Europe, 
however, occurs in patients infected with wild-type 
HBV, in the absence of precore mutants, and both pre-
core mutants and other mutations throughout the HBV 
genome occur commonly, even in patients with typical, 
self-limited, milder forms of HBV infection. HBeAg-
negative chronic hepatitis with mutations in the pre-
core region is now the most frequently encountered 
form of hepatitis B in Mediterranean countries and in 
Europe. In the United States, where HBV genotype A 
(less prone to G1896A mutation) is prevalent, precore-
mutant HBV is much less common; however, as a result 
of immigration from Asia and Europe, the proportion 
of HBeAg-negative hepatitis B–infected individuals has 
increased in the United States, and they now represent 
approximately one-third of patients with chronic hepa-
titis B. Characteristic of such HBeAg-negative chronic 
hepatitis B are lower levels of HBV DNA (usually ≤105 
copies/mL) and one of several patterns of aminotrans-
ferase activity—persistent elevations, periodic fluctua-
tions above the normal range, and periodic fluctuations 
between the normal and elevated range.
The second important category of HBV mutants 
consists of escape mutants, in which a single amino acid 
substitution, from glycine to arginine, occurs at position 
145 of the immunodominant a determinant common to 
all subtypes of HBsAg. This change in HBsAg leads to 
a critical conformational change that results in a loss of 
neutralizing activity by anti-HBs. This specific HBV/a 
mutant has been observed in two situations, active and 
passive immunization, in which humoral immunologic 
pressure may favor evolutionary change (“escape”) 
in the virus—in a small number of hepatitis B vaccine 
recipients who acquired HBV infection despite the 
prior appearance of neutralizing anti-HBs and in liver 
transplant recipients who underwent the procedure for 
hepatitis B and who were treated with a high-potency 
human monoclonal anti-HBs preparation. Although 
such mutants have not been recognized frequently, their 
existence raises a concern that may complicate vaccina-
tion strategies and serologic diagnosis.
Different types of mutations emerge during anti-
viral therapy of chronic hepatitis B with nucleoside 
analogues; such “YMDD” and similar mutations 
in the polymerase motif of HBV are described in 
Chap. 40.
Extrahepatic sites
Hepatitis B antigens and HBV DNA have been identi-
fied in extrahepatic sites, including lymph nodes, bone 
marrow, circulating lymphocytes, spleen, and pancreas. 
Although the virus does not appear to be associated 
with tissue injury in any of these extrahepatic sites, its 
presence in these “remote” reservoirs has been invoked 
(but is not necessary) to explain the recurrence of HBV 
infection after orthotopic liver transplantation. A more 
complete understanding of the clinical relevance of 
extrahepatic HBV remains to be defined.
Hepatitis D
The delta hepatitis agent, or HDV, the only member 
of the genus Deltavirus, is a defective RNA virus that 
coinfects with and requires the helper function of HBV 
(or other hepadnaviruses) for its replication and expression. 
Slightly smaller than HBV, delta is a formalin-sen-
sitive, 35- to 37-nm virus with a hybrid structure. 
Its nucleocapsid expresses delta antigen, which bears 
no antigenic homology with any of the HBV anti-
gens, and contains the virus genome. The delta core is 
“encapsidated” by an outer envelope of HBsAg, indis-
tinguishable from that of HBV except in its relative 
compositions of major, middle, and large HBsAg compo-
nent proteins. The genome is a small, 1700-nucleotide, 
circular, single-strand RNA of negative polarity that 
is nonhomologous with HBV DNA (except for a 
small area of the polymerase gene) but that has fea-
tures and the rolling circle model of replication com-
mon to genomes of plant satellite viruses or viroids. 
HDV RNA contains many areas of internal comple-
mentarity; therefore, it can fold on itself by internal base 
pairing to form an unusual, very stable, rodlike struc-
ture that contains a very stable, self-cleaving and self-
ligating ribozyme. HDV RNA requires host RNA 
polymerase II for its replication via RNA-directed 
RNA synthesis by transcription of genomic RNA to 
SECTION VI
Disorders of the Liver and Biliary Tree
364
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
AA
Envelope
glycoproteins
Core
Conserved
region
Hypervariable
region
Serine
protease
Helicase
5'
3'
p7
NS4A
RNA-dependent
RNA polymerase
C
E1
E2
NS2
NS3
NS4B
NS5A
NS5B
a complementary antigenomic (plus strand) RNA; the 
antigenomic RNA, in turn, serves as a template for sub-
sequent genomic RNA synthesis. HDV RNA has only 
one open reading frame, and delta antigen (HDAg), a 
product of the antigenomic strand is the only known 
HDV protein; HDAg exists in two forms: a small, 
195-amino-acid species, which plays a role in facilitat-
ing HDV RNA replication, and a large, 214-amino-
acid species, which appears to suppress replication but is 
required for assembly of the antigen into virions. Delta 
antigens have been shown to bind directly to RNA 
polymerase II, resulting in stimulation of transcription. 
Although complete hepatitis D virions and liver injury 
require the cooperative helper function of HBV, intra-
cellular replication of HDV RNA can occur without 
HBV. Genomic heterogeneity among HDV isolates 
has been described; however, pathophysiologic and 
clinical consequences of this genetic diversity have not 
been recognized. The clinical spectrum of hepatitis D 
is common to all seven genotypes identified, the pre-
dominant of which is genotype 1.
HDV can either infect a person simultaneously 
with HBV (co-infection) or superinfect a person already 
infected with HBV (superinfection); when HDV infec-
tion is transmitted from a donor with one HBsAg 
subtype to an HBsAg-positive recipient with a differ-
ent subtype, the HDV agent assumes the HBsAg sub-
type of the recipient, rather than the donor. Because 
HDV relies absolutely on HBV, the duration of HDV 
infection is determined by the duration of (and cannot 
outlast) HBV infection. HDV antigen is expressed pri-
marily in hepatocyte nuclei and is occasionally detect-
able in serum. During acute HDV infection, anti-HDV 
of the IgM class predominates, and 30–40 days may 
elapse after symptoms appear before anti-HDV can be 
detected. In self-limited infection, anti-HDV is low-
titer and transient, rarely remaining detectable beyond 
the clearance of HBsAg and HDV antigen. In chronic 
HDV infection, anti-HDV circulates in high titer, and 
both IgM and IgG anti-HDV can be detected. HDV 
antigen in the liver and HDV RNA in serum and liver 
can be detected during HDV replication.
Hepatitis C
Hepatitis C virus, which, before its identification was 
labeled “non-A, non-B hepatitis,” is a linear, single-
strand, positive-sense, 9600-nucleotide RNA virus, 
the genome of which is similar in organization to that 
of flaviviruses and pestiviruses; HCV is the only mem-
ber of the genus Hepacivirus in the family Flaviviridae. 
The HCV genome contains a single, large open reading 
frame (gene) that codes for a virus polyprotein of ∼3000 
amino acids, which is cleaved after translation to yield 
10 viral proteins. The 5′ end of the genome consists of 
an untranslated region (containing an internal ribosomal 
entry site) adjacent to the genes for four structural pro-
teins, the nucleocapsid core protein, C; two envelope 
glycoproteins, E1 and E2; and a membrane protein p7. 
The 5′ untranslated region and core gene are highly 
conserved among genotypes, but the envelope proteins 
are coded for by the hypervariable region, which varies 
from isolate to isolate and may allow the virus to evade 
host immunologic containment directed at accessible 
virus-envelope proteins. The 3′ end of the genome also 
includes an untranslated region and contains the genes 
for six nonstructural (NS) proteins NS2, NS3, NS4A, 
NS4B, NS5A, and NS5B. The NS2 cysteine protease 
cleaves NS3 from NS2, and the NS3-4A serine protease 
cleaves all the downstream proteins from the polyprot-
ein. Important NS proteins involved in virus replication 
include the NS3 helicase, NS3-NS4A serine prote-
ase, and the NS5B RNA-dependent RNA polymerase 
(Fig. 38-6). Because HCV does not replicate via a 
Figure 38-6 
Organization of the hepatitis C virus genome and its asso-
ciated, 3000 amino-acid (AA) proteins. The three structural 
genes at the 5′ end are the core region, C, which codes for the 
nucleocapsid, and the envelope regions, E1 and E2, which code 
for envelope glycoproteins. The 5′ untranslated region and the 
C region are highly conserved among isolates, while the enve-
lope domain E2 contains the hypervariable region. Adjacent to 
the structural proteins is p7, a membrane protein that appears 
to function as an ion channel. At the 3′ end are six nonstructural 
(NS) regions, NS2, which codes for a cysteine protease; NS3, 
which codes for a serine protease and an RNA helicase; NS4 and 
NS4B; NS5A; and NS5B, which codes for an RNA-dependent 
RNA polymerase. After translation of the entire polyprotein, indi-
vidual proteins are cleaved by both host and viral proteases.
 
CHAPTER 38
Acute Viral Hepatitis
365
DNA intermediate, it does not integrate into the host 
genome. Because HCV tends to circulate in relatively 
low titer, 103–107 virions/mL, visualization of virus par-
ticles, estimated to be 40–60 nm in diameter, remains 
difficult. Still, the replication rate of HCV is very 
high, 1012 virions per day; its half-life is 2.7 h. The 
chimpanzee is a helpful but cumbersome animal model. 
Although a robust, reproducible, small animal model 
is lacking, HCV replication has been documented in 
an immunodeficient mouse model containing explants 
of human liver and in transgenic mouse and rat models. 
Although in vitro replication has been difficult, hepa-
tocellular carcinoma–derived cell lines have been 
described (replicon systems) that support replication of 
genetically manipulated, truncated, or full-length HCV 
RNA (but not intact virions). Recently, complete rep-
lication of HCV and intact 55-nm virions have been 
described in cell culture systems. HCV gains entry into 
the hepatocyte via the nonliver-specific CD81 receptor 
and the liver-specific tight junction protein claudin-1. 
Relying on the same assembly and secretion pathway as 
low-density lipoproteins (LPLs), HCV masquerades as a 
lipoprotein, which may limit its visibility to the adap-
tive immune system and which may explain its ability to 
evade immune containment and clearance.
At least six distinct major genotypes, as well as >50 
subtypes within genotypes, of HCV have been iden-
tified by nucleotide sequencing. Genotypes differ 
one from another in sequence homology by ≥30%. 
Because divergence of HCV isolates within a geno-
type or subtype and, within the same host, may vary 
insufficiently to define a distinct genotype, these 
intragenotypic differences are referred to as quasispecies 
and differ in sequence homology by only a few per-
cent. The genotypic and quasispecies diversity of HCV, 
resulting from its high mutation rate, interferes with 
effective humoral immunity. Neutralizing antibodies 
to HCV have been demonstrated, but they tend to be 
short lived, and HCV infection does not induce lasting 
immunity against reinfection with different virus isolates 
or even the same virus isolate. Thus, neither heterologous 
nor homologous immunity appears to develop commonly 
after acute HCV infection. Some HCV genotypes are 
distributed worldwide, while others are more geo-
graphically confined (see “Epidemiology and Global 
Features”). In addition, differences exist among geno-
types in responsiveness to antiviral therapy; however, 
early reports of differences in pathogenicity among gen-
otypes have not been corroborated.
Currently available, third-generation immunoassays, 
which incorporate proteins from the core, NS3, and 
NS5 regions, detect anti-HCV antibodies during acute 
infection. The most sensitive indicator of HCV infec-
tion is the presence of HCV RNA, which requires 
molecular amplification by PCR or transcription-
mediated amplification (TMA) (Fig. 38-7). To allow 
standardization of the quantification of HCV RNA 
among laboratories and commercial assays, HCV RNA 
is reported as international units (IUs) per milliliter; 
quantitative assays are available that allow detection of 
HCV RNA with a sensitivity as low as 5 IU/mL. HCV 
RNA can be detected within a few days of exposure 
to HCV—well before the appearance of anti-HCV— 
and tends to persist for the duration of HCV infection; 
however, occasionally in patients with chronic HCV 
infection, HCV RNA may be detectable only inter-
mittently. Application of sensitive molecular probes 
for HCV RNA has revealed the presence of replicative 
HCV in peripheral blood lymphocytes of infected per-
sons; however, as is the case for HBV in lymphocytes, 
the clinical relevance of HCV lymphocyte infection is 
not known.
Hepatitis E
Previously labeled epidemic or enterically transmitted non-
A, non-B hepatitis, HEV is an enterically transmitted 
virus that occurs primarily in India, Asia, Africa, and 
Central America; in those geographic areas, HEV is the 
most common cause of acute hepatitis. This agent, with 
epidemiologic features resembling those of hepatitis 
A, is a 32- to 34-nm, nonenveloped, HAV-like virus 
with a 7600-nucleotide, single-strand, positive-sense 
RNA genome. HEV has three open reading frames 
(ORF) (genes), the largest of which, ORF1, encodes 
nonstructural proteins involved in virus replication. A 
middle-sized gene, ORF2, encodes the nucleocapsid 
protein, the major nonstructural protein, and the small-
est, ORF3, encodes a structural protein whose func-
tion remains undetermined. All HEV isolates appear to 
belong to a single serotype, despite genomic heteroge-
neity of up to 25% and the existence of five genotypes, 
only four of which have been detected in humans; 
genotypes 1 and 2 appear to be more virulent, while 
0 1 2 3 4 5 6
12
24
48
60
120
36
Anti-HCV
HCV  RNA
ALT
Months after exposure
Figure 38-7 
Scheme of typical laboratory features during acute 
hepatitis C progressing to chronicity. HCV RNA is the first 
detectable event, preceding alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 
elevation and the appearance of anti-HCV.
SECTION VI
Disorders of the Liver and Biliary Tree
366
genotypes 3 and 4 are more attenuated and account 
for subclinical infections. Contributing to the perpetu-
ation of this virus are animal reservoirs, most notably 
in swine. There is no genomic or antigenic homology, 
however, between HEV and HAV or other picorna-
viruses; and HEV, although resembling caliciviruses, 
is sufficiently distinct from any known agent to merit 
a new classification of its own as a unique genus, 
Hepevirus, within the family Hepeviridae. The virus has 
been detected in stool, bile, and liver and is excreted 
in the stool during the late incubation period; immune 
responses to viral antigens occur very early during 
the course of acute infection. Both IgM anti-HEV 
and IgG anti-HEV can be detected, but both fall 
rapidly after acute infection, reaching low levels within 
9–12 months. Currently, serologic testing for HEV 
infection is not available routinely.
Pathogenesis
Under ordinary circumstances, none of the hepatitis 
viruses is known to be directly cytopathic to hepatocytes. 
Evidence suggests that the clinical manifestations and 
outcomes after acute liver injury associated with viral 
hepatitis are determined by the immunologic responses 
of the host. Among the viral hepatitides, the immuno-
pathogenesis of hepatitis B and C has been studied most 
extensively.
Hepatitis B
For HBV, the existence of inactive hepatitis B carriers 
with normal liver histology and function suggests 
that the virus is not directly cytopathic. The fact that 
patients with defects in cellular immune competence 
are more likely to remain chronically infected rather 
than to clear HBV supports the role of cellular immune 
responses in the pathogenesis of hepatitis B–related liver 
injury. The model that has the most experimental sup-
port involves cytolytic T cells sensitized specifically to 
recognize host and hepatitis B viral antigens on the liver 
cell surface. Nucleocapsid proteins (HBcAg and 
possibly HBeAg), present on the cell membrane in 
minute quantities, are the viral target antigens that, with 
host antigens, invite cytolytic T cells to destroy HBV-
infected hepatocytes. Differences in the robustness and 
broad polyclonality of CD8+ cytolytic T cell respon-
siveness and in the elaboration of antiviral cytokines by 
T cells have been invoked to explain differences in out-
comes between those who recover after acute hepatitis, 
and those who progress to chronic hepatitis, or between 
those with mild and those with severe (fulminant) acute 
HBV infection.
Although a robust cytolytic T cell response occurs 
and eliminates virus-infected liver cells during acute 
hepatitis B, >90% of HBV DNA has been found in 
experimentally infected chimpanzees to disappear from 
the liver and blood before maximal T cell infiltration of 
the liver and before most of the biochemical and his-
tologic evidence of liver injury. This observation sug-
gests that components of the innate immune system 
and inflammatory cytokines, independent of cytopathic 
antiviral mechanisms, participate in the early immune 
response to HBV infection; this effect has been shown to 
represent elimination of HBV replicative intermediates 
from the cytoplasm and covalently closed circular viral 
DNA from the nucleus of infected hepatocytes. Ulti-
mately, HBV-HLA-specific cytolytic T cell responses of 
the adaptive immune system are felt to be responsible 
for recovery from HBV infection.
Debate continues over the relative importance of viral 
and host factors in the pathogenesis of HBV-associated 
liver injury and its outcome. As noted earlier, precore 
genetic mutants of HBV have been associated with the 
more severe outcomes of HBV infection (severe chronic 
and fulminant hepatitis), suggesting that, under cer-
tain circumstances, relative pathogenicity is a property 
of the virus, not the host. The fact that concomitant 
HDV and HBV infections are associated with more 
severe liver injury than HBV infection alone and the 
fact that cells transfected in vitro with the gene for 
HDV (delta) antigen express HDV antigen and then 
become necrotic in the absence of any immunologic 
influences are also consistent with a viral effect on 
pathogenicity. Similarly, in patients who undergo liver 
transplantation for end-stage chronic hepatitis B, occa-
sionally, rapidly progressive liver injury appears in the 
new liver. This clinical pattern is associated with an 
unusual histologic pattern in the new liver, fibrosing 
cholestatic hepatitis, which, ultrastructurally, appears to 
represent a choking of the cell with overwhelming 
quantities of HBsAg. This observation suggests that, 
under the influence of the potent immunosuppressive 
agents required to prevent allograft rejection, HBV may 
have a direct cytopathic effect on liver cells, indepen-
dent of the immune system.
Although the precise mechanism of liver injury in 
HBV infection remains elusive, studies of nucleocap-
sid proteins have shed light on the profound immuno-
logic tolerance to HBV of babies born to mothers with 
highly replicative (HBeAg-positive), chronic HBV 
infection. In HBeAg-expressing transgenic mice, in 
utero exposure to HBeAg, which is sufficiently small to 
traverse the placenta, induces T cell tolerance to both 
nucleocapsid proteins. This, in turn, may explain why, 
when infection occurs so early in life, immunologic 
clearance does not occur, and protracted, lifelong infec-
tion ensues.
An important distinction should be drawn between 
HBV infection acquired at birth, common in endemic 
areas, such as the Far East, and infection acquired in 
adulthood, common in the West. Infection in the 
 
CHAPTER 38
Acute Viral Hepatitis
367
neonatal period is associated with the acquisition of 
immunologic tolerance to HBV, absence of an acute 
hepatitis illness, but the almost invariable establishment 
of chronic, often lifelong infection. Neonatally acquired 
HBV infection can culminate decades later in cirrho-
sis and hepatocellular carcinoma (see “Complications 
and Sequelae”). In contrast, when HBV infection is 
acquired during adolescence or early adulthood, the 
host immune response to HBV infected hepatocytes 
tends to be robust, an acute hepatitis-like illness is the 
rule, and failure to recover is the exception. After adult-
hood acquired infection, chronicity is uncommon, 
and the risk of hepatocellular carcinoma is very low. 
Based on these observations, some authorities catego-
rize HBV infection into an “immunotolerant” phase, an 
“immunoreactive” phase, and an “inactive” phase. This 
somewhat simplistic formulation does not apply at all to 
the typical adult in the west with self-limited acute hep-
atitis B, in whom no period of immunologic tolerance 
occurs. Even among those with neonatally acquired 
HBV infection, in whom immunologic tolerance is 
established definitively, intermittent bursts of hepatic 
necroinflammatory activity punctuate the period 
during the early decades of life during which liver 
injury appears to be quiescent (labeled by some as the 
“immunotolerant” phase). In addition, even when 
clinically apparent, liver injury and progressive fibrosis 
emerge during later decades (the so-called immunore-
active, or immunointolerant phase), the level of immu-
nologic tolerance to HBV remains substantial. More 
accurately, in patients with neonatally acquired HBV 
infection, a dynamic equilibrium exists between toler-
ance and intolerance, the outcome of which determines 
the clinical expression of chronic infection. Those indi-
viduals who are infected as neonates tend to have a rela-
tively higher level of immunologic tolerance during the 
early decades of life and a relatively lower level (but 
only rarely a loss) of tolerance in the later decades of life.
Hepatitis C
Cell-mediated immune responses and elaboration by 
T cells of antiviral cytokines contribute to the con-
tainment of infection and pathogenesis of liver injury 
associated with hepatitis C. Perhaps HCV infection 
of lymphoid cells plays a role in moderating immune 
responsiveness to the virus, as well. Intrahepatic HLA 
class I restricted cytolytic T cells directed at nucleo-
capsid, envelope, and nonstructural viral protein anti-
gens have been demonstrated in patients with chronic 
hepatitis C; however, such virus-specific cytolytic T cell 
responses do not correlate adequately with the degree 
of liver injury or with recovery. Yet, a consensus has 
emerged supporting a role in the pathogenesis of HCV-
associated liver injury of virus-activated CD4 helper 
T cells that stimulate, via the cytokines they elaborate, 
HCV-specific CD8 cytotoxic T cells. These responses 
appear to be more robust (higher in number, more 
diverse in viral antigen specificity, more functionally 
effective, and more long lasting) in those who recover 
from HCV than in those who have chronic infection. 
Several HLA alleles have been linked with self- 
limited hepatitis C, the most convincing of which is 
the C/C haplotype of the IL28B gene. Although atten-
tion has focused on adaptive immunity, HCV proteins 
have been shown to interfere with innate immunity 
by resulting in blocking of type 1 interferon responses 
and inhibition of interferon signaling and effector mol-
ecules in the interferon signaling cascade. Also shown to 
contribute to limiting HCV infection are natural killer 
cells of the innate immune system that function when 
HLA class 1 molecules required for successful adaptive 
immunity are underexpressed. Of note, the emergence 
of substantial viral quasispecies diversity and HCV 
sequence variation allow the virus to evade attempts 
by the host to contain HCV infection by both humoral 
and cellular immunity.
Finally, cross-reactivity between viral antigens (HCV 
NS3 and NS5A) and host autoantigens (cytochrome 
P450 2D6) has been invoked to explain the association 
between hepatitis C and a subset of patients with auto-
immune hepatitis and antibodies to liver-kidney micro-
somal (LKM) antigen (anti-LKM) (Chap. 40).
Extrahepatic Manifestations
Immune complex–mediated tissue damage appears to 
play a pathogenetic role in the extrahepatic manifesta-
tions of acute hepatitis B. The occasional prodromal 
serum sickness–like syndrome observed in acute hepa-
titis B appears to be related to the deposition in tis-
sue blood vessel walls of HBsAg-anti-HBs circulating 
immune complexes, leading to activation of the com-
plement system and depressed serum complement levels.
In patients with chronic hepatitis B, other types of 
immune-complex disease may be seen. Glomerulo-
nephritis with the nephrotic syndrome is observed 
occasionally; HBsAg, immunoglobulin, and C3 depo-
sition has been found in the glomerular basement 
membrane. While generalized vasculitis (polyarteri-
tis nodosa) develops in considerably fewer than 1% 
of patients with chronic HBV infection, 20–30% of 
patients with polyarteritis nodosa have HBsAg in serum. 
In these patients, the affected small- and medium-
size arterioles contain HBsAg, immunoglobulins, and 
complement components. Another extrahepatic mani-
festation of viral hepatitis, essential mixed cryoglobuline-
mia (EMC), was reported initially to be associated with 
hepatitis B. The disorder is characterized clinically by 
arthritis; cutaneous vasculitis (palpable purpura); and, 
occasionally, with glomerulonephritis and serologically 
by the presence of circulating cryoprecipitable immune 
SECTION VI
Disorders of the Liver and Biliary Tree
368
complexes of more than one immunoglobulin class. 
Many patients with this syndrome have chronic liver 
disease, but the association with HBV infection is lim-
ited; instead, a substantial proportion has chronic HCV 
infection, with circulating immune complexes contain-
ing HCV RNA. Immune-complex glomerulonephri-
tis is another recognized extrahepatic manifestation of 
chronic hepatitis C.
Pathology
The typical morphologic lesions of all types of viral 
hepatitis are similar and consist of panlobular infiltration 
with mononuclear cells, hepatic cell necrosis, hyper-
plasia of Kupffer cells, and variable degrees of cholesta-
sis. Hepatic cell regeneration is present, as evidenced 
by numerous mitotic figures, multinucleated cells, and 
“rosette” or “pseudoacinar” formation. The mono-
nuclear infiltration consists primarily of small lympho-
cytes, although plasma cells and eosinophils occasionally 
are present. Liver cell damage consists of hepatic cell 
degeneration and necrosis, cell dropout, ballooning 
of cells, and acidophilic degeneration of hepatocytes 
(forming so-called Councilman or apoptotic bodies). 
Large hepatocytes with a ground-glass appearance of 
the cytoplasm may be seen in chronic but not in acute 
HBV infection; these cells contain HBsAg and can be 
identified histochemically with orcein or aldehyde 
fuchsin. In uncomplicated viral hepatitis, the reticulin 
framework is preserved.
In hepatitis C, the histologic lesion is often remark-
able for a relative paucity of inflammation, a marked 
increase in activation of sinusoidal lining cells, lymphoid 
aggregates, the presence of fat (more frequent in geno-
type 3 and linked to increased fibrosis), and, occasion-
ally, bile duct lesions in which biliary epithelial cells 
appear to be piled up without interruption of the base-
ment membrane. Occasionally, microvesicular steatosis 
occurs in hepatitis D. In hepatitis E, a common histo-
logic feature is marked cholestasis. A cholestatic vari-
ant of slowly resolving acute hepatitis A also has been 
described.
A more severe histologic lesion, bridging hepatic necrosis, 
also termed subacute or confluent necrosis or interface hepa-
titis, is observed occasionally in acute hepatitis. “Bridg-
ing” between lobules results from large areas of hepatic 
cell dropout, with collapse of the reticulin framework. 
Characteristically, the bridge consists of condensed 
reticulum, inflammatory debris, and degenerating liver 
cells that span adjacent portal areas, portal to central 
veins, or central vein to central vein. This lesion had 
been thought to have prognostic significance; in many 
of the originally described patients with this lesion, 
a subacute course terminated in death within sev-
eral weeks to months, or severe chronic hepatitis and 
cirrhosis developed; however, the association between 
bridging necrosis and a poor prognosis in patients 
with acute hepatitis has not been upheld. Therefore, 
although demonstration of this lesion in patients with 
chronic hepatitis has prognostic significance (Chap. 40), 
its demonstration during acute hepatitis is less meaning-
ful, and liver biopsies to identify this lesion are no longer 
undertaken routinely in patients with acute hepatitis. In 
massive hepatic necrosis (fulminant hepatitis, “acute yellow 
atrophy”), the striking feature at postmortem exami-
nation is the finding of a small, shrunken, soft liver. 
Histologic examination reveals massive necrosis and 
dropout of liver cells of most lobules with exten-
sive collapse and condensation of the reticulin frame-
work. When histologic documentation is required in 
the management of fulminant or very severe hepatitis, 
a biopsy can be done by the angiographically guided 
transjugular route, which permits the performance 
of this invasive procedure in the presence of severe 
coagulopathy.
Immunohistochemical and electron-microscopic stud-
ies have localized HBsAg to the cytoplasm and plasma 
membrane of infected liver cells. In contrast, HBcAg 
predominates in the nucleus, but, occasionally, scant 
amounts are also seen in the cytoplasm and on the cell 
membrane. HDV antigen is localized to the hepato-
cyte nucleus, while HAV, HCV, and HEV antigens are 
localized to the cytoplasm.
Epidemiology and Global Features
Before the availability of serologic tests for hepa-
titis viruses, all viral hepatitis cases were labeled 
either as “infectious” or “serum” hepatitis. 
Modes of transmission overlap, however, and a clear 
distinction among the different types of viral hepatitis cannot be 
made solely on the basis of clinical or epidemiologic features 
(Table 38-2). The most accurate means to distinguish 
the various types of viral hepatitis involves specific sero-
logic testing.
Hepatitis A
This agent is transmitted almost exclusively by the fecal-oral 
route. Person-to-person spread of HAV is enhanced by 
poor personal hygiene and overcrowding; large out-
breaks as well as sporadic cases have been traced to 
contaminated food, water, milk, frozen raspberries and 
strawberries, green onions imported from Mexico, and 
shellfish. Intrafamily and intrainstitutional spread are also 
common. Early epidemiologic observations supported a 
predilection for hepatitis A to occur in late fall and early 
winter. In temperate zones, epidemic waves have been 
recorded every 5–20 years as new segments of nonim-
mune population appeared; however, in developed 
 
CHAPTER 38
Acute Viral Hepatitis
369
countries, the incidence of hepatitis A has been declin-
ing, presumably as a function of improved sanitation, 
and these cyclic patterns are no longer observed. No 
HAV carrier state has been identified after acute hep-
atitis A; perpetuation of the virus in nature depends 
presumably on nonepidemic, inapparent subclinical 
infection, ingestion of contaminated food or water in, 
or imported from, endemic areas, and/or contamination 
linked to environmental reservoirs.
In the general population, anti-HAV, a marker for 
previous HAV infection, increases in prevalence as a 
function of increasing age and of decreasing socioeco-
nomic status. In the 1970s, serologic evidence of prior 
hepatitis A infection occurred in ∼40% of urban pop-
ulations in the United States, most of whose members 
never recalled having had a symptomatic case of hepatitis. 
In subsequent decades, however, the prevalence of 
anti-HAV has been declining in the United States. In 
developing countries, exposure, infection, and sub-
sequent immunity are almost universal in childhood. 
As the frequency of subclinical childhood infections 
declines in developed countries, a susceptible cohort of 
adults emerges. Hepatitis A tends to be more symptom-
atic in adults; therefore, paradoxically, as the frequency 
of HAV infection declines, the likelihood of clinically 
apparent, even severe, HAV illnesses increases in the 
susceptible adult population. Travel to endemic areas 
is a common source of infection for adults from non-
endemic areas. More recently recognized epidemio-
logic foci of HAV infection include child-care centers, 
Table 38-2 
Clinical and Epidemiologic Features of Viral Hepatitis
Feature
HAV
HBV
HCV
HDV
HEV
Incubation (days)
15–45, mean 
30
30–180, mean 60–90
15–160, mean 50
30–180, mean 60–90
14–60,  
mean 40
Onset
Acute
Insidious or acute
Insidious
Insidious or acute
Acute
Age preference
Children, 
young adults
Young adults (sexual 
and percutaneous), 
babies, toddlers
Any age, but more 
common in adults
Any age (similar to 
HBV)
Young adults 
(20–40 years)
Transmission
Fecal-oral
+++
−
−
−
+++
Percutaneous
Unusual
+++
+++
+++
−
Perinatal
−
+++
±a
+
−
Sexual
±
++
±a
++
−
Clinical
Severity
Mild
Occasionally severe
Moderate
Occasionally severe
Mild
Fulminant
0.1%
0.1–1%
0.1%
5–20%b
1–2%e
Progression to 
chronicity
None
Occasional (1–10%) 
(90% of neonates)
Common (85%)
Commond
None
Carrier
None
0.1–30%c
1.5–3.2%
Variablef
None
Cancer
None
+ (Neonatal infection)
+
±
None
Prognosis
Excellent
Worse with age,  
debility
Moderate
Acute, good 
Chronic, poor
Good
Prophylaxis
IG, inactivated 
vaccine
HBIG, recombinant 
vaccine
None
HBV vaccine (none 
for HBV carriers)
Vaccine
Therapy
None
Interferon
Lamivudine
Adefovir
Pegylated interferon
Entecavir
Telbivudine
Tenofovir
Pegylated  
interferon plus 
ribavirin
Telaprevir 
Boceprevir
Interferon or 
pegylated interferon 
(efficacy moderate)
None
aPrimarily with HIV co-infection and high-level viremia in index case; risk ∼5%.
bUp to 5% in acute HBV/HDV co-infection; up to 20% in HDV superinfection of chronic HBV infection.
cVaries considerably throughout the world and in subpopulations within countries; see text.
dIn acute HBV/HDV co-infection, the frequency of chronicity is the same as that for HBV; in HDV superinfection, chronicity is invariable.
e10–20% in pregnant women.
fCommon in Mediterranean countries, rare in North America and western Europe.
Abbreviation: HBIG, hepatitis B immunoglobulin.
SECTION VI
Disorders of the Liver and Biliary Tree
370
neonatal intensive care units, promiscuous men who 
have sex with men, and injection drug users. Although 
hepatitis A is rarely bloodborne, several outbreaks 
have been recognized in recipients of clotting-factor 
concentrates. In the United States, the introduction of 
hepatitis A vaccination programs among children from 
high-incidence states has resulted in a >70% reduction 
in the annual incidence of new HAV infections and has 
shifted the burden of new infections from children to 
young adults.
Hepatitis B
Percutaneous inoculation has long been recognized as 
a major route of hepatitis B transmission, but the out-
moded designation “serum hepatitis” is an inaccurate 
label for the epidemiologic spectrum of HBV infec-
tion recognized today. As detailed later, most of the 
hepatitis transmitted by blood transfusion is not caused 
by HBV; moreover, in approximately two-thirds of 
patients with acute type B hepatitis, no history of an 
identifiable percutaneous exposure can be elicited. We 
now recognize that many cases of hepatitis B result 
from less obvious modes of nonpercutaneous or covert 
percutaneous transmission. HBsAg has been identi-
fied in almost every body fluid from infected persons, 
and at least some of these body fluids—most notably 
semen and saliva—are infectious, albeit less so than 
serum, when administered percutaneously or non-
percutaneously to experimental animals. Among the 
nonpercutaneous modes of HBV transmission, oral 
ingestion has been documented as a potential but inef-
ficient route of exposure. By contrast, the two non-
percutaneous routes considered to have the greatest 
impact are intimate (especially sexual) contact and 
perinatal transmission.
In sub-Saharan Africa, intimate contact among 
toddlers is considered instrumental in contributing to the 
maintenance of the high frequency of hepatitis B in the 
population. Perinatal transmission occurs primarily in 
infants born to HBsAg carrier mothers or mothers with 
acute hepatitis B during the third trimester of pregnancy 
or during the early postpartum period. Perinatal trans-
mission is uncommon in North America and western 
Europe but occurs with great frequency and is the most 
important mode of HBV perpetuation in the Far East 
and developing countries. Although the precise mode of 
perinatal transmission is unknown, and although ∼10% 
of infections may be acquired in utero, epidemiologic 
evidence suggests that most infections occur approx-
imately at the time of delivery and are not related to 
breast-feeding. The likelihood of perinatal transmis-
sion of HBV correlates with the presence of HBeAg 
and high-level viral replication; 90% of HBeAg-positive 
mothers but only 10–15% of anti-HBe-positive mothers 
transmit HBV infection to their offspring. In most cases, 
acute infection in the neonate is clinically asymptom-
atic, but the child is very likely to remain chronically 
infected.
The >350–400 million HBsAg carriers in the world 
constitute the main reservoir of hepatitis B in human 
beings. Whereas serum HBsAg is infrequent (0.1–0.5%) in 
normal populations in the United States and western Europe, 
a prevalence of up to 5–20% has been found in the Far East 
and in some tropical countries; in persons with Down’s 
syndrome, lepromatous leprosy, leukemia, Hodgkin’s 
disease, and polyarteritis nodosa; in patients with chronic 
renal disease on hemodialysis; and in injection drug users.
Other groups with high rates of HBV infection 
include spouses of acutely infected persons; sexually 
promiscuous persons (especially promiscuous men who 
have sex with men); health care workers exposed to 
blood; persons who require repeated transfusions espe-
cially with pooled blood-product concentrates (e.g., 
hemophiliacs); residents and staff of custodial institu-
tions for the developmentally handicapped; prisoners; 
and, to a lesser extent, family members of chronically 
infected patients. In volunteer blood donors, the preva-
lence of anti-HBs, a reflection of previous HBV infec-
tion, ranges from 5–10%, but the prevalence is higher 
in lower socioeconomic strata, older age groups, and 
persons—including those mentioned earlier—exposed 
to blood products. Because of highly sensitive virologic 
screening of donor blood, the risk of acquiring HBV 
infection from a blood transfusion is 1 in 230,000.
Prevalence of infection, modes of transmission, and 
human behavior conspire to mold geographically dif-
ferent epidemiologic patterns of HBV infection. In the 
Far East and Africa, hepatitis B, a disease of the new-
born and young children, is perpetuated by a cycle of 
maternal-neonatal spread. In North America and west-
ern Europe, hepatitis B is primarily a disease of ado-
lescence and early adulthood, the time of life when 
intimate sexual contact as well as recreational and occu-
pational percutaneous exposures tend to occur. To 
some degree, however, this dichotomy between high-
prevalence and low-prevalence geographic regions has 
been minimized by immigration from high-prevalence 
to low-prevalence areas. The introduction of hepatitis 
B vaccine in the early 1980s and adoption of univer-
sal childhood vaccination policies in many countries 
resulted in a dramatic, ∼90%, decline in the incidence of 
new HBV infections in those countries as well as in the 
dire consequences of chronic infection, including hepa-
tocellular carcinoma. Populations and groups for whom 
HBV-infection screening is recommended are listed in 
Table 38-3.
Hepatitis D
Infection with HDV has a worldwide distribution, but 
two epidemiologic patterns exist. In Mediterranean 
 
CHAPTER 38
Acute Viral Hepatitis
371
countries (northern Africa, southern Europe, the Middle 
East), HDV infection is endemic among those with 
hepatitis B, and the disease is transmitted predomi-
nantly by nonpercutaneous means, especially close per-
sonal contact. In nonendemic areas, such as the United 
States and northern Europe, HDV infection is con-
fined to persons exposed frequently to blood and blood 
products, primarily injection drug users and hemophil-
iacs. HDV infection can be introduced into a popula-
tion through drug users or by migration of persons 
from endemic to nonendemic areas. Thus, patterns of 
population migration and human behavior facilitating 
percutaneous contact play important roles in the intro-
duction and amplification of HDV infection. Occa-
sionally, the migrating epidemiology of hepatitis D is 
expressed in explosive outbreaks of severe hepatitis, such 
as those that have occurred in remote South American 
villages as well as in urban centers in the United States. 
Ultimately, such outbreaks of hepatitis D—either of 
co-infections with acute hepatitis B or of superinfections 
in those already infected with HBV—may blur the dis-
tinctions between endemic and nonendemic areas. On 
a global scale, HDV infection declined at the end of 
the 1990s. Even in Italy, an HDV-endemic area, pub-
lic health measures introduced to control HBV infec-
tion resulted during the 1990s in a 1.5%/year reduction 
in the prevalence of HDV infection. Still, the frequency 
of HDV infection during the first decade of the twenty-
first century has not fallen below levels reached during 
the 1990s; the reservoir has been sustained by survivors 
infected during 1970–1980 and recent immigrants from 
still-endemic to less-endemic countries.
Hepatitis C
Routine screening of blood donors for HBsAg and the 
elimination of commercial blood sources in the early 
1970s reduced the frequency of, but did not elimi-
nate, transfusion-associated hepatitis. During the 1970s, 
the likelihood of acquiring hepatitis after transfusion of 
voluntarily donated, HBsAg-screened blood was ∼10% 
per patient (up to 0.9% per unit transfused); 90–95% of 
these cases were classified, based on serologic exclusion 
of hepatitis A and B, as “non-A, non-B” hepatitis. For 
patients requiring transfusion of pooled products, such 
as clotting factor concentrates, the risk was even higher, 
up to 20–30%.
During the 1980s, voluntary self-exclusion of blood 
donors with risk factors for AIDS and then the intro-
duction of donor screening for anti-HIV reduced fur-
ther the likelihood of transfusion-associated hepatitis to 
<5%. During the late 1980s and early 1990s, the intro-
duction first of “surrogate” screening tests for non-A, 
non-B hepatitis (alanine aminotransferase [ALT] and 
anti-HBc, both shown to identify blood donors with a 
higher likelihood of transmitting non-A, non-B hepatitis 
to recipients) and, subsequently, after the discovery of 
HCV, first-generation immunoassays for anti-HCV 
reduced the frequency of transfusion-associated hepa-
titis even further. A prospective analysis of transfusion-
associated hepatitis conducted between 1986 and 1990 
showed that the frequency of transfusion-associated 
hepatitis at one urban university hospital fell from a 
baseline of 3.8% per patient (0.45% per unit transfused) 
to 1.5% per patient (0.19% per unit) after the introduc-
tion of surrogate testing and to 0.6% per patient (0.03% 
per unit) after the introduction of first-generation anti-
HCV assays. The introduction of second-generation 
anti-HCV assays reduced the frequency of transfusion-
associated hepatitis C to almost imperceptible levels—1 
in 100,000—and these gains were reinforced by the 
application of third-generation anti-HCV assays and 
of automated PCR testing of donated blood for HCV 
RNA, which has resulted in a reduction in the risk of 
transfusion-associated HCV infection to 1 in 2.3 million 
transfusions.
In addition to being transmitted by transfusion, 
hepatitis C can be transmitted by other percutaneous 
routes, such as injection drug use. In addition, this virus 
can be transmitted by occupational exposure to blood, 
and the likelihood of infection is increased in hemodialysis 
units. Although the frequency of transfusion-associated 
hepatitis C fell as a result of blood-donor screening, 
the overall frequency of hepatitis C remained the same 
until the early 1990s, when the overall frequency fell by 
80%, in parallel with a reduction in the number of new 
cases in injection drug users. After the exclusion of anti-
HCV-positive plasma units from the donor pool, rare, 
sporadic instances have occurred of hepatitis C among 
Table 38-3
High-Risk Populations for Which  
HBV-Infection Screening Is Recommended
Persons born in countries/regions with a high (>8%) and 
intermediate (>2%) prevalence of HBV infection including 
immigrants and adopted children and including persons 
born in the United States who were not vaccinated as 
infants and whose parents immigrated from areas of high 
HBV endemicity
Household and sexual contacts of persons with hepatitis B
Persons who have used injection drugs
Persons with multiple sexual contacts or a history of  
sexually transmitted disease
Men who have sex with men
Inmates of correctional facilities
Persons with elevated alanine or aspartate aminotransferase 
levels
Persons with HCV or HIV infection
Hemodialysis patients
Pregnant women
Persons who require immunosuppressive or cytotoxic 
therapy
SECTION VI
Disorders of the Liver and Biliary Tree
372
recipients of immunoglobulin (IG) preparations for 
intravenous (but not intramuscular) use.
Serologic evidence for HCV infection occurs in 
90% of patients with a history of transfusion-associ-
ated hepatitis (almost all occurring before 1992, when 
second-generation HCV-screening tests were intro-
duced); hemophiliacs and others treated with clotting 
factors; injection drug users; 60–70% of patients with 
sporadic “non-A, non-B” hepatitis who lack identifi-
able risk factors; 0.5% of volunteer blood donors; and, in 
the most recent survey conducted in the United States 
between 1999 and 2000, 1.6% of the general population 
in the United States, which translates into 4.1 million 
persons (3.2 million with viremia). Comparable frequen-
cies of HCV infection occur in most countries around 
the world, with 170 million persons infected worldwide, 
but extraordinarily high prevalences of HCV infection 
occur in certain countries such as Egypt, where >20% 
of the population in some cities is infected. The high 
frequency in Egypt is attributable to contaminated 
equipment used for medical procedures and unsafe 
injection practices in the 1970s. In the United States, 
African Americans and Mexican Americans have higher 
frequencies of HCV infection than whites. Between 
1988 and 1994, 30- to 40-year-old adult males had 
the highest prevalence of HCV infection; however, in 
a survey conducted between 1999 and 2000, the peak 
age decile had shifted to those age 40–49 years; an 
increase in hepatitis C–related mortality has paralleled 
this secular trend, increasing since 1995 predominantly 
in the 55- to 64-year age group. Thus, despite an 80% 
reduction in new HCV infections during the 1990s, the 
prevalence of HCV infection in the population was sus-
tained by an aging cohort that had acquired their infec-
tions 2 to 3 decades earlier, during the 1960s and 1970s, 
as a result predominantly of self-inoculation with recre-
ational drugs. Hepatitis C accounts for 40% of chronic 
liver disease, is the most frequent indication for liver 
transplantation, and is estimated to account for 8000–
10,000 deaths per year in the United States.
The distribution of HCV genotypes varies in different 
parts of the world. Worldwide, genotype 1 is the most 
common. In the United States, genotype 1 accounts for 
70% of HCV infections, while genotypes 2 and3 account 
for the remaining 30%; among African Americans, the 
frequency of genotype 1 is even higher (i.e., 90%). Geno-
type 4 predominates in Egypt; genotype 5 is localized to 
South Africa, and genotype 6 to Hong Kong.
Most asymptomatic blood donors found to have 
anti-HCV and ∼20–30% of persons with reported cases 
of acute hepatitis C do not fall into a recognized risk 
group; however, many such blood donors do recall 
risk-associated behaviors when questioned carefully.
As a bloodborne infection, HCV potentially can be 
transmitted sexually and perinatally; however, both of 
these modes of transmission are inefficient for hepatitis C. 
Although 10–15% of patients with acute hepatitis C 
report having potential sexual sources of infection, most 
studies have failed to identify sexual transmission of this 
agent. The chances of sexual and perinatal transmission 
have been estimated to be ∼5%, well below comparable 
rates for HIV and HBV infections. Moreover, sexual 
transmission appears to be confined to such subgroups 
as persons with multiple sexual partners and sexually 
transmitted diseases; transmission of HCV infection 
is rare between stable, monogamous sexual partners. 
Breast-feeding does not increase the risk of HCV infec-
tion between an infected mother and her infant. Infec-
tion of health workers is not dramatically higher than 
among the general population; however, health workers 
are more likely to acquire HCV infection through acci-
dental needle punctures, the efficiency of which is ∼3%. 
Infection of household contacts is rare as well.
Other groups with an increased frequency of HCV 
infection include patients who require hemodialysis and 
organ transplantation, those who require transfusions 
in the setting of cancer chemotherapy, HIV-infected 
persons, and persons with unexplained serum amino-
transferase elevations. In immunosuppressed individuals, 
levels of anti-HCV may be undetectable, and a diag-
nosis may require testing for HCV RNA. Although 
new acute cases of hepatitis C are rare, newly diag-
nosed cases are common among otherwise healthy per-
sons who experimented briefly with injection drugs, as 
noted earlier, 2 or 3 decades earlier. Such instances usu-
ally remain unrecognized for years, until unearthed by 
laboratory screening for routine medical examinations, 
insurance applications, and attempted blood donation. 
Populations groups for whom HCV-infection screening 
is recommended are listed in Table 38-4.
Hepatitis E
This type of hepatitis, identified in India, Asia, Africa, the 
Middle East, and Central America, resembles hepatitis A 
Table 38-4
High-Risk Populations for Which  
HCV-Infection Screening Is Recommended
Persons who have used injection drugs or those who have 
used illicit drugs by noninjection routes
Persons with HIV infection
Hemophiliacs treated with clotting factor concentrates 
prior to 1987
Hemodialysis patients
Persons with unexplained elevations of aminotransferase levels
Transfusion or transplantation recipients prior to July 1992
Children born to women with hepatitis C
Health care, public safety, and emergency medical  
personnel following needle injury or mucosal exposure to 
HCV-contaminated blood
Sexual partners of persons with hepatitis C infection
 
CHAPTER 38
Acute Viral Hepatitis
373
in its primarily enteric mode of spread. The commonly 
recognized cases occur after contamination of water 
supplies such as after monsoon flooding, but sporadic, 
isolated cases occur. An epidemiologic feature that dis-
tinguishes HEV from other enteric agents is the rarity of 
secondary person-to-person spread from infected persons 
to their close contacts. Infections arise in populations that 
are immune to HAV and favor young adults. In endemic 
areas, the prevalence of antibodies to HEV is ≤40%. In 
nonendemic areas of the world, such as the United States, 
clinically apparent acute hepatitis E is extremely rare; 
however, the prevalence of antibodies to HEV can be 
as high as 20% in such areas. In nonendemic areas, HEV 
does not account for any of the sporadic “non-A, non-B” 
cases of hepatitis; however, cases imported from endemic 
areas have been found in the United States. Several 
reports suggest a zoonotic reservoir for HEV in swine.
Clinical and Laboratory Features
Symptoms and signs
Acute viral hepatitis occurs after an incubation period 
that varies according to the responsible agent. Generally, 
incubation periods for hepatitis A range from 15–45 days 
(mean, 4 weeks), for hepatitis B and D from 30–180 
days (mean, 8–12 weeks), for hepatitis C from 
15–160 days (mean, 7 weeks), and for hepatitis E from 
14–60 days (mean, 5–6 weeks). The prodromal symptoms 
of acute viral hepatitis are systemic and quite variable. 
Constitutional symptoms of anorexia, nausea and vomit-
ing, fatigue, malaise, arthralgias, myalgias, headache, pho-
tophobia, pharyngitis, cough, and coryza may precede 
the onset of jaundice by 1–2 weeks. The nausea, vom-
iting, and anorexia are frequently associated with altera-
tions in olfaction and taste. A low-grade fever between 
38° and 39°C (100°–102°F) is more often present in 
hepatitis A and E than in hepatitis B or C, except when 
hepatitis B is heralded by a serum sickness–like syn-
drome; rarely, a fever of 39.5°–40°C (103°–104°F) may 
accompany the constitutional symptoms. Dark urine and 
clay-colored stools may be noticed by the patient from 
1–5 days before the onset of clinical jaundice.
With the onset of clinical jaundice, the constitu-
tional prodromal symptoms usually diminish, but in 
some patients mild weight loss (2.5–5 kg) is common 
and may continue during the entire icteric phase. The 
liver becomes enlarged and tender and may be associ-
ated with right upper quadrant pain and discomfort. 
Infrequently, patients present with a cholestatic picture, 
suggesting extrahepatic biliary obstruction. Spleno-
megaly and cervical adenopathy are present in 10–20% 
of patients with acute hepatitis. Rarely, a few spider 
angiomas appear during the icteric phase and disap-
pear during convalescence. During the recovery phase, 
constitutional symptoms disappear, but usually some 
liver enlargement and abnormalities in liver biochemi-
cal tests are still evident. The duration of the posticteric 
phase is variable, ranging 2–12 weeks, and is usually 
more prolonged in acute hepatitis B and C. Complete 
clinical and biochemical recovery is to be expected 
1–2 months after all cases of hepatitis A and E and 
3–4 months after the onset of jaundice in three-quarters 
of uncomplicated, self-limited cases of hepatitis B and 
C (among healthy adults, acute hepatitis B is self-lim-
ited in 95–99% while hepatitis C is self-limited in only 
∼15%). In the remainder, biochemical recovery may be 
delayed. A substantial proportion of patients with viral 
hepatitis never become icteric.
Infection with HDV can occur in the presence of 
acute or chronic HBV infection; the duration of HBV 
infection determines the duration of HDV infection. 
When acute HDV and HBV infection occur simul-
taneously, clinical and biochemical features may be 
indistinguishable from those of HBV infection alone, 
although occasionally they are more severe. As opposed 
to patients with acute HBV infection, patients with 
chronic HBV infection can support HDV replication 
indefinitely. This can happen when acute HDV infec-
tion occurs in the presence of a nonresolving acute 
HBV infection. More commonly, acute HDV infection 
becomes chronic when it is superimposed on an under-
lying chronic HBV infection. In such cases, the HDV 
superinfection appears as a clinical exacerbation or an 
episode resembling acute viral hepatitis in someone 
already chronically infected with HBV. Superinfection 
with HDV in a patient with chronic hepatitis B often 
leads to clinical deterioration (discussed later).
In addition to superinfections with other hepatitis 
agents, acute hepatitis-like clinical events in persons 
with chronic hepatitis B may accompany spontane-
ous HBeAg to anti-HBe seroconversion or spontane-
ous reactivation (i.e., reversion from nonreplicative to 
replicative infection). Such reactivations can occur as 
well in therapeutically immunosuppressed patients with 
chronic HBV infection when cytotoxic/immunosuppressive 
drugs are withdrawn; in these cases, restoration of 
immune competence is thought to allow resumption 
of previously checked cell-mediated immune cytolysis 
of HBV-infected hepatocytes. Occasionally, acute clini-
cal exacerbations of chronic hepatitis B may represent 
the emergence of a precore mutant (see “Virology and 
Etiology”), and the subsequent course in such patients 
may be characterized by periodic exacerbations.
Laboratory features
The serum aminotransferases aspartate aminotransferase 
(AST) and ALT (previously designated SGOT and 
SGPT) show a variable increase during the prodromal 
phase of acute viral hepatitis and precede the rise in 
bilirubin level (Figs. 38-2 and 38-4). The acute level of 
SECTION VI
Disorders of the Liver and Biliary Tree
374
these enzymes, however, does not correlate well with 
the degree of liver cell damage. Peak levels vary from 
400–4000 IU or more; these levels are usually reached 
at the time the patient is clinically icteric and diminish 
progressively during the recovery phase of acute hepatitis. 
The diagnosis of anicteric hepatitis is based on clinical 
features and on aminotransferase elevations.
Jaundice is usually visible in the sclera or skin when 
the serum bilirubin value is >43 μmol/L (2.5 mg/dL). 
When jaundice appears, the serum bilirubin typically rises 
to levels ranging from 85–340 μmol/L (5–20 mg/dL). 
The serum bilirubin may continue to rise despite fall-
ing serum aminotransferase levels. In most instances, 
the total bilirubin is equally divided between the con-
jugated and unconjugated fractions. Bilirubin levels 
>340 μmol/L (20 mg/dL) extending and persisting 
late into the course of viral hepatitis are more likely 
to be associated with severe disease. In certain patients 
with underlying hemolytic anemia, however, such as 
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency and sickle 
cell anemia, a high serum bilirubin level is common, 
resulting from superimposed hemolysis. In such patients, 
bilirubin levels >513 μmol/L (30 mg/dL) have been 
observed and are not necessarily associated with a poor 
prognosis.
Neutropenia and lymphopenia are transient and are 
followed by a relative lymphocytosis. Atypical lympho-
cytes (varying between 2 and 20%) are common dur-
ing the acute phase. Measurement of the prothrombin 
time (PT) is important in patients with acute viral hepa-
titis, for a prolonged value may reflect a severe hepatic 
synthetic defect, signify extensive hepatocellular necro-
sis, and indicate a worse prognosis. Occasionally, a pro-
longed PT may occur with only mild increases in the 
serum bilirubin and aminotransferase levels. Prolonged 
nausea and vomiting, inadequate carbohydrate intake, 
and poor hepatic glycogen reserves may contribute to 
hypoglycemia noted occasionally in patients with severe 
viral hepatitis. Serum alkaline phosphatase may be 
normal or only mildly elevated, while a fall in serum 
albumin is uncommon in uncomplicated acute viral 
hepatitis. In some patients, mild and transient steator-
rhea has been noted as well as slight microscopic hema-
turia and minimal proteinuria.
A diffuse but mild elevation of the γ globulin fraction 
is common during acute viral hepatitis. Serum IgG and 
IgM levels are elevated in about one-third of patients 
during the acute phase of viral hepatitis, but the serum 
IgM level is elevated more characteristically during 
acute hepatitis A. During the acute phase of viral hepa-
titis, antibodies to smooth muscle and other cell constit-
uents may be present, and low titers of rheumatoid fac-
tor, nuclear antibody, and heterophil antibody can also 
be found occasionally. In hepatitis C and D, antibodies 
to LKM may occur; however, the species of LKM anti-
bodies in the two types of hepatitis are different from 
each other as well as from the LKM antibody species 
characteristic of autoimmune hepatitis type 2 (Chap. 
40). The autoantibodies in viral hepatitis are nonspecific 
and can also be associated with other viral and systemic 
diseases. In contrast, virus-specific antibodies, which 
appear during and after hepatitis virus infection, are 
serologic markers of diagnostic importance.
As described earlier, serologic tests are available with 
which to establish a diagnosis of hepatitis A, B, D, 
and C. Tests for fecal or serum HAV are not routinely 
available. Therefore, a diagnosis of hepatitis A is based 
on detection of IgM anti-HAV during acute illness 
(Fig. 38-2). Rheumatoid factor can give rise to false-
positive results in this test.
A diagnosis of HBV infection can usually be made 
by detection of HBsAg in serum. Infrequently, levels of 
HBsAg are too low to be detected during acute HBV 
infection, even with contemporary, highly sensitive 
immunoassays. In such cases, the diagnosis can be estab-
lished by the presence of IgM anti-HBc.
The titer of HBsAg bears little relation to the severity 
of clinical disease. Indeed, an inverse correlation exists 
between the serum concentration of HBsAg and the 
degree of liver cell damage. For example, titers are high-
est in immunosuppressed patients, lower in patients with 
chronic liver disease (but higher in mild chronic than 
in severe chronic hepatitis), and very low in patients 
with acute fulminant hepatitis. These observations sug-
gest that, in hepatitis B, the degree of liver cell damage 
and the clinical course are related to variations in the 
patient’s immune response to HBV rather than to the 
amount of circulating HBsAg. In immunocompetent 
persons, however, a correlation exists between markers 
of HBV replication and liver injury (discussed later).
Another serologic marker that may be of value in 
patients with hepatitis B is HBeAg. Its principal clini-
cal usefulness is as an indicator of relative infectivity. 
Because HBeAg is invariably present during early acute 
hepatitis B, HBeAg testing is indicated primarily during 
follow-up of chronic infection.
In patients with hepatitis B surface antigenemia of 
unknown duration (e.g., blood donors found to be 
HBsAg-positive and referred to a physician for evalu-
ation), testing for IgM anti-HBc may be useful to 
distinguish between acute or recent infection (IgM 
anti-HBc-positive) and chronic HBV infection (IgM 
anti-HBc-negative, IgG anti-HBc-positive). A false-
positive test for IgM anti-HBc may be encountered in 
patients with high-titer rheumatoid factor.
Anti-HBs is rarely detectable in the presence of 
HBsAg in patients with acute hepatitis B, but 10–20% 
of persons with chronic HBV infection may harbor low-
level anti-HBs. This antibody is directed not against 
the common group determinant, a, but against the 
heterotypic subtype determinant (e.g., HBsAg of sub-
type ad with anti-HBs of subtype y). In most cases, this 
 
CHAPTER 38
Acute Viral Hepatitis
375
serologic pattern cannot be attributed to infection with 
two different HBV subtypes, and the presence of 
this antibody is not a harbinger of imminent HBsAg 
clearance. When such antibody is detected, its presence 
is of no recognized clinical significance (see “Virology 
and Etiology”).
After immunization with hepatitis B vaccine, which 
consists of HBsAg alone, anti-HBs is the only serologic 
marker to appear. The commonly encountered sero-
logic patterns of hepatitis B and their interpretations 
are summarized in Table 38-5. Tests for the detection 
of HBV DNA in liver and serum are now available. 
Like HBeAg, serum HBV DNA is an indicator of HBV 
replication, but tests for HBV DNA are more sensitive 
and quantitative. First-generation hybridization assays 
for HBV DNA had a sensitivity of 105–106 virions/
mL, a relative threshold below which infectivity and 
liver injury are limited and HBeAg is usually unde-
tectable. Currently, testing for HBV DNA has shifted 
from insensitive hybridization assays to amplification 
assays (e.g., the PCR-based assay, which can detect as 
few as 10 or 100 virions/mL); among the commercially 
available PCR assays, the most useful are those with 
the highest sensitivity (5–10 IU/mL) and the largest 
dynamic range (100–109 IU/mL). With increased sen-
sitivity, amplification assays remain reactive well below 
the threshold for infectivity and liver injury. These 
markers are useful in following the course of HBV 
replication in patients with chronic hepatitis B receiv-
ing antiviral chemotherapy (e.g., with interferon or 
nucleoside analogues) (Chap. 40). In immunocompe-
tent persons with chronic hepatitis B, a general corre-
lation does appear to exist between the level of HBV 
replication, as reflected by the level of HBV DNA in 
serum, and the degree of liver injury. High-serum HBV 
DNA levels, increased expression of viral antigens, and 
necroinflammatory activity in the liver go hand in hand 
unless immunosuppression interferes with cytolytic 
T cell responses to virus-infected cells; reduction 
of HBV replication with antiviral drugs tends to be 
accompanied by an improvement in liver histology. 
Among patients with chronic hepatitis B, high lev-
els of HBV DNA increase the risk of cirrhosis, hepatic 
decompensation, and hepatocellular carcinoma (see 
“Complications and Sequelae”).
In patients with hepatitis C, an episodic pattern of 
aminotransferase elevation is common. A specific sero-
logic diagnosis of hepatitis C can be made by demon-
strating the presence in serum of anti-HCV. When 
contemporary immunoassays are used, anti-HCV can 
be detected in acute hepatitis C during the initial phase 
of elevated aminotransferase activity. This antibody 
may never become detectable in 5–10% of patients 
with acute hepatitis C, and levels of anti-HCV may 
become undetectable after recovery (albeit rare) from 
acute hepatitis C. In patients with chronic hepatitis C, 
anti-HCV is detectable in >95% of cases. Nonspecificity 
can confound immunoassays for anti-HCV, especially 
in persons with a low prior probability of infection, 
such as volunteer blood donors, or in persons with 
circulating rheumatoid factor, which can bind non-
specifically to assay reagents; testing for HCV RNA 
can be used in such settings to distinguish between 
true-positive and false-positive anti-HCV determi-
nations. Assays for HCV RNA are the most sensi-
tive tests for HCV infection and represent the “gold 
standard” in establishing a diagnosis of hepatitis C. 
HCV RNA can be detected even before acute eleva-
tion of aminotransferase activity and before the appear-
ance of anti-HCV in patients with acute hepatitis C. 
Table 38-5
Commonly Encountered Serologic Patterns of Hepatitis B Infection
HBsAg
Anti-HBs
Anti-HBc
HBeAg
Anti-HBe
Interpretation
+
−
IgM
+
−
Acute hepatitis B, high infectivity
+
−
IgG
+
−
Chronic hepatitis B, high infectivity
+
−
IgG
−
+
1.  Late acute or chronic hepatitis B, low infectivity
2.  HBeAg−negative (“precore−mutant”) hepatitis B (chronic 
or, rarely, acute)
+
+
+
+/−
+/−
1.  HBsAg of one subtype and heterotypic anti−HBs (common)
2.  Process of seroconversion from HBsAg to anti−HBs (rare)
−
−
IgM
+/−
+/−
1.  Acute hepatitis B
2.  Anti−HBc “window”
−
−
IgG
−
+/−
1.  Low−level hepatitis B carrier
2.  Hepatitis B in remote past
−
+
IgG
−
+/−
Recovery from hepatitis B
−
+
−
−
−
1.  Immunization with HBsAg (after vaccination)
2.  Hepatitis B in the remote past (?)
3.  False−positive
SECTION VI
Disorders of the Liver and Biliary Tree
376
In addition, HCV RNA remains detectable indefinitely, 
continuously in most but intermittently in some, in 
patients with chronic hepatitis C (detectable as well in 
some persons with normal liver tests (i.e., inactive carriers). 
In the small minority of patients with hepatitis C who lack 
anti-HCV, a diagnosis can be supported by detection of 
HCV RNA. If all these tests are negative and the patient 
has a well-characterized case of hepatitis after percutaneous 
exposure to blood or blood products, a diagnosis of hepati-
tis caused by an unidentified agent can be entertained.
Amplification techniques are required to detect 
HCV RNA, and two types are available. One is a 
branched-chain complementary DNA (bDNA) assay, 
in which the detection signal (a colorimetrically detect-
able enzyme bound to a complementary DNA probe) is 
amplified. The other involves target amplification (i.e., 
synthesis of multiple copies of the viral genome). This 
can be done by PCR or TMA, in which the viral RNA 
is reverse transcribed to complementary DNA and then 
amplified by repeated cycles of DNA synthesis. Both 
can be used as quantitative assays and a measurement of 
relative “viral load”; PCR and TMA, with a sensitiv-
ity of 10–102 IU/mL, are more sensitive than bDNA, 
with a sensitivity of 103 IU/mL; assays are available with 
a wide dynamic range (10–107 IU/mL). Determination 
of HCV RNA level is not a reliable marker of disease 
severity or prognosis but is helpful in predicting relative 
responsiveness to antiviral therapy. The same is true for 
determinations of HCV genotype (Chap. 40).
A proportion of patients with hepatitis C have isolated 
anti-HBc in their blood, a reflection of a common risk in 
certain populations of exposure to multiple bloodborne 
hepatitis agents. The anti-HBc in such cases is almost 
invariably of the IgG class and usually represents HBV 
infection in the remote past (HBV DNA undetectable), 
rarely current HBV infection with low-level virus carriage.
The presence of HDV infection can be identified by 
demonstrating intrahepatic HDV antigen or, more prac-
tically, an anti-HDV seroconversion (a rise in titer of 
anti-HDV or de novo appearance of anti-HDV). Circu-
lating HDV antigen, also diagnostic of acute infection, 
is detectable only briefly, if at all. Because anti-HDV is 
often undetectable once HBsAg disappears, retrospec-
tive serodiagnosis of acute self-limited, simultaneous 
HBV and HDV infection is difficult. Early diagnosis of 
acute infection may be hampered by a delay of up to 
30–40 days in the appearance of anti-HDV.
When a patient presents with acute hepatitis and has 
HBsAg and anti-HDV in serum, determination of the 
class of anti-HBc is helpful in establishing the relation-
ship between infection with HBV and HDV. Although 
IgM anti-HBc does not distinguish absolutely between 
acute and chronic HBV infection, its presence is a 
reliable indicator of recent infection and its absence 
a reliable indicator of infection in the remote past. In 
simultaneous acute HBV and HDV infections, IgM 
anti-HBc will be detectable, while in acute HDV infec-
tion superimposed on chronic HBV infection, anti-HBc 
will be of the IgG class.
Tests for the presence of HDV RNA are useful for 
determining the presence of ongoing HDV replication and 
relative infectivity. Diagnostic tests for hepatitis E are com-
mercially available in several countries outside the United 
States; in the United States, diagnostic assays can be per-
formed at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Liver biopsy is rarely necessary or indicated in acute 
viral hepatitis, except when the diagnosis is question-
able or when clinical evidence suggests a diagnosis of 
chronic hepatitis.
A diagnostic algorithm can be applied in the evalu-
ation of cases of acute viral hepatitis. A patient with 
acute hepatitis should undergo four serologic tests, 
HBsAg, IgM anti-HAV, IgM anti-HBc, and anti-HCV 
(Table 38-6). The presence of HBsAg, with or with-
out IgM anti-HBc, represents HBV infection. If IgM 
anti-HBc is present, the HBV infection is considered 
acute; if IgM anti-HBc is absent, the HBV infection is 
Table 38-6
Simplified Diagnostic Approach in Patients 
Presenting With Acute Hepatitis
Serologic Tests of Patient’s Serum
HBsAg
IgM 
Anti-HAV
IgM 
Anti-HBc
Anti-
HCV
Diagnostic 
Interpretation
+
−
+
−
Acute  
hepatitis B
+
−
−
−
Chronic  
hepatitis B
+
+
−
−
Acute  
hepatitis A  
superimposed 
on chronic 
hepatitis B
+
+
+
−
Acute hepatitis 
A and B
−
+
−
−
Acute  
hepatitis A
−
+
+
−
Acute  
hepatitis A 
and B  
(HBsAg below  
detection 
threshold)
−
−
+
−
Acute hepati-
tis B (HBsAg 
below  
detection 
threshold)
−
−
−
+
Acute  
hepatitis C
 
CHAPTER 38
Acute Viral Hepatitis
377
considered chronic. A diagnosis of acute hepatitis B can 
be made in the absence of HBsAg when IgM anti-HBc 
is detectable. A diagnosis of acute hepatitis A is based on 
the presence of IgM anti-HAV. If IgM anti-HAV coex-
ists with HBsAg, a diagnosis of simultaneous HAV and 
HBV infections can be made; if IgM anti-HBc (with 
or without HBsAg) is detectable, the patient has simul-
taneous acute hepatitis A and B, and if IgM anti-HBc 
is undetectable, the patient has acute hepatitis A super-
imposed on chronic HBV infection. The presence of 
anti-HCV supports a diagnosis of acute hepatitis C. 
Occasionally, testing for HCV RNA or repeat anti-
HCV testing later during the illness is necessary to 
establish the diagnosis. Absence of all serologic markers 
is consistent with a diagnosis of “non-A, non-B, non-
C” hepatitis, if the epidemiologic setting is appropriate.
In patients with chronic hepatitis, initial testing 
should consist of HBsAg and anti-HCV. Anti-HCV 
supports and HCV RNA testing establishes the diag-
nosis of chronic hepatitis C. If a serologic diagnosis of 
chronic hepatitis B is made, testing for HBeAg and anti-
HBe is indicated to evaluate relative infectivity. Testing 
for HBV DNA in such patients provides a more quan-
titative and sensitive measure of the level of virus rep-
lication and, therefore, is very helpful during antiviral 
therapy (Chap. 40). In patients with chronic hepatitis 
B and normal aminotransferase activity in the absence 
of HBeAg, serial testing over time is often required to 
distinguish between inactive carriage and HBeAg- 
negative chronic hepatitis B with fluctuating viro-
logic and necroinflammatory activity. In persons with 
hepatitis B, testing for anti-HDV is useful in those with 
severe and fulminant disease, with severe chronic dis-
ease, with chronic hepatitis B and acute hepatitis-like 
exacerbations, with frequent percutaneous exposures, 
and from areas where HDV infection is endemic.
Prognosis
Virtually all previously healthy patients with hepatitis A 
recover completely with no clinical sequelae. Simi-
larly, in acute hepatitis B, 95–99% of previously healthy 
adults have a favorable course and recover completely. 
Certain clinical and laboratory features, however, sug-
gest a more complicated and protracted course. Patients 
of advanced age and with serious underlying medical 
disorders may have a prolonged course and are more 
likely to experience severe hepatitis. Initial presenting 
features such as ascites, peripheral edema, and symptoms 
of hepatic encephalopathy suggest a poorer prognosis. 
In addition, a prolonged PT, low-serum albumin level, 
hypoglycemia, and very high-serum bilirubin values 
suggest severe hepatocellular disease. Patients with these 
clinical and laboratory features deserve prompt hospi-
tal admission. The case fatality rate in hepatitis A and 
B is very low (∼0.1%) but is increased by advanced age 
and underlying debilitating disorders. Among patients 
ill enough to be hospitalized for acute hepatitis B, the 
fatality rate is 1%. Hepatitis C is less severe during the 
acute phase than hepatitis B and is more likely to be 
anicteric; fatalities are rare, but the precise case fatality 
rate is not known. In outbreaks of waterborne hepatitis 
E in India and Asia, the case fatality rate is 1–2% and up 
to 10–20% in pregnant women. Patients with simulta-
neous acute hepatitis B and hepatitis D do not necessar-
ily experience a higher mortality rate than do patients 
with acute hepatitis B alone; however, in several recent 
outbreaks of acute simultaneous HBV and HDV infec-
tion among injection drug users, the case fatality rate 
has been ∼5%. In the case of HDV superinfection of a 
person with chronic hepatitis B, the likelihood of ful-
minant hepatitis and death is increased substantially. 
Although the case fatality rate for hepatitis D has not 
been defined adequately, in outbreaks of severe HDV 
superinfection in isolated populations with a high hepa-
titis B carrier rate, the mortality rate has been recorded 
in excess of 20%.
Complications and Sequelae
A small proportion of patients with hepatitis A experi-
ence relapsing hepatitis weeks to months after apparent 
recovery from acute hepatitis. Relapses are character-
ized by recurrence of symptoms, aminotransferase ele-
vations, occasionally jaundice, and fecal excretion of 
HAV. Another unusual variant of acute hepatitis A is 
cholestatic hepatitis, characterized by protracted choles-
tatic jaundice and pruritus. Rarely, liver test abnormali-
ties persist for many months, even up to a year. Even 
when these complications occur, hepatitis A remains 
self-limited and does not progress to chronic liver 
disease. During the prodromal phase of acute hepatitis B, 
a serum sickness-like syndrome characterized by arthral-
gia or arthritis, rash, angioedema, and rarely, hematuria 
and proteinuria may develop in 5–10% of patients. This 
syndrome occurs before the onset of clinical jaundice, 
and these patients are often diagnosed erroneously as 
having rheumatologic diseases. The diagnosis can be 
established by measuring serum aminotransferase lev-
els, which are almost invariably elevated, and serum 
HBsAg. As noted earlier, EMC is an immune-complex 
disease that can complicate chronic hepatitis C and is 
part of a spectrum of B cell lymphoproliferative dis-
orders, which, in rare instances, can evolve to B cell 
lymphoma. Attention has been drawn as well to asso-
ciations between hepatitis C and such cutaneous dis-
orders as porphyria cutanea tarda and lichen planus. A 
mechanism for these associations is unknown. Finally, 
related to the reliance of HCV on lipoprotein secre-
tion and assembly pathways and on interactions of 
HCV with glucose metabolism, HCV infection may be 
complicated by hepatic steatosis, hypercholesterolemia, 
SECTION VI
Disorders of the Liver and Biliary Tree
378
insulin resistance (and other manifestations of the 
metabolic syndrome), and type 2 diabetes mellitus; both 
hepatic steatosis and insulin resistance appear to acceler-
ate hepatic fibrosis and blunt responsiveness to antiviral 
therapy (Chap. 40).
The most feared complication of viral hepatitis is 
fulminant hepatitis (massive hepatic necrosis); fortunately, 
this is a rare event. Fulminant hepatitis is primarily seen 
in hepatitis B and D, as well as hepatitis E, but rare 
fulminant cases of hepatitis A occur primarily in older 
adults and in persons with underlying chronic liver 
disease, including, according to some reports, chronic 
hepatitis B and C. Hepatitis B accounts for >50% of 
fulminant cases of viral hepatitis, a sizable propor-
tion of which are associated with HDV infection and 
another proportion with underlying chronic hepatitis C. 
Fulminant hepatitis is hardly ever seen in hepatitis C, 
but hepatitis E, as noted earlier, can be complicated 
by fatal fulminant hepatitis in 1–2% of all cases and in 
up to 20% of cases in pregnant women. Patients usu-
ally present with signs and symptoms of encephalopa-
thy that may evolve to deep coma. The liver is usually 
small and the PT excessively prolonged. The combina-
tion of rapidly shrinking liver size, rapidly rising biliru-
bin level, and marked prolongation of the PT, even as 
aminotransferase levels fall, together with clinical signs 
of confusion, disorientation, somnolence, ascites, and 
edema, indicates that the patient has hepatic failure with 
encephalopathy. Cerebral edema is common; brainstem 
compression, gastrointestinal bleeding, sepsis, respira-
tory failure, cardiovascular collapse, and renal failure are 
terminal events. The mortality rate is exceedingly high 
(>80% in patients with deep coma), but patients who 
survive may have a complete biochemical and histologic 
recovery. If a donor liver can be located in time, liver 
transplantation may be life-saving in patients with ful-
minant hepatitis (Chap. 46).
Documenting the disappearance of HBsAg after 
apparent clinical recovery from acute hepatitis B is par-
ticularly important. Before laboratory methods were 
available to distinguish between acute hepatitis and acute 
hepatitis-like exacerbations (spontaneous reactivations) of 
chronic hepatitis B, observations suggested that ∼10% 
of previously healthy patients remained HBsAg-posi-
tive for >6 months after the onset of clinically appar-
ent acute hepatitis B. One-half of these persons cleared 
the antigen from their circulations during the next 
several years, but the other 5% remained chronically 
HBsAg-positive. More recent observations suggest 
that the true rate of chronic infection after clinically 
apparent acute hepatitis B is as low as 1% in normal, 
immunocompetent, young adults. Earlier, higher esti-
mates may have been confounded by inadvertent inclu-
sion of acute exacerbations in chronically infected 
patients; these patients, chronically HBsAg-positive 
before exacerbation, were unlikely to seroconvert to 
HBsAg-negative thereafter. Whether the rate of chro-
nicity is 10% or 1%, such patients have anti-HBc in 
serum; anti-HBs is either undetected or detected at low 
titer against the opposite subtype specificity of the anti-
gen (see “Laboratory Features”). These patients may 
(1) be inactive carriers; (2) have low-grade, mild chronic 
hepatitis; or (3) have moderate to severe chronic 
hepatitis with or without cirrhosis. The likelihood 
of remaining chronically infected after acute HBV infec-
tion is especially high among neonates, persons with 
Down’s syndrome, chronically hemodialyzed patients, 
and immunosuppressed patients, including persons with 
HIV infection.
Chronic hepatitis is an important late complication 
of acute hepatitis B occurring in a small proportion of 
patients with acute disease but more common in those 
who present with chronic infection without having 
experienced an acute illness, as occurs typically after 
neonatal infection or after infection in an immunosup-
pressed host (Chap. 40). Certain clinical and laboratory 
features suggest progression of acute hepatitis to chronic 
hepatitis: (1) lack of complete resolution of clinical 
symptoms of anorexia, weight loss, fatigue, and the per-
sistence of hepatomegaly; (2) the presence of bridging/
interface or multilobular hepatic necrosis on liver biopsy 
during protracted, severe acute viral hepatitis; (3) fail-
ure of the serum aminotransferase, bilirubin, and globu-
lin levels to return to normal within 6–12 months after 
the acute illness; and (4) the persistence of HBeAg for 
>3 months or HBsAg for >6 months after acute hepatitis.
Although acute hepatitis D infection does not 
increase the likelihood of chronicity of simultaneous 
acute hepatitis B, hepatitis D has the potential for 
contributing to the severity of chronic hepatitis B. 
Hepatitis D superinfection can transform inactive or 
mild chronic hepatitis B into severe, progressive chronic 
hepatitis and cirrhosis; it also can accelerate the course 
of chronic hepatitis B. Some HDV superinfections in 
patients with chronic hepatitis B lead to fulminant hep-
atitis. As defined in longitudinal studies over 3 decades, 
the annual rates of cirrhosis and hepatocellular carci-
noma in patients with chronic hepatitis D are 4% and 
2.8%, respectively. Although HDV and HBV infections 
are associated with severe liver disease, mild hepatitis 
and even inactive carriage have been identified in some 
patients, and the disease may become indolent beyond 
the early years of infection.
After acute HCV infection, the likelihood of remain-
ing chronically infected approaches 85–90%. Although 
many patients with chronic hepatitis C have no symp-
toms, cirrhosis may develop in as many as 20% within 
10–20 years of acute illness; in some series of cases 
reported by referral centers, cirrhosis has been reported 
in as many as 50% of patients with chronic hepatitis 
C. Although chronic hepatitis C accounts for at least 
40% of cases of chronic liver disease and of patients 
 
CHAPTER 38
Acute Viral Hepatitis
379
undergoing liver transplantation for end-stage liver dis-
ease in the United States and Europe, in the majority of 
patients with chronic hepatitis C, morbidity and mortal-
ity are limited during the initial 20 years after the onset 
of infection. Progression of chronic hepatitis C may 
be influenced by age of acquisition, duration of infec-
tion, immunosuppression, coexisting excessive alco-
hol use, concomitant hepatic steatosis, other hepatitis 
virus infection, or HIV co-infection. In fact, instances 
of severe and rapidly progressive chronic hepatitis B and 
C are being recognized with increasing frequency in 
patients with HIV infection. In contrast, neither HAV 
nor HEV causes chronic liver disease.
Rare complications of viral hepatitis include pancreati-
tis, myocarditis, atypical pneumonia, aplastic anemia, 
transverse myelitis, and peripheral neuropathy. Persons 
with chronic hepatitis B, particularly those infected 
in infancy or early childhood and especially those 
with HBeAg and/or high-level HBV DNA, have an 
enhanced risk of hepatocellular carcinoma. The risk of 
hepatocellular carcinoma is increased as well in patients 
with chronic hepatitis C, almost exclusively in patients 
with cirrhosis, and almost always after at least several 
decades, usually after 3 decades of disease (Chap. 50). 
In children, hepatitis B may present rarely with anicteric 
hepatitis, a nonpruritic papular rash of the face, 
buttocks, and limbs, and lymphadenopathy (papular acro-
dermatitis of childhood or Gianotti-Crosti syndrome).
Rarely, autoimmune hepatitis (Chap. 40) can be trig-
gered by a bout of otherwise self-limited acute hepatitis, 
as reported after acute hepatitis A, B, and C.
Differential Diagnosis
Viral diseases such as infectious mononucleosis; those 
due to cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex, and coxsackie-
viruses; and toxoplasmosis may share certain clini-
cal features with viral hepatitis and cause elevations in 
serum aminotransferase and, less commonly, in serum 
bilirubin levels. Tests such as the differential hetero-
phile and serologic tests for these agents may be helpful 
in the differential diagnosis if HBsAg, anti-HBc, IgM 
anti-HAV, and anti-HCV determinations are negative. 
Aminotransferase elevations can accompany almost 
any systemic viral infection; other rare causes of liver 
injury confused with viral hepatitis are infections with 
Leptospira, Candida, Brucella, Mycobacteria, and Pneumocystis. 
A complete drug history is particularly important, for 
many drugs and certain anesthetic agents can produce 
a picture of either acute hepatitis or cholestasis (Chap. 
39). Equally important is a past history of unexplained 
“repeated episodes” of acute hepatitis. This history 
should alert the physician to the possibility that the 
underlying disorder is chronic hepatitis. Alcoholic hepa-
titis must also be considered, but usually the serum ami-
notransferase levels are not as markedly elevated and 
other stigmata of alcoholism may be present. The find-
ing on liver biopsy of fatty infiltration, a neutrophilic 
inflammatory reaction, and “alcoholic hyaline” would 
be consistent with alcohol-induced rather than viral 
liver injury. Because acute hepatitis may present with 
right upper quadrant abdominal pain, nausea and vom-
iting, fever, and icterus, it is often confused with acute 
cholecystitis, common duct stone, or ascending cholan-
gitis. Patients with acute viral hepatitis may tolerate sur-
gery poorly; therefore, it is important to exclude this 
diagnosis, and in confusing cases, a percutaneous liver 
biopsy may be necessary before laparotomy. Viral hepa-
titis in the elderly is often misdiagnosed as obstructive 
jaundice resulting from a common duct stone or car-
cinoma of the pancreas. Because acute hepatitis in the 
elderly may be quite severe and the operative mortality 
high, a thorough evaluation including biochemical tests, 
radiographic studies of the biliary tree, and even liver 
biopsy may be necessary to exclude primary parenchy-
mal liver disease. Another clinical constellation that may 
mimic acute hepatitis is right ventricular failure with 
passive hepatic congestion or hypoperfusion syndromes, 
such as those associated with shock, severe hypoten-
sion, and severe left ventricular failure. Also included in 
this general category is any disorder that interferes with 
venous return to the heart, such as right atrial myxoma, 
constrictive pericarditis, hepatic vein occlusion (Budd-
Chiari syndrome), or veno-occlusive disease. Clinical 
features are usually sufficient to distinguish among these 
vascular disorders and viral hepatitis. Acute fatty liver 
of pregnancy, cholestasis of pregnancy, eclampsia, and 
the HELLP (hemolysis, elevated liver tests, and low 
platelets) syndrome can be confused with viral hepatitis 
during pregnancy. Very rarely, malignancies metastatic 
to the liver can mimic acute or even fulminant viral 
hepatitis. Occasionally, genetic or metabolic liver disor-
ders (e.g., Wilson’s disease, α1 antitrypsin deficiency) as 
well as nonalcoholic fatty liver disease are confused with 
viral hepatitis.
Treatment	
Acute Viral Hepatitis
In hepatitis B, among previously healthy adults who 
present with clinically apparent acute hepatitis, recov-
ery occurs in ∼99%; therefore, antiviral therapy is 
not likely to improve the rate of recovery and is not 
required. In rare instances of severe acute hepatitis B, 
treatment with a nucleoside analogue at oral doses 
used to treat chronic hepatitis B (Chap. 40) has been 
attempted successfully. Although clinical trials have not 
been done to establish the efficacy of this approach, 
although severe acute hepatitis B is not an approved 
indication for therapy, and although the duration of 
therapy has not been determined, nonetheless, most 
SECTION VI
Disorders of the Liver and Biliary Tree
380
authorities would recommend institution of antiviral 
therapy with a nucleoside analogue for severe, but not 
mild–moderate, acute hepatitis B. In typical cases of 
acute hepatitis C, recovery is rare, progression to chronic 
hepatitis is the rule, and meta-analyses of small clinical 
trials suggest that antiviral therapy with interferon alfa 
monotherapy (3 million units SC three times a week) 
is beneficial, reducing the rate of chronicity consider-
ably by inducing sustained responses in 30–70% of 
patients. In a German multicenter study of 44 patients 
with acute symptomatic hepatitis C, initiation of inten-
sive interferon alfa therapy (5 million units SC daily for 
4 weeks, then three times a week for another 20 weeks) 
within an average of 3 months after infection resulted 
in a sustained virologic response rate of 98%. Although 
treatment of acute hepatitis C is recommended, the 
optimum regimen, duration of therapy, and time to ini-
tiate therapy remain to be determined. Many authori-
ties now opt for a 24-week course (beginning within 
2–3 months after onset) of the best regimen identified 
for the treatment of chronic hepatitis C, long-acting  
pegylated interferon plus the nucleoside analogue  
ribavirin, although the value of adding ribavirin has not 
been demonstrated (see Chap. 40 for doses). Because 
of the marked reduction over the past 2 decades in the 
frequency of acute hepatitis C, opportunities to iden-
tify and treat patients with acute hepatitis C are rare, 
except in injection drug users. Hospital epidemiologists,  
however, will encounter health workers who sustain 
hepatitis C-contaminated needle sticks; when moni-
toring for ALT elevations and HCV, RNA after these  
accidents identifies acute hepatitis C (risk only ∼3%), 
therapy should be initiated.
Notwithstanding these specific therapeutic consid-
erations, in most cases of typical acute viral hepatitis, 
specific treatment generally is not necessary. Although 
hospitalization may be required for clinically severe ill-
ness, most patients do not require hospital care. Forced 
and prolonged bed rest is not essential for full recov-
ery, but many patients will feel better with restricted 
physical activity. A high-calorie diet is desirable, and 
because many patients may experience nausea late in 
the day, the major caloric intake is best tolerated in the 
morning. Intravenous feeding is necessary in the acute 
stage if the patient has persistent vomiting and can-
not maintain oral intake. Drugs capable of producing 
adverse reactions such as cholestasis and drugs metab-
olized by the liver should be avoided. If severe pruritus 
is present, the use of the bile salt-sequestering resin 
cholestyramine is helpful. Glucocorticoid therapy has 
no value in acute viral hepatitis, even in severe cases 
associated with bridging necrosis, and may be deleteri-
ous, even increasing the risk of chronicity (e.g., of acute 
hepatitis B).
Physical isolation of patients with hepatitis to a 
single room and bathroom is rarely necessary except 
in the case of fecal incontinence for hepatitis A and E 
or uncontrolled, voluminous bleeding for hepatitis B  
(with or without concomitant hepatitis D) and hepatitis C.  
Because most patients hospitalized with hepatitis A 
excrete little, if any, HAV, the likelihood of HAV transmis-
sion from these patients during their hospitalization is 
low. Therefore, burdensome enteric precautions are no 
longer recommended. Although gloves should be worn 
when the bedpans or fecal material of patients with 
hepatitis A are handled, these precautions do not rep-
resent a departure from sensible procedure and con-
temporary universal precautions for all hospitalized 
patients. For patients with hepatitis B and hepatitis C, 
emphasis should be placed on blood precautions (i.e., 
avoiding direct, ungloved hand contact with blood and 
other body fluids). Enteric precautions are unnecessary. 
The importance of simple hygienic precautions such 
as hand washing cannot be overemphasized. Univer-
sal precautions that have been adopted for all patients 
apply to patients with viral hepatitis.
Hospitalized patients may be discharged following 
substantial symptomatic improvement, a significant 
downward trend in the serum aminotransferase and 
bilirubin values, and a return to normal of the PT. Mild 
aminotransferase elevations should not be considered 
contraindications to the gradual resumption of normal 
activity.
In fulminant hepatitis, the goal of therapy is to sup-
port the patient by maintenance of fluid balance, sup-
port of circulation and respiration, control of bleeding, 
correction of hypoglycemia, and treatment of other 
complications of the comatose state in anticipation of 
liver regeneration and repair. Protein intake should be 
restricted, and oral lactulose or neomycin administered. 
Glucocorticoid therapy has been shown in controlled 
trials to be ineffective. Likewise, exchange transfusion, 
plasmapheresis, human cross-circulation, porcine liver 
cross-perfusion, hemoperfusion, and extracorporeal liver-
assist devices have not been proven to enhance survival. 
Meticulous intensive care that includes prophylactic 
antibiotic coverage is the one factor that does appear 
to improve survival. Orthotopic liver transplantation is 
resorted to with increasing frequency, with excellent 
results, in patients with fulminant hepatitis (Chap. 46).
Prophylaxis
Because application of therapy for acute viral hepatitis 
is limited and because antiviral therapy for chronic viral 
hepatitis is cumbersome and costly but effective in only 
a proportion of patients (Chap. 40), emphasis is placed 
on prevention through immunization. The prophylactic 
approach differs for each of the types of viral hepatitis. 
 
CHAPTER 38
Acute Viral Hepatitis
381
In the past, immunoprophylaxis relied exclusively on 
passive immunization with antibody-containing globu-
lin preparations purified by cold ethanol fractionation 
from the plasma of hundreds of normal donors. Cur-
rently, for hepatitis A and B, active immunization with 
vaccines is the preferable approach to prevention.
Hepatitis A
Both passive immunization with IG and active immu-
nization with killed vaccines are available. All prepara-
tions of IG contain anti-HAV concentrations sufficient 
to be protective. When administered before exposure 
or during the early incubation period, IG is effective in 
preventing clinically apparent hepatitis A. For postexpo-
sure prophylaxis of intimate contacts (household, sexual, 
institutional) of persons with hepatitis A, the administra-
tion of 0.02 mL/kg is recommended as early after exposure 
as possible; it may be effective even when administered 
as late as 2 weeks after exposure. Prophylaxis is not nec-
essary for those who have already received hepatitis A 
vaccine, casual contacts (office, factory, school, or 
hospital), for most elderly persons, who are very likely 
to be immune, or for those known to have anti-HAV 
in their serum. In day-care centers, recognition of 
hepatitis A in children or staff should provide a stim-
ulus for immunoprophylaxis in the center and in the 
children’s family members. By the time most common-
source outbreaks of hepatitis A are recognized, it is 
usually too late in the incubation period for IG to be 
effective; however, prophylaxis may limit the frequency 
of secondary cases. For travelers to tropical countries, 
developing countries, and other areas outside standard 
tourist routes, IG prophylaxis had been recommended 
before a vaccine became available. When such travel 
lasted <3 months, 0.02 mL/kg was given; for longer 
travel or residence in these areas, a dose of 0.06 mL/kg 
every 4–6 months was recommended. Administration 
of plasma-derived globulin is safe; all contemporary lots 
of IG are subjected to viral inactivation steps and must 
be free of HCV RNA as determined by PCR testing. 
Administration of IM lots of IG has not been associated 
with transmission of HBV, HCV, or HIV.
Formalin-inactivated vaccines made from strains 
of HAV attenuated in tissue culture have been shown 
to be safe, immunogenic, and effective in preventing 
hepatitis A. Hepatitis A vaccines are approved for use in 
persons who are at least one year old and appear to pro-
vide adequate protection beginning 4 weeks after a pri-
mary inoculation. If it can be given within 4 weeks of 
an expected exposure, such as by travel to an endemic 
area, hepatitis A vaccine is the preferred approach to 
pre-exposure immunoprophylaxis. If travel is more immi-
nent, IG (0.02 mL/kg) should be administered at a dif-
ferent injection site, along with the first dose of vaccine. 
Because vaccination provides long-lasting protection 
(protective levels of anti-HAV should last 20 years after 
vaccination), persons whose risk will be sustained (e.g., 
frequent travelers or those remaining in endemic areas 
for prolonged periods) should be vaccinated, and vac-
cine should supplant the need for repeated IG injec-
tions. Shortly after its introduction, hepatitis A vaccine 
was recommended for children living in communities 
with a high incidence of HAV infection; in 1999, this 
recommendation was extended to include all children 
living in states, counties, and communities with high 
rates of HAV infection. As of 2006, the Advisory 
Committee on Immunization Practices of the U.S. 
Public Health Service recommended routine hepatitis A 
vaccination of all children. Other groups considered to be 
at increased risk for HAV infection and who are can-
didates for hepatitis A vaccination include military per-
sonnel, populations with cyclic outbreaks of hepatitis A 
(e.g., Alaskan natives), employees of day-care centers, 
primate handlers, laboratory workers exposed to hepa-
titis A or fecal specimens, and patients with chronic 
liver disease. Because of an increased risk of fulminant 
hepatitis A—observed in some experiences but not con-
firmed in others—among patients with chronic hepati-
tis C, patients with chronic hepatitis C are candidates 
for hepatitis A vaccination, as are persons with chronic 
hepatitis B. Other populations whose recognized risk 
of hepatitis A is increased should be vaccinated, includ-
ing men who have sex with men, injection drug users, 
persons with clotting disorders who require frequent 
administration of clotting-factor concentrates, per-
sons traveling from the United States to countries with 
high or intermediate hepatitis A endemicity, postexpo-
sure prophylaxis for contacts of persons with hepatitis 
A, and household members and other close contacts of 
adopted children arriving from countries with high and 
moderate hepatitis A endemicity. Recommendations for 
dose and frequency differ for the two approved vaccine 
preparations (Table 38-7); all injections are IM. 
Hepatitis A vaccine has been reported to be effective 
in preventing secondary household cases of acute hep-
atitis A, but its role in other instances of postexposure 
prophylaxis remains to be demonstrated. In the United 
States, reported mortality resulting from hepatitis A 
declined in parallel with hepatitis A vaccine-associated 
reductions in the annual incidence of new infections.
Hepatitis B
Until 1982, prevention of hepatitis B was based on 
passive immunoprophylaxis either with standard IG, con-
taining modest levels of anti-HBs, or hepatitis B immu-
noglobulin (HBIG), containing high-titer anti-HBs. 
The efficacy of standard IG has never been established 
and remains questionable; even the efficacy of HBIG, 
demonstrated in several clinical trials, has been chal-
lenged, and its contribution appears to be in reducing 
SECTION VI
Disorders of the Liver and Biliary Tree
382
the frequency of clinical illness, not in preventing infec-
tion. The first vaccine for active immunization, intro-
duced in 1982, was prepared from purified, noninfec-
tious 22-nm spherical forms of HBsAg derived from the 
plasma of healthy HBsAg carriers. In 1987, the plasma-
derived vaccine was supplanted by a genetically engi-
neered vaccine derived from recombinant yeast. The 
latter vaccine consists of HBsAg particles that are non-
glycosylated but are otherwise indistinguishable from 
natural HBsAg; two recombinant vaccines are licensed 
for use in the United States. Current recommendations 
can be divided into those for pre-exposure and postex-
posure prophylaxis.
For pre-exposure prophylaxis against hepatitis B in set-
tings of frequent exposure (health workers exposed to 
blood; hemodialysis patients and staff; residents and staff 
of custodial institutions for the developmentally handi-
capped; injection drug users; inmates of long-term cor-
rectional facilities; persons with multiple sexual partners; 
persons such as hemophiliacs who require long-term, 
high-volume therapy with blood derivatives; household 
and sexual contacts of HBsAg carriers; persons living 
in or traveling extensively in endemic areas; unvacci-
nated children under the age of 18; and unvaccinated 
children who are Alaskan natives, Pacific Islanders, or 
residents in households of first-generation immigrants 
from endemic countries), three IM (deltoid, not gluteal) 
injections of hepatitis B vaccine are recommended at 0, 
1, and 6 months (other, optional schedules are summa-
rized in Table 38-8). Pregnancy is not a contraindica-
tion to vaccination. In areas of low HBV endemicity 
such as the United States, despite the availability of safe 
and effective hepatitis B vaccines, a strategy of vacci-
nating persons in high-risk groups has not been effec-
tive. The incidence of new hepatitis B cases continued 
to increase in the United States after the introduction 
of vaccines; <10% of all targeted persons in high-risk 
groups have actually been vaccinated, and ∼30% of per-
sons with sporadic acute hepatitis B do not fall into any 
high-risk-group category. Therefore, to have an impact 
on the frequency of HBV infection in an area of low 
endemicity such as the United States, universal hepatitis 
B vaccination in childhood has been recommended. For 
unvaccinated children born after the implementation of 
universal infant vaccination, vaccination during early 
adolescence, at age 11–12 years, was recommended, and 
this recommendation has been extended to include all 
unvaccinated children age 0–19 years. In HBV-hyper-
endemic areas (e.g., Asia), universal vaccination of chil-
dren has resulted in a marked 10- to 15-year decline in 
hepatitis B and its complications, including hepatocel-
lular carcinoma.
The two available recombinant hepatitis B vac-
cines are comparable, one containing 10 μg of HBsAg 
(Recombivax-HB) and the other containing 20 μg of 
HBsAg (Engerix-B), and recommended doses for each 
injection vary for the two preparations (Table 38-8). 
Combinations of hepatitis B vaccine with other child-
hood vaccines are available as well (Table 38-8).
For unvaccinated persons sustaining an exposure 
to HBV, postexposure prophylaxis with a combination 
of HBIG (for rapid achievement of high-titer circu-
lating anti-HBs) and hepatitis B vaccine (for achieve-
ment of long-lasting immunity as well as its apparent 
efficacy in attenuating clinical illness after exposure) is 
recommended. For perinatal exposure of infants born 
to HBsAg-positive mothers, a single dose of HBIG, 
0.5 mL, should be administered IM in the thigh imme-
diately after birth, followed by a complete course of three 
injections of recombinant hepatitis B vaccine (see doses 
earlier) to be started within the first 12 h of life. For 
those experiencing a direct percutaneous inoculation 
or transmucosal exposure to HBsAg-positive blood or 
body fluids (e.g., accidental needle stick, other mucosal 
penetration, or ingestion), a single IM dose of HBIG, 
0.06 mL/kg, administered as soon after exposure as 
possible, is followed by a complete course of hepati-
tis B vaccine to begin within the first week. For those 
exposed by sexual contact to a patient with acute hepa-
titis B, a single IM dose of HBIG, 0.06 mL/kg, should 
be given within 14 days of exposure, to be followed by 
a complete course of hepatitis B vaccine. When both 
HBIG and hepatitis B vaccine are recommended, they 
may be given at the same time but at separate sites.
The precise duration of protection afforded by hep-
atitis B vaccine is unknown; however, ∼80–90% of 
immunocompetent vaccinees retain protective levels of 
anti-HBs for at least 5 years, and 60–80% for 10 years. 
Thereafter and even after anti-HBs becomes unde-
tectable, protection persists against clinical hepatitis 
B, hepatitis B surface antigenemia, and chronic HBV 
infection. Currently, booster immunizations are not 
Table 38-7
Hepatitis A Vaccination Schedules
Age, 
years
No. of 
Doses
Dose
Schedule, 
months
HAVRIX (GlaxoSmithKline)a
1–18
2
720 ELUb (0.5 mL)
0, 6–12
≥19
2
1440 ELU (1 mL)
0, 6–12
VAQTA (Merck)
1–18
2
25 units (0.5 mL)
0, 6–18
≥19
2
50 units (1 mL)
0, 6–18
aA combination of this hepatitis A vaccine and hepatitis B vaccine, 
TWINRIX, is licensed for simultaneous protection against both 
of these viruses among adults (age ≥18 years). Each 1-mL dose con-
tains 720 ELU of hepatitis A vaccine and 20 μg of hepatitis B vac-
cine. These doses are recommended at months 0, 1, and 6.
bEnzyme-linked immunoassay units.
Abbreviation: ELU, enzyme-linked immunoassay unit.
 
CHAPTER 38
Acute Viral Hepatitis
383
recommended routinely, except in immunosuppressed 
persons who have lost detectable anti-HBs or immuno-
competent persons who sustain percutaneous HBsAg-
positive inoculations after losing detectable antibody. 
Specifically, for hemodialysis patients, annual anti-HBs 
testing is recommended after vaccination; booster doses 
are recommended when anti-HBs levels fall to <10 
mIU/mL. As noted earlier, for persons at risk of both 
hepatitis A and B, a combined vaccine is available con-
taining 720 enzyme-linked immunoassay units (ELUs) 
of inactivated HAV and 20 μg of recombinant HBsAg 
(at 0, 1, and 6 months).
Hepatitis D
Infection with hepatitis D can be prevented by vac-
cinating susceptible persons with hepatitis B vaccine. 
No product is available for immunoprophylaxis to pre-
vent HDV superinfection in HBsAg carriers; for them, 
avoidance of percutaneous exposures and limitation of 
intimate contact with persons who have HDV infection 
are recommended.
Hepatitis C
IG is ineffective in preventing hepatitis C and is no 
longer recommended for postexposure prophylaxis 
in cases of perinatal, needle stick, or sexual exposure. 
Although prototype vaccines that induce antibodies 
to HCV envelope proteins have been developed, cur-
rently, hepatitis C vaccination is not feasible practi-
cally. Genotype and quasispecies viral heterogeneity, as 
well as rapid evasion of neutralizing antibodies by this 
rapidly mutating virus, conspire to render HCV a dif-
ficult target for immunoprophylaxis with a vaccine. 
Prevention of transfusion-associated hepatitis C has 
been accomplished by the following successively intro-
duced measures: exclusion of commercial blood donors 
and reliance on a volunteer blood supply; screen-
ing donor blood with surrogate markers such as ALT 
(no longer recommended) and anti-HBc, markers that 
identify segments of the blood donor population with 
an increased risk of bloodborne infections; exclusion 
of blood donors in high-risk groups for AIDS and the 
introduction of anti-HIV screening tests; and progres-
sively sensitive serologic and virologic screening tests 
for HCV infection.
In the absence of active or passive immunization, 
prevention of hepatitis C includes behavior changes and 
precautions to limit exposures to infected persons. Rec-
ommendations designed to identify patients with clini-
cally inapparent hepatitis as candidates for medical man-
agement have as a secondary benefit the identification 
of persons whose contacts could be at risk of becom-
ing infected. A so-called look-back program has been 
recommended to identify persons who were transfused 
before 1992 with blood from a donor found subse-
quently to have hepatitis C. In addition, anti-HCV test-
ing is recommended for anyone who received a blood 
transfusion or a transplanted organ before the intro-
duction of second-generation screening tests in 1992, 
those who ever used injection drugs (or took other 
illicit drugs by noninjection routes), chronically hemo-
dialyzed patients, persons with clotting disorders who 
received clotting factors made before 1987 from pooled 
blood products, persons with elevated aminotransferase 
Table 38-8
Pre-exposure Hepatitis B Vaccination 
Schedules
Target Group
No. of 
Doses
Dose
Schedule, 
months
RECOMBIVAX-HB (Merck)a
Infants,  
children  
(<1–10 years)
3
5 μg (0.5 mL)
0, 1–2, 4–6
Adolescents 
(11–19 years)
3 or 4
5 μg (0.5 mL)
0–2, 1–4, 4–6 
or 0, 12, 24 or 
0, 1, 2, 12
or
2
10 μg (1 mL)
0, 4–6 (age 
11–15)
Adults (≥20 
years)
3
10 μg (1 mL)
0–2, 1–4, 4–6
Hemodialysis patientsb
<20 years
3
5 μg (0.5 mL)
0, 1, 6
≥20 years
3
40 μg (4 mL)
0, 1, 6
ENGERIX-B (GlaxoSmithKline)c
Infants,  
children  
(<1–10 years)
3 or 4
10 μg (0.5 mL)
0, 1–2, 4–6 or 
0, 1, 2,12
Adolescents 
(10–19 years)
3 or 4
10 μg (0.5 mL)
0, 1–2, 4–6 or 
0, 12, 24 or 
0, 1, 2, 12
Adults  
(≥20 years)
3 or 4
20 μg (1 mL)
0–2, 1–4, 4–6 
or 0, 1, 2, 12
Hemodialysis 
patientsb
<20 years
4
10 μg (0.5 mL)
0, 1, 2, 6
≥20 years
4
40 μg (2 mL)
0, 1, 2, 6
aThis manufacturer produces a licensed combination of hepati-
tis B vaccine and vaccines against Haemophilus influenzae type b 
and Neisseria meningitides, Comvax, for use in infants and young 
children. Please consult product insert for dose and schedule.
bThis group also includes other immunocompromised persons.
cThis manufacturer produces two licensed combination hepatitis 
B vaccines: (1) Twinrix, recombinant hepatitis B vaccine plus inac-
tivated hepatitis A vaccine, is licensed for simultaneous protection 
against both of these viruses among adults (age ≥18 years). Each 
1-mL dose contains 720 ELU of hepatitis A vaccine and 20 μg of 
hepatitis B vaccine. These doses are recommended at months 0, 1, 
and 6. (2) Pediatrix, recombinant hepatitis B vaccine plus diphtheria 
and tetanus toxoid, pertussis, and inactivated poliovirus, is licensed 
for use in infants and young children. Please consult product insert 
for doses and schedules.
SECTION VI
Disorders of the Liver and Biliary Tree
384
levels, health workers exposed to HCV-positive blood 
or contaminated needles, persons with HIV infection, 
health care and public safety personnel following a 
needle-stick or other nonpercutaneous exposure to 
HCV-infected material, sexual partners of persons with 
hepatitis C, and children born to HCV-positive mothers 
(Table 38-4).
For stable, monogamous sexual partners, sexual trans-
mission of hepatitis C is unlikely, and sexual barrier 
precautions are not recommended. For persons with 
multiple sexual partners or with sexually transmitted 
diseases, the risk of sexual transmission of hepatitis C is 
increased, and barrier precautions (latex condoms) are 
recommended. A person with hepatitis C should avoid 
sharing such items as razors, toothbrushes, and nail clip-
pers with sexual partners and family members. No spe-
cial precautions are recommended for babies born to 
mothers with hepatitis C, and breast-feeding does not 
have to be restricted.
Hepatitis E
Whether IG prevents hepatitis E remains undetermined. 
A safe and effective recombinant vaccine has been 
developed and is available in endemic areas but not in 
the United States.
 Jules L. Dienstag 
385
 Liver injury may follow the inhalation, ingestion, or 
parenteral administration of a number of pharmaco-
logic and chemical agents. These include industrial 
toxins (e.g., carbon tetrachloride, trichloroethylene, 
and yellow phosphorus); the heat-stable toxic bicy-
clic octapeptides of certain species of  Amanita and  Galerina
(hepatotoxic mushroom poisoning); and, more commonly, 
pharmacologic agents used in medical therapy. Among 
patients with acute liver failure, drug-induced liver 
injury is the cause in a majority of all cases, and liver 
toxicity accounts for the abandonment of many new 
drugs during their development. It is essential that any 
patient presenting with jaundice or altered biochemi-
cal liver tests be questioned carefully about exposure 
to chemicals used in work or at home, drugs taken by 
prescription or bought over the counter, and herbal or 
alternative medicines. Hepatotoxic drugs can injure the 
hepatocyte directly (e.g., via a free-radical or metabolic 
intermediate that causes peroxidation of membrane 
lipids and that results in liver cell injury). Alternatively, 
the drug or its metabolite can distort cell membranes 
or other cellular molecules, bind covalently to intra-
cellular proteins, activate apoptotic pathways, interfere 
with bile salt export proteins, or block biochemical 
pathways or cellular integrity  ( Fig. 39-1 ) . Interference 
with bile canalicular pumps can allow endogenous bile 
acids, which can injure the liver, to accumulate. Such 
injuries, in turn, may lead to necrosis of hepatocytes; 
injure bile ducts, producing cholestasis; or block path-
ways of lipid movement, inhibit protein synthesis, or 
impair mitochondrial oxidation of fatty acids, resulting 
in lactic acidosis and intracellular triglyceride accumula-
tion (expressed histologically as microvesicular steatosis). 
In some cases, drug metabolites sensitize hepatocytes to 
toxic cytokines, and differences between susceptible and 
nonsusceptible drug recipients may be attributable to 
polymorphisms in elaboration of competing, protective 
cytokines, as has been suggested for acetaminophen hep-
atotoxicity (discussed later). Immunologically mediated 
liver injury has been postulated to represent another 
mechanism of drug hepatotoxicity (discussed later). In 
addition, a role has been shown for activation of nuclear 
transporters, such as the constitutive androstane receptor 
(CAR), in the induction of drug hepatotoxicity. 
 Most drugs, which are water-insoluble, undergo a 
series of hepatic metabolic transformation steps, cul-
minating in a water-soluble form appropriate for renal 
or biliary excretion. This process begins with oxida-
tion or methylation initially mediated by the micro-
somal mixed-function oxygenases cytochrome P450 
(phase I reaction) followed by glucuronidation or sul-
fation (phase II reaction) or inactivation by glutathione. 
Most drug hepatotoxicity is mediated by a phase I toxic 
metabolite, but glutathione depletion, precluding inactiva-
tion of harmful compounds by glutathione S-transferase, 
can contribute as well. 
 In general, two major types of chemical hepatotoxicity 
have been recognized: (1) direct toxic and (2) idio-
syncratic. As shown in  Table 39-1 , direct toxic hepa-
titis occurs with predictable regularity in individuals 
exposed to the offending agent and is dose-dependent. 
The latent period between exposure and liver injury 
is usually short (often several hours), although clini-
cal manifestations may be delayed for 24–48 h. Agents 
producing toxic hepatitis are generally systemic poisons 
or are converted in the liver to toxic metabolites. The 
direct hepatotoxins result in morphologic abnormali-
ties that are reasonably characteristic and reproducible 
for each toxin. For example, carbon tetrachloride and 
trichloroethylene characteristically produce a centri-
lobular zonal necrosis, whereas yellow phosphorus 
poisoning typically results in periportal injury. The hepa-
totoxic octapeptides of  Amanita phalloides usually pro-
duce massive hepatic necrosis; the lethal dose of the 
toxin is ∼10 mg, the amount found in a single death-
cap mushroom. Tetracycline, when administered in IV 
doses >1.5 g daily, leads to microvesicular fat deposits in 
the liver. Liver injury, which is often only one facet of 
 TOXIC AND DRUG-INDUCED HEPATITIS 
 CHAPTER 39 
SECTION VI
Disorders of the Liver and Biliary Tree
386
A
Membrane
Hepatocyte
B
Canaliculus
Transport
pumps (MRP3)
P450
Heme Drug
C
D
E
F
Endoplasmic
reticulum
Enzyme-drug
adduct
Cytokines
Vesicle
Triglycerides
Free fatty
acid
Inhibition of
β-oxidation, respiration,
or both
Lactate
Mitochondrion
Other
caspases
Cell death
Other
caspases
Caspase
Caspase
Caspase
DD
DD
DD
DD
TNF-α receptor,
Fas
Cytolytic
T cell
Six Mechanisms of Liver Injury
A. Rupture of cell membrane.
B. Injury of bile canaliculus (disruption of transport pumps).
C. P450-drug covalent binding (drug adducts).
D. Drug adducts targeted by CTLs/cytokines.
E. Activation of apoptotic pathway by TNFα/Fas.
F. Inhibition of mitochondrial function.
Figure 39-1 
Potential mechanisms of drug-induced liver injury. The 
normal hepatocyte may be affected adversely by drugs 
through A. disruption of intracellular calcium homeostasis 
that leads to the disassembly of actin fibrils at the surface of 
the hepatocyte, resulting in blebbing of the cell membrane, 
rupture, and cell lysis; B. disruption of actin filaments 
next to the canaliculus (the specialized portion of the cell 
responsible for bile excretion), leading to loss of villous pro-
cesses and interruption of transport pumps such as multidrug 
resistance–associated protein 3 (MRP3), which, in turn, pre-
vents the excretion of bilirubin and other organic compounds; 
C. covalent binding of the heme-containing cytochrome P450 
enzyme to the drug, thus creating nonfunctioning adducts; 
D. migration of these enzyme-drug adducts to the cell sur-
face in vesicles to serve as target immunogens for cytolytic 
attack by T cells, stimulating an immune response involv-
ing cytolytic T cells and cytokines; E. activation of apoptotic 
pathways by tumor necrosis factor α (TNFα) receptor or 
 
CHAPTER 39
Toxic and Drug-Induced Hepatitis
387
the toxicity produced by the direct hepatotoxins, may 
go unrecognized until jaundice appears.
In idiosyncratic drug reactions, the occurrence of 
hepatitis is usually infrequent (1 in 103–105 patients) 
and unpredictable; the response is not as clearly dose-
dependent as is injury associated with direct hepatotoxins, 
and liver injury may occur at any time during or shortly 
after exposure to the drug. Adding to the difficulty of 
predicting or identifying idiosyncratic drug hepatotoxicity 
is the occurrence of mild, transient, nonprogressive 
serum aminotransferase elevations that resolve with 
continued drug use. Such “adaptation,” the mecha-
nism of which is unknown, occurs in such drugs as 
isoniazid, valproate, phenytoin, and HMG-CoA reduc-
tase inhibitors (statins). Extrahepatic manifestations of 
hypersensitivity, such as rash, arthralgias, fever, leuko-
cytosis, and eosinophilia, occur in about one-quarter of 
patients with idiosyncratic hepatotoxic drug reactions; 
this observation and the unpredictability of idiosyn-
cratic drug hepatotoxicity contributed to the hypothesis 
that this category of drug reactions is immunologically 
mediated. More recent evidence, however, suggests 
that, in most cases, even idiosyncratic reactions rep-
resent direct hepatotoxicity but are caused by drug 
metabolites rather than by the intact compound. Even 
the prototypes of idiosyncratic hepatotoxicity reactions, 
halothane hepatitis and isoniazid hepatotoxicity, associ-
ated frequently with hypersensitivity manifestations, are 
now recognized to be mediated by toxic metabolites 
that damage liver cells directly. Currently, most idiosyn-
cratic reactions are thought to result from differences in 
metabolic reactivity to specific agents; host susceptibility 
is mediated by the kinetics of toxic metabolite genera-
tion, which differs among individuals, probably medi-
ated by genetic polymorphisms in drug-metabolizing 
pathways (e.g., differences in cytochrome P450 enzyme 
isotypes or in acetylation). Associations between certain 
HLA haplotypes have been drawn with hepatotoxicity 
of such drugs as amoxicillin/clavulanate, statins, halo-
thane, nitrofurantoin, chlorpromazine, and flucloxacillin. 
Occasionally, however, the clinical features of an aller-
gic reaction (prominent tissue eosinophilia, autoanti-
bodies, etc.) are difficult to ignore. In vitro models have 
been described in which lymphocyte cytotoxicity can 
be demonstrated against rabbit hepatocytes altered by 
incubation with the potential offending drug. Further-
more, several instances of drug hepatotoxicity are asso-
ciated with the appearance of autoantibodies, including 
Table 39-1
Some Features of Toxic and Drug-Induced Hepatic Injury
Direct Toxic Effect*
Idiosyncratic*
Othera
Features
(Carbon 
Tetrachloride) (Acetaminophen)
(Halothane)
(Isoniazid)
(Chlorpromazine)
(Oral 
Contraceptive 
Agents)
Predictable and 
dose-related 
toxicity
+
+
0
0
0
+
Latent period
Short
Short
Variable
Variable
Variable
Variable
Arthralgia, 
fever, rash, 
eosinophilia
0
0
+
0
+
0
Liver  
morphology
Necrosis, fatty 
infiltration
Centrilobular 
necrosis
Similar to 
viral  
hepatitis
Similar 
to viral 
hepatitis
Cholestasis with 
portal inflammation
Cholestasis 
without portal 
inflammation,  
vascular 
lesions
aThe drugs listed are typical samples.
Fas (DD denotes death domain), triggering the cascade of 
intercellular caspases, resulting in programmed cell death; 
or F. inhibition of mitochondrial function by a dual effect on 
both β-oxidation and the respiratory-chain enzymes, lead-
ing to failure of free fatty acid metabolism, a lack of aero-
bic respiration, and accumulation of lactate and reactive 
oxygen species (which may disrupt mitochondrial DNA). 
Toxic metabolites excreted in bile may damage bile-duct 
epithelium (not shown). CTLs, cytolytic T lymphocytes. 
(Reproduced from WM Lee: Drug-induced hepatotoxicity. 
N Engl J Med 349:474, 2003, with permission.)
SECTION VI
Disorders of the Liver and Biliary Tree
388
a class of antibodies to liver-kidney microsomes, anti-
LKM2, directed against a cytochrome P450 enzyme. 
Similarly, in selected cases, a drug or its metabolite has 
been shown to bind to a host cellular component 
forming a hapten; the immune response to this 
“neoantigen” is postulated to play a role in the patho-
genesis of liver injury. Therefore, some authorities 
subdivide idiosyncratic drug hepatotoxicity into hyper-
sensitivity (allergic) and “metabolic” categories. Several 
unusual exceptions notwithstanding, true drug allergy 
is difficult to support in most cases of idiosyncratic 
drug-induced liver injury.
Idiosyncratic reactions lead to a morphologic pattern 
that is more variable than those produced by direct tox-
ins; a single agent is often capable of causing a variety of 
lesions, although certain patterns tend to predominate. 
Depending on the agent involved, idiosyncratic hepa-
titis may result in a clinical and morphologic picture 
indistinguishable from that of viral hepatitis (e.g., 
halothane) or may simulate extrahepatic bile duct obstruc-
tion clinically with morphologic evidence of cholestasis. 
Drug-induced cholestasis ranges from mild to increas-
ingly severe: (1) bland cholestasis with limited hepatocel-
lular injury (e.g., estrogens, 17,α-substituted androgens); 
(2) inflammatory cholestasis (e.g., phenothiazines, 
amoxicillin-clavulanic acid [the most frequently impli-
cated antibiotic among cases of drug-induced liver 
injury], oxacillin, erythromycin estolate); (3) sclerosing 
cholangitis (e.g., after intrahepatic infusion of the che-
motherapeutic agent floxuridine for hepatic metastases 
from a primary colonic carcinoma); (4) disappearance 
of bile ducts, “ductopenic” cholestasis, similar to that 
observed in chronic rejection following liver trans-
plantation (e.g., carbamazepine, chlorpromazine, tricy-
clic antidepressant agents). Cholestasis may result from 
binding of drugs to canalicular membrane transporters, 
accumulation of toxic bile acids resulting from cana-
licular pump failure, or genetic defects in canalicular 
transporter proteins. Morphologic alterations may also 
include bridging hepatic necrosis (e.g., methyldopa), or, 
infrequently, hepatic granulomas (e.g., sulfonamides). 
Some drugs result in macrovesicular or microvesicu-
lar steatosis or steatohepatitis, which, in some cases, 
has been linked to mitochondrial dysfunction and 
lipid peroxidation. Severe hepatotoxicity associated 
with steatohepatitis, most likely a result of mitochon-
drial toxicity, is being recognized with increasing fre-
quency among patients receiving antiretroviral therapy 
with reverse transcriptase inhibitors (e.g., zidovudine, 
didanosine) or protease inhibitors (e.g., indinavir, rito-
navir) for HIV infection. Generally, such mitochon-
drial hepatotoxicity of these antiretroviral agents is 
reversible, but dramatic, nonreversible hepatotoxicity 
associated with mitochondrial injury (inhibition of 
DNA polymerase γ) was the cause of acute liver 
failure encountered during early clinical trials of 
now-abandoned fialuridine, a fluorinated pyrimidine 
analogue with potent antiviral activity against hepatitis B 
virus. Another potential target for idiosyncratic drug 
hepatotoxicity is sinusoidal lining cells; when these are 
injured, such as by high-dose chemotherapeutic agents 
(e.g., cyclophosphamide, melphalan, busulfan) adminis-
tered prior to bone marrow transplantation, venoocclu-
sive disease can result.
Not all adverse hepatic drug reactions can be classi-
fied as either toxic or idiosyncratic in type. For exam-
ple, oral contraceptives, which combine estrogenic 
and progestational compounds, may result in impair-
ment of hepatic tests and, occasionally, jaundice; 
however, they do not produce necrosis or fatty change, 
manifestations of hypersensitivity are generally absent, and 
susceptibility to the development of oral contraceptive– 
induced cholestasis appears to be genetically deter-
mined. Such estrogen-induced cholestasis is more 
common in women with cholestasis of pregnancy, a 
disorder linked to genetic defects in multidrug resistance– 
associated canalicular transporter proteins. Other instances 
of genetically determined drug hepatotoxicity have 
been identified. For example, ∼10% of the population 
have an autosomal recessive trait associated with the 
absence of cytochrome P450 enzyme 2D6 and have 
impaired debrisoquine-4-hydroxylase enzyme activity. 
As a result, they cannot metabolize, and are at increased 
risk of hepatotoxicity resulting from certain compounds 
such as desipramine, propranolol, and quinidine.
Some forms of drug hepatotoxicity are so rare (e.g., 
occurring in <1:10,000 recipients), that they do not 
become apparent during clinical trials, involving only 
several thousand recipients, conducted to obtain drug 
registration. An example of such rare, but serious, idio-
syncratic drug hepatotoxicity followed the approval and 
generalized use of troglitazone, a peroxisomal, prolif-
erator activator–receptor γ agonist, the first introduced 
example of a thiazolidinedione insulin-sensitizing agent. 
This instance of drug hepatotoxicity was not recognized 
until well after the drug was introduced, underlining 
the importance of postmarketing surveillance in iden-
tifying toxic drugs and in leading to their withdrawal 
from use. Fortunately, such hepatotoxicity is not char-
acteristic of the second-generation thiazolidinedione 
insulin-sensitizing agents rosiglitazone and pioglitazone; 
in clinical trials, the frequency of aminotransferase ele-
vations in patients treated with these medications did 
not differ from that in placebo recipients, and isolated 
reports of liver injury among recipients are extremely 
rare.
Because drug-induced hepatitis is often a presump-
tive diagnosis and many other disorders produce a 
similar clinicopathologic picture, evidence of a causal 
relationship between the use of a drug and subsequent 
liver injury may be difficult to establish. The relation-
ship is most convincing for the direct hepatotoxins, 
 
CHAPTER 39
Toxic and Drug-Induced Hepatitis
389
which lead to a high frequency of hepatic impairment 
after a short latent period. Idiosyncratic reactions may 
be reproduced, in some instances, when rechallenge, 
after an asymptomatic period, results in a recurrence 
of signs, symptoms, and morphologic and biochemical 
abnormalities. Rechallenge, however, is often ethically 
unfeasible, because severe reactions may occur. Causality- 
assessment methodologies (scoring systematically based 
on a checklist of such variables as index of suspicion, 
time of onset, clinical-biochemical features, type of 
injury [direct, idiosyncratic], extrahepatic features, 
course, histologic features, drug serum levels, genetic 
markers and polymorphisms, and exclusion of other 
potential causes) have been adopted to add objectiv-
ity to diagnoses of drug-induced liver injury; however, 
even these approaches have their limitations and yield 
residual uncertainty.
Generally, drug hepatotoxicity is not more fre-
quent in persons with underlying chronic liver disease. 
Reported exceptions include hepatotoxicity of aspirin, 
methotrexate, isoniazid (only in certain experiences), 
and antiretroviral therapy for HIV infection.
Treatment	
Toxic and Drug-Induced Hepatic Disease
Treatment is largely supportive, except in acetamino-
phen hepatotoxicity (discussed later). In patients with 
fulminant hepatitis resulting from drug hepatotoxic-
ity, liver transplantation may be lifesaving (Chap. 46). 
Withdrawal of the suspected agent is indicated at the 
first sign of an adverse reaction. In the case of the direct 
toxins, liver involvement should not divert attention  
from renal or other organ involvement, which may also 
threaten survival. Glucocorticoids for drug hepatotoxicity  
with allergic features, silibinin for hepatotoxic mush-
room poisoning, and ursodeoxycholic acid for choles-
tatic drug hepatotoxicity have never been shown to be 
effective and are not recommended.
In Table 39-2, several classes of chemical agents 
are listed together with examples of the pattern of liver 
injury produced by them. Certain drugs appear to be 
responsible for the development of chronic as well 
as acute hepatic injury. For example, oxyphenisatin, 
methyldopa, and isoniazid have been associated with 
moderate to severe chronic hepatitis, and halothane and 
methotrexate have been implicated in the development 
of cirrhosis. A syndrome resembling primary biliary 
cirrhosis has been described following treatment with 
chlorpromazine, methyl testosterone, tolbutamide, and 
other drugs. Portal hypertension in the absence of cir-
rhosis may result from alterations in hepatic architecture 
produced by vitamin A or arsenic intoxication, indus-
trial exposure to vinyl chloride, or administration of 
thorium dioxide. The latter three agents have also been 
associated with angiosarcoma of the liver. Oral contra-
ceptives have been implicated in the development of 
hepatic adenoma and, rarely, hepatocellular carcinoma 
and hepatic vein occlusion (Budd-Chiari syndrome). 
Another unusual lesion, peliosis hepatis (blood cysts of 
the liver), has been observed in some patients treated 
with anabolic steroids. The existence of these hepatic 
disorders expands the spectrum of liver injury induced 
by chemical agents and emphasizes the need for a thor-
ough drug history in all patients with liver dysfunction.
The following are patterns of adverse hepatic reac-
tions for some prototypic agents.
Acetaminophen Hepatotoxicity 
(Direct Toxin)
Acetaminophen can cause severe centrilobular hepatic 
necrosis when ingested in large amounts in suicide 
attempts or accidentally by children. In the United 
States and England, acetaminophen hepatotoxicity is the 
most common culprit among patients presenting with 
acute liver failure and the leading indication for liver 
transplantation among patients with drug-induced liver 
failure. A single dose of 10–15 g, occasionally less, may 
produce clinical evidence of liver injury. Fatal fulminant 
disease is usually (although not invariably) associated 
with ingestion of ≥25 g. Blood levels of acetaminophen 
correlate with the severity of hepatic injury (levels 
>300 μg/mL 4 h after ingestion are predictive of the 
development of severe damage; levels <150 μg/mL 
suggest that hepatic injury is highly unlikely). Nau-
sea, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain, and shock 
are early manifestations occurring 4–12 h after inges-
tion. Then 24–48 h later, when these features are abat-
ing, hepatic injury becomes apparent. Maximal abnor-
malities and hepatic failure may not be evident until 
4–6 days after ingestion, and aminotransferase levels 
approaching 10,000 units are not uncommon (i.e., levels 
far exceeding those in patients with viral hepatitis). 
Renal failure and myocardial injury may be present.
Acetaminophen is metabolized predominantly by a 
phase II reaction to innocuous sulfate and glucuronide 
metabolites; however, a small proportion of acetamin-
ophen is metabolized by a phase I reaction to a hepa-
totoxic metabolite formed from the parent compound 
by the cytochrome P450 CYP2E1. This metabolite, 
N-acetyl-benzoquinone-imine (NAPQI), is detoxi-
fied by binding to “hepatoprotective” glutathione 
to become harmless, water-soluble mercapturic acid, 
which undergoes renal excretion. When excessive 
amounts of NAPQI are formed, or when glutathione 
levels are low, glutathione levels are depleted and over-
whelmed, permitting covalent binding to nucleophilic 
hepatocyte macromolecules forming acetaminophen- 
protein “adducts.” These adducts, which can be measured 
SECTION VI
Disorders of the Liver and Biliary Tree
390
Table 39-2
Principal Alterations of Hepatic Morphology Produced by Some Commonly Used Drugs  
and Chemicalsa
Principal  
Morphologic  
Change
Class of Agent
Example
Cholestasis
Anabolic steroid
Methyl testosterone
Antibiotic
Erythromycin estolate, nitrofurantoin, rifampin,  
amoxicillinclavulanic acid, oxacillin
Anticonvulsant
Carbamazine
Antidepressant
Duloxetine, mirtazapine, tricyclic antidepressants
Anti-inflammatory
Sulindac
Antiplatelet
Clopidogrel
Antihypertensive
Irbesartan, fosinopril
Antithyroid
Methimazole
Calcium channel blocker
Nifedipine, verapamil
Immunosuppressive
Cyclosporine
Lipid-lowering
Ezetimibe
Oncotherapeutic
Anabolic steroids, busulfan, tamoxifen, irinotecan,  
cytarabine
Oral contraceptive
Norethynodrel with mestranol
Oral hypoglycemic
Chlorpropamide
Tranquilizer
Chlorpromazineb
Fatty liver
Antiarrhythmic
Amiodarone
Antibiotic
Tetracycline (high-dose, IV)
Anticonvulsant
Valproic acid
Antiviral
Dideoxynucleosides (e.g., zidovudine), protease inhibitors 
(e.g., indinavir, ritonavir)
Oncotherapeutic
Asparaginase, methotrexate
Hepatitis
Anesthetic
Halothanec
Antiandrogen
Flutamide
Antibiotic
Isoniazid,c rifampicin, nitrofurantoin, telithromycin, 
minocycline,d pyrazinamide, trovafloxacine
Anticonvulsant
Phenytoin, carbamazine, valproic acid, phenobarbital
Antidepressant
Iproniazid, amitriptyline, imipramine, trazodone, venlafaxine, 
fluoxetine, paroxetine, duloxetine, sertraline, nefazodone,e 
bupropion
Antifungal
Ketoconazole, fluconazole, itraconazole
Antihypertensive
Methyldopa,c captopril, enalapril, lisinopril, losartan
Anti-inflammatory
Ibuprofen, indomethacin, diclofenac, sulindac,  
bromfenac
Antipsychotic
Risperidone
Antiviral
Zidovudine, didanosine, stavudine, nevirapine,  
ritonavir, indinavir, tipranavir, zalcitabine
Calcium channel blocker
Nifedipine, verapamil, diltiazem
Cholinesterase inhibitor
Tacrine
Diuretic
Chlorothiazide
Laxative
Oxyphenisatinc,e
Norepinephrine-reuptake  
inhibitor
Atomoxetine
Oral hypoglycemic
Troglitazone,e acarbose
Mixed hepatitis/ 
cholestatic
Antibiotic
Amoxicillin-clavulanic acid,  
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
Antibacterial
Clindamycin
Antifungal
Terbinafine
Antihistamine
Cyproheptadine
Immunosuppressive
Azathioprine
Lipid-lowering
Nicotinic acid, lovastatin, ezetimide
(continued )
 
CHAPTER 39
Toxic and Drug-Induced Hepatitis
391
in serum by high-performance liquid chromatogra-
phy, hold promise as diagnostic markers of acetamino-
phen hepatotoxicity. The binding of acetaminophen 
to hepatocyte macromolecules is believed to lead to 
hepatocyte necrosis; the precise sequence and mecha-
nism are unknown. Hepatic injury may be potenti-
ated by prior administration of alcohol, phenobarbital, 
isoniazid, or other drugs; by conditions that stimulate 
the mixed-function oxidase system; or by conditions 
such as starvation that reduce hepatic glutathione levels. 
The xenobiotic (environmental, exogenous substance) 
receptor CAR has been shown in a mouse model of 
acetaminophen hepatotoxicity to induce acetaminophen- 
metabolizing enzymes and, thereby, regulate and 
increase hepatotoxicity. Cimetidine, which inhibits 
P450 enzymes, has the potential to reduce generation of 
the toxic metabolite. Alcohol induces cytochrome P450 
CYP2E1; consequently, increased levels of the toxic 
metabolite NAPQI are produced in chronic alcohol-
ics after acetaminophen ingestion. In addition, alcohol 
suppresses hepatic glutathione production. Therefore, 
in chronic alcoholics, the toxic dose of acetaminophen 
may be as low as 2 g, and alcoholic patients should be 
warned specifically about the dangers of even standard 
doses of this commonly used drug. Such “therapeutic 
misadventures” also occur occasionally in patients with 
severe, febrile illnesses or pain syndromes; in such a set-
ting, several days of anorexia and near-fasting coupled 
with regular administration of extra-strength acetamin-
ophen formulations result in a combination of gluta-
thione depletion and relatively high NAPQI levels in 
the absence of a history of recognized acetaminophen 
overdose. In a 2006 study, aminotransferase elevations 
were identified in 31–44% of normal subjects treated for 
14 days with the maximal recommended dose of acet-
aminophen, 4 g daily (administered alone or as part of 
an acetaminophen/opioid combination); because these 
changes were transient and never associated with 
bilirubin elevation, the clinical relevance of these find-
ings remains to be determined. Although underly-
ing HCV infection was found to be associated with an 
increased risk of acute liver injury in patients hospital-
ized for acetaminophen overdose, generally, in patients 
with nonalcoholic liver disease, acetaminophen taken 
in recommended doses, may be the safest analgesic/
antipyretic. In this vein, acetaminophen use in cir-
rhotic patients has not been associated with hepatic 
decompensation. On the other hand, because of the 
link between acetaminophen use and liver injury, and 
because of the limited safety margin between safe and 
toxic doses, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 
has recommended that the daily dose of acetaminophen 
be reduced from 4 g to 3.25 g (even lower for persons 
with chronic alcohol use), that all acetaminophen- 
containing products be labeled prominently as con-
taining acetaminophen, and that the potential for liver 
injury be prominent in the packaging of acetaminophen 
and acetaminophen-containing products.
Treatment	
Acetaminophen Overdosage
Treatment includes gastric lavage, supportive mea-
sures, and oral administration of activated charcoal or 
cholestyramine to prevent absorption of residual drug. 
Toxic (necrosis)
Analgesic
Acetaminophen
Hydrocarbon
Carbon tetrachloride
Metal
Yellow phosphorus
Mushroom
Amanita phalloides
Solvent
Dimethylformamide
Granulomas
Antiarrhythmic
Quinidine, diltiazem
Antibiotic
Sulfonamides
Anticonvulsant
Carbamazine
Anti-inflammatory
Phenylbutazone
Xanthine oxidase inhibitor
Allopurinol
aSeveral agents cause more than one type of liver lesion and appear under more than one category.
bRarely associated with primary biliary cirrhosis-like lesion.
cOccasionally associated with chronic hepatitis or bridging hepatic necrosis or cirrhosis.
dAssociated with an autoimmune hepatitis-like syndrome.
eWithdrawn from use because of severe hepatotoxicity.
Table 39-2
Principal Alterations of Hepatic Morphology Produced by Some Commonly Used Drugs  
and Chemicalsa  (Continued)
Principal  
Morphologic  
Change
Class of Agent
Example
SECTION VI
Disorders of the Liver and Biliary Tree
392
4000
3000
2000
1300
1000
500
100
50
30
µmol/L µg/mL
5
10
50
100
150
200
300
400
500
4
8
12
16
20
24
28
Hours after acetaminophen ingestion
Lower limit for high-risk group
Lower limit for probable-risk group
Study nomogram line
Plasma acetaminophen concentration
Figure 39-2 
Nomogram to define risk of acetaminophen hepatotoxicity 
according to initial plasma acetaminophen concentration. 
(After BH Rumack, H Matthew: Pediatrics 55:871, 1975.)
Neither charcoal nor cholestyramine appears to be 
effective if given >30 min after acetaminophen inges-
tion; if they are used, the stomach lavage should be 
done before other agents are administered orally. The 
chances of possible, probable, and high-risk hepatotox-
icity can be derived from a nomogram plot (Fig. 39-2), 
readily available in emergency departments as a func-
tion of measuring acetaminophen plasma levels 8 h  
after ingestion. In patients with high acetaminophen 
blood levels (>200 μg/mL measured at 4 h or >100 μg/mL 
at 8 h after ingestion), the administration of sulfhydryl 
compounds (e.g., cysteamine, cysteine, or N-acetylcysteine) 
reduces the severity of hepatic necrosis. These agents 
appear to act by providing a reservoir of sulfhydryl 
groups to bind the toxic metabolites or by stimulating 
synthesis and repletion of hepatic glutathione. Ther-
apy should be begun within 8 h of ingestion but may 
be effective even if given as late as 24–36 h after over-
dose. Later administration of sulfhydryl compounds 
is of uncertain value. Routine use of N-acetylcysteine 
has substantially reduced the occurrence of fatal  
acetaminophen hepatotoxicity. When given orally, 
N-acetylcysteine is diluted to yield a 5% solution. A load-
ing dose of 140 mg/kg is given, followed by 70 mg/kg  
every 4 h for 15–20 doses. Whenever a patient with 
potential acetaminophen hepatotoxicity is encountered,  
a local poison control center should be contacted. Treat-
ment can be stopped when plasma acetaminophen 
levels indicate that the risk of liver damage is low. If signs  
of hepatic failure (e.g., progressive jaundice, coagulopathy, 
confusion) occur despite N-acetylcysteine therapy for 
acetaminophen hepatotoxicity, liver transplantation  
may be the only option. Early arterial blood lactate  
levels among such patients with acute liver failure may 
distinguish patients highly likely to require liver trans-
plantation (lactate levels >3.5 mmol/L) from those likely 
to survive without liver replacement.
Survivors of acute acetaminophen overdose usually 
have no hepatic sequelae. In a few patients, prolonged 
or repeated administration of acetaminophen in thera-
peutic doses appears to have led to the development of 
chronic hepatitis and cirrhosis.
Halothane Hepatotoxicity 
(Idiosyncratic Reaction)
Although, currently, halothane anesthesia is adminis-
tered in only rare situations, halothane hepatotoxic-
ity was one of the prototypical, and most intensively 
studied, examples of idiosyncratic drug hepatotoxicity. 
Administration of halothane, a nonexplosive fluori-
nated hydrocarbon anesthetic agent that is structurally 
similar to chloroform, results in severe hepatic necrosis 
in a small number of individuals, many of whom have 
previously been exposed to this agent. The failure to 
produce similar hepatic lesions reliably in animals, the 
rarity of hepatic impairment in human beings, and the 
delayed appearance of hepatic injury suggest that halo-
thane is not a direct hepatotoxin but rather a sensitizing 
agent; however, manifestations of hypersensitivity are 
seen in <25% of cases. A genetic predisposition leading 
to an idiosyncratic metabolic reactivity has been postu-
lated and appears to be the most likely mechanism of 
halothane hepatotoxicity. Adults (rather than children), 
obese people, and women appear to be particularly 
susceptible. Fever, moderate leukocytosis, and eosino-
philia may occur in the first week following halothane 
administration. Jaundice is usually noted 7–10 days after 
exposure but may occur earlier in previously exposed 
patients. Nausea and vomiting may precede the onset of 
jaundice. Hepatomegaly is often mild, but liver tender-
ness is common, and serum aminotransferase levels are 
elevated. The pathologic changes at autopsy are indis-
tinguishable from massive hepatic necrosis resulting 
from viral hepatitis. The case-fatality rate of halothane 
hepatitis is not known but may vary from 20–40% in 
cases with severe liver involvement. Patients in whom 
unexplained spiking fever, especially delayed fever, or 
jaundice develops after halothane anesthesia should 
 
CHAPTER 39
Toxic and Drug-Induced Hepatitis
393
not receive this agent again. Because cross-reactions 
between halothane and methoxyflurane have been 
reported, the latter agent should not be used after halo-
thane reactions. Later-generation halogenated hydro-
carbon anesthetics that have supplanted halothane 
except in rare instances (e.g., certain types of thoracic 
surgery) are believed to be associated with a lower risk 
of hepatotoxicity.
Methyldopa Hepatotoxicity (Toxic 
and Idiosyncratic Reaction)
Minor alterations in liver tests are reported in ∼5% 
of patients treated with this antihypertensive agent. 
These trivial abnormalities typically resolve despite 
continued drug administration. In <1% of patients, 
acute liver injury resembling viral or chronic hepatitis 
or, rarely, a cholestatic reaction is seen 1–20 weeks 
after methyldopa is started. In 50% of cases the inter-
val is <4 weeks. A prodrome of fever, anorexia, and 
malaise may be noted for a few days before the onset 
of jaundice. Rash, lymphadenopathy, arthralgia, and 
eosinophilia are rare. Serologic markers of autoim-
munity are detected infrequently, and <5% of patients 
have a Coombs-positive hemolytic anemia. In ∼15% 
of patients with methyldopa hepatotoxicity, the clini-
cal, biochemical, and histologic features are those of 
moderate to severe chronic hepatitis, with or without 
bridging necrosis and macronodular cirrhosis. With dis-
continuation of the drug, the disorder usually resolves. 
Although methyldopa is currently used infrequently, its 
hepatotoxicity is very well characterized. Among the 
currently popular antihypertensive agents, angiotensin-
converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, such as captopril 
and enalapril, have been blamed, albeit rarely, for 
hepatotoxicity (primarily cholestasis and cholestatic 
hepatitis, but also hepatocellular injury). Angiotensin-II 
receptor antagonists, such as losartan, are unlikely hep-
atotoxins, although rare reports of liver injury in their 
recipients have appeared.
Isoniazid Hepatotoxicity (Toxic and 
Idiosyncratic Reaction)
In ∼10% of adults treated with the antituberculosis 
agent isoniazid, elevated serum aminotransferase lev-
els develop during the first few weeks of therapy; this 
appears to represent an adaptive response to a toxic 
metabolite of the drug. Whether or not isoniazid is 
continued, these values (usually <200 units) return 
to normal in a few weeks. In ∼1% of treated patients, 
an illness develops that is indistinguishable from viral 
hepatitis; approximately one-half of these cases occur 
within the first 2 months of treatment; in the remain-
der, clinical disease may be delayed for many months. 
Liver biopsy reveals morphologic changes similar to 
those of viral hepatitis or bridging hepatic necrosis. 
The disease may be severe, with a case-fatality rate of 
10%. Important liver injury appears to be age-related, 
increasing substantially after age 35; the highest fre-
quency is in patients over age 50, the lowest under the 
age of 20. Even for patients >50 years of age moni-
tored carefully during therapy, hepatotoxicity occurs 
in only ∼2%, well below the risk estimate derived 
from earlier experiences. Isoniazid hepatotoxicity is 
enhanced by alcohol, rifampin, and pyrazinamide. 
Fever, rash, eosinophilia, and other manifestations of 
drug allergy are distinctly unusual. A reactive metabo-
lite of acetylhydrazine, a metabolite of isoniazid, may 
be responsible for liver injury, and patients who are 
rapid acetylators would be more prone to such injury. 
Counterintuitively, in some reports, the opposite is 
true; slow acetylators are more likely to experience 
hepatotoxicity and more severe hepatotoxicity than 
rapid acetylators. Contrary to past reports, more recent 
studies suggest that hepatotoxicity due to isoniazid as 
well as to combination antituberculous therapy that 
includes isoniazid is more likely in patients with under-
lying chronic hepatitis B. A picture resembling chronic 
hepatitis has been observed in a few patients. Care-
ful liver-test monitoring is advisable in patients being 
treated with isoniazid.
Sodium Valproate Hepatotoxicity 
(Toxic and Idiosyncratic Reaction)
Sodium valproate, an anticonvulsant useful in the treat-
ment of petit mal and other seizure disorders, has been 
associated with the development of severe hepatic tox-
icity and, rarely, fatalities, predominantly in children 
but also in adults. Among children listed as candidates 
for liver transplantation, valproate is the most common 
antiepileptic drug implicated. Asymptomatic eleva-
tions of serum aminotransferase levels have been rec-
ognized in as many as 45% of treated patients. These 
“adaptive” changes, however, appear to have no clini-
cal importance, because major hepatotoxicity is not 
seen in the majority of patients despite continuation of 
drug therapy. In the rare patients in whom jaundice, 
encephalopathy, and evidence of hepatic failure are 
found, examination of liver tissue reveals microvesicu-
lar fat and bridging hepatic necrosis, predominantly in 
the centrilobular zone. Bile duct injury may also be 
apparent. Most likely, sodium valproate is not directly 
hepatotoxic, but its metabolite, 4-pentenoic acid, may 
be responsible for hepatic injury. Valproate hepato-
toxicity is more common in persons with mitochon-
drial enzyme deficiencies and may be ameliorated by 
IV administration of carnitine, which valproate therapy 
can deplete.
SECTION VI
Disorders of the Liver and Biliary Tree
394
Phenytoin Hepatotoxicity 
(Idiosyncratic Reaction)
Phenytoin, formerly diphenylhydantoin, a mainstay 
in the treatment of seizure disorders, has been associ-
ated in rare instances with the development of severe 
hepatitis-like liver injury leading to fulminant hepatic 
failure. In many patients, the hepatitis is associated with 
striking fever, lymphadenopathy, rash (Stevens-Johnson 
syndrome or exfoliative dermatitis), leukocytosis, and 
eosinophilia, suggesting an immunologically mediated 
hypersensitivity mechanism. Despite these observations, 
evidence suggests that metabolic idiosyncrasy may be 
responsible for hepatic injury. In the liver, phenytoin is 
converted by cytochrome P450 to metabolites, includ-
ing the highly reactive electrophilic arene oxides. These 
metabolites are normally metabolized further by epox-
ide hydrolases. A defect (genetic or acquired) in epox-
ide hydrolase activity could permit covalent binding of 
arene oxides to hepatic macromolecules, thereby leading 
to hepatic injury. Hepatic injury is usually manifest within 
the first 2 months after beginning phenytoin therapy. 
With the exception of an abundance of eosinophils in 
the liver, the clinical, biochemical, and histologic pic-
ture resembles that of viral hepatitis. In rare instances, 
bile duct injury may be the salient feature of phenyt-
oin hepatotoxicity, with striking features of intrahepatic 
cholestasis. Asymptomatic elevations of aminotransfer-
ase and alkaline phosphatase levels have been observed 
in a sizable proportion of patients receiving long-term 
phenytoin therapy. These liver changes are believed 
by some authorities to represent the potent hepatic 
enzyme-inducing properties of phenytoin and are 
accompanied histologically by swelling of hepatocytes in 
the absence of necroinflammatory activity or evidence 
of chronic liver disease.
Amiodarone Hepatotoxicity (Toxic 
and Idiosyncratic Reaction)
Therapy with this potent antiarrhythmic drug is accom-
panied in 15–50% of patients by modest elevations of 
serum aminotransferase levels that may remain stable or 
diminish despite continuation of the drug. Such abnor-
malities may appear days to many months after begin-
ning therapy. A proportion of those with elevated 
aminotransferase levels have detectable hepatomegaly, 
and clinically important liver disease develops in <5% 
of patients. Features that represent a direct effect of the 
drug on the liver and that are common to the majority 
of long-term recipients are ultrastructural phospholipido-
sis, unaccompanied by clinical liver disease, and interfer-
ence with hepatic mixed-function oxidase metabolism 
of other drugs. The cationic amphiphilic drug and its 
major metabolite desethylamiodarone accumulate in 
hepatocyte lysosomes and mitochondria and in bile 
duct epithelium. The relatively common elevations in 
aminotransferase levels are also considered a predict-
able, dose-dependent, direct hepatotoxic effect. On the 
other hand, in the rare patient with clinically appar-
ent, symptomatic liver disease, liver injury resembling 
that seen in alcoholic liver disease is observed. The 
so-called pseudoalcoholic liver injury can range from ste-
atosis to alcoholic hepatitis-like neutrophilic infiltration 
and Mallory’s hyaline to cirrhosis. Electron-microscopic 
demonstration of phospholipid-laden lysosomal lamellar 
bodies can help to distinguish amiodarone hepatotox-
icity from typical alcoholic hepatitis. This category of 
liver injury appears to be a metabolic idiosyncrasy that 
allows hepatotoxic metabolites to be generated. Rarely, 
an acute idiosyncratic hepatocellular injury resembling 
viral hepatitis or cholestatic hepatitis occurs. Hepatic 
granulomas have occasionally been observed. Because 
amiodarone has a long half-life, liver injury may persist 
for months after the drug is stopped.
Erythromycin Hepatotoxicity 
(Cholestatic Idiosyncratic Reaction)
The most important adverse effect associated with 
erythromycin, more common in children than adults, 
is the infrequent occurrence of a cholestatic reaction. 
Although most of these reactions have been associated 
with erythromycin estolate, other erythromycins may 
also be responsible. The reaction usually begins during 
the first 2 or 3 weeks of therapy and includes nausea, 
vomiting, fever, right upper quadrant abdominal pain, 
jaundice, leukocytosis, and moderately elevated amino-
transferase and alkaline phosphatase levels. The clini-
cal picture can resemble acute cholecystitis or bacterial 
cholangitis. Liver biopsy reveals variable cholestasis; 
portal inflammation comprising lymphocytes, polymor-
phonuclear leukocytes, and eosinophils; and scattered foci 
of hepatocyte necrosis. Symptoms and laboratory findings 
usually subside within a few days of drug withdrawal, 
and evidence of chronic liver disease has not been 
found on follow-up. The precise mechanism remains 
ill-defined.
Oral Contraceptive Hepatotoxicity 
(Cholestatic Reaction)
The administration of oral contraceptive combina-
tions of estrogenic and progestational steroids leads to 
intrahepatic cholestasis with pruritus and jaundice in a 
small number of patients weeks to months after taking 
these agents. Especially susceptible seem to be patients 
with recurrent idiopathic jaundice of pregnancy, severe 
pruritus of pregnancy, or a family history of these 
disorders. With the exception of liver biochemical tests, 
laboratory studies are normal, and extrahepatic mani-
festations of hypersensitivity are absent. Liver biopsy 
reveals cholestasis with bile plugs in dilated canaliculi 
 
CHAPTER 39
Toxic and Drug-Induced Hepatitis
395
and striking bilirubin staining of liver cells. In contrast 
to chlorpromazine-induced cholestasis, portal inflam-
mation is absent. The lesion is reversible on withdrawal 
of the agent. The two steroid components appear to act 
synergistically on hepatic function, although the estro-
gen may be primarily responsible. Oral contraceptives 
are contraindicated in patients with a history of recur-
rent jaundice of pregnancy. Primarily benign, but rarely 
malignant, neoplasms of the liver, hepatic vein occlu-
sion, and peripheral sinusoidal dilatation have also been 
associated with oral contraceptive therapy. Focal nodular 
hyperplasia of the liver is not more frequent among 
users of oral contraceptives.
17, `-Alkyl-Substituted Anabolic 
Steroids (Cholestatic Reaction)
In the majority of patients receiving these agents, used 
therapeutically mainly in the treatment of bone marrow 
failure but used surreptitiously and without medical 
indication (or unknowingly when included in nutri-
tional supplements) by athletes to improve their per-
formance, mild hepatic dysfunction develops. Impaired 
excretory function is the predominant defect, but 
the precise mechanism is uncertain. Jaundice, which 
appears to be dose-related, develops in only a minor-
ity of patients and may be the sole clinical manifesta-
tion of hepatotoxicity, although anorexia, nausea, and 
malaise may occur. Pruritus is not a prominent feature. 
Serum aminotransferase levels are usually <100 units, 
and serum alkaline phosphatase levels are normal; mildly 
elevated; or, in <5% of patients, three or more times 
the upper limit of normal. Examination of liver tissue 
reveals cholestasis without inflammation or necrosis. 
Hepatic sinusoidal dilatation and peliosis hepatis have 
been found in a few patients. The cholestatic disorder 
is usually reversible on cessation of treatment, although 
fatalities have been linked to peliosis. An association 
with hepatic adenoma and hepatocellular carcinoma has 
been reported.
Trimethoprim-Sulfamethoxazole 
Hepatotoxicity (Idiosyncratic 
Reaction)
This antibiotic combination is used routinely for uri-
nary tract infections in immunocompetent persons and 
for prophylaxis against and therapy of Pneumocystis carinii 
pneumonia in immunosuppressed persons (transplant 
recipients, patients with AIDS). With its increasing use, 
its occasional hepatotoxicity is being recognized with 
growing frequency. Its likelihood is unpredictable, but 
when it occurs, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole hepa-
totoxicity follows a relatively uniform latency period of 
several weeks and is often accompanied by eosinophilia, 
rash, and other features of a hypersensitivity reaction. 
Biochemically and histologically, acute hepatocellular 
necrosis predominates, but cholestatic features are quite 
frequent. Occasionally, cholestasis without necrosis 
occurs, and, very rarely, a severe cholangiolytic pattern 
of liver injury is observed. In most cases, liver injury is 
self-limited, but rare fatalities have been recorded. The 
hepatotoxicity is attributable to the sulfamethoxazole 
component of the drug and is similar in features to that 
seen with other sulfonamides; tissue eosinophilia and 
granulomas may be seen. The risk of trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole hepatotoxicity is increased in persons 
with HIV infection.
HMG-COA Reductase Inhibitors 
(Statins) (Idiosyncratic Mixed 
Hepatocellular And Cholestatic 
Reaction)
Between 1 and 2% of patients taking lovastatin, simvas-
tatin, pravastatin, fluvastatin, or one of the newer statin 
drugs for the treatment of hypercholesterolemia experi-
ence asymptomatic, reversible elevations (>threefold) of 
aminotransferase activity. Acute hepatitis-like histologic 
changes, centrilobular necrosis, and centrilobular cho-
lestasis have been described in several cases. In a larger 
proportion, minor aminotransferase elevations appear 
during the first several weeks of therapy. Careful labora-
tory monitoring can distinguish between patients with 
minor, transitory changes; who may continue therapy; 
and those with more profound and sustained abnor-
malities, who should discontinue therapy. Because clini-
cally meaningful aminotransferase elevations are so rare 
after statin use and do not differ in meta-analyses from 
the frequency of such laboratory abnormalities in pla-
cebo recipients, a panel of liver experts recommended 
to the National Lipid Association’s Safety Task Force 
that liver-test monitoring was not necessary in patients 
treated with statins and that statin therapy need not be 
discontinued in patients found to have asymptomatic 
isolated aminotransferase elevations during therapy. 
Statin hepatotoxicity is not increased in patients with 
chronic hepatitis C, hepatic steatosis, or other underly-
ing liver diseases, and statins can be used safely in these 
patients.
Total Parenteral Nutrition 
(Steatosis, Cholestasis)
Total parenteral nutrition (TPN) is often complicated 
by cholestatic hepatitis attributable to either steatosis, 
cholestasis, or gallstones (or gallbladder sludge). Steato-
sis or steatohepatitis may result from the excess carbo-
hydrate calories in these nutritional supplements and is 
the predominant form of TPN-associated liver disorder 
in adults. The frequency of this complication has been 
reduced substantially by the introduction of balanced 
SECTION VI
Disorders of the Liver and Biliary Tree
396
TPN formulas that rely on lipid as an alternative caloric 
source. Cholestasis and cholelithiasis, caused by the 
absence of stimulation of bile flow and secretion result-
ing from the lack of oral intake, are the predominant 
forms of TPN-associated liver disease in infants, espe-
cially in premature neonates. Often, cholestasis in such 
neonates is multifactorial, contributed to by other factors 
such as sepsis, hypoxemia, and hypotension; occasion-
ally, TPN-induced cholestasis in neonates culminates in 
chronic liver disease and liver failure. When TPN-asso-
ciated liver-test abnormalities occur in adults, balancing 
the TPN formula with more lipid is the intervention of 
first recourse. In infants with TPN-associated cholestasis, 
the addition of oral feeding may ameliorate the problem. 
Therapeutic interventions suggested, but not shown, to 
be of proven benefit, include cholecystokinin, ursode-
oxycholic acid, S-adenosyl methionine, and taurine.
“Alternative and Complementary 
Medicines” (Idiosyncratic Hepatitis, 
Steatosis)
The misguided popularity of herbal medications that are 
of scientifically unproven efficacy and that lack prospec-
tive safety oversight by regulatory agencies has resulted 
in occasional instances of hepatotoxicity. Included 
among the herbal remedies associated with toxic hepa-
titis are Jin Bu Huan, xiao-chai-hu-tang, germander, 
chaparral, senna, mistletoe, skullcap, gentian, comfrey 
(containing pyrrolizidine alkaloids), Ma huang, bee 
pollen, valerian root, pennyroyal oil, kava, celandine, 
Impila (Callilepsis laureaola), LipoKinetix, Hyroxycut, 
herbal nutritional supplements, and herbal teas. Well 
characterized are the acute hepatitis-like histologic 
lesions following Jin Bu Huan use: focal hepatocellular 
necrosis, mixed mononuclear portal tract infiltration, 
coagulative necrosis, apoptotic hepatocyte degeneration, 
tissue eosinophilia, and microvesicular steatosis. Megadoses 
of vitamin A can injure the liver, as can pyrrolizidine 
alkaloids, which often contaminate Chinese herbal 
preparations and can cause a venoocclusive injury lead-
ing to sinusoidal hepatic vein obstruction. Because some 
alternative medicines induce toxicity via active metab-
olites, alcohol and drugs that stimulate cytochrome 
P450 enzymes may enhance the toxicity of some of 
these products. Conversely, some alternative medicines 
also stimulate cytochrome P450 and may result in or 
amplify the toxicity of recognized drug hepatotoxins. 
Given the widespread use of such poorly defined herbal 
preparations, hepatotoxicity is likely to be encountered 
with increasing frequency; therefore, a drug history 
in patients with acute and chronic liver disease should 
include use of “alternative medicines” and other non-
prescription preparations sold in so-called health food 
stores.
Highly Active Antiretroviral 
Therapy (HAART) for HIV Infection 
(Mitochondrial Toxic, Idiosyncratic, 
Steatosis; Hepatocellular, 
Cholestatic, and Mixed)
The recognition of drug hepatotoxicity in persons with 
HIV infection is complicated in this population by the 
many alternative causes of liver injury (chronic viral hepa-
titis, fatty infiltration, infiltrative disorders, mycobacte-
rial infection, etc.), but drug hepatotoxicity associated 
with HAART is an emerging and common type of liver 
injury in HIV-infected persons. Although no one antivi-
ral agent is recognized as a potent hepatotoxin, combina-
tion regimens including reverse transcriptase and protease 
inhibitors cause hepatotoxicity in ∼10% of treated patients. 
Implicated most frequently are combinations including 
nucleoside analogue reverse transcriptase inhibitors zid-
ovudine, didanosine, and, to a lesser extent, stavudine; 
protease inhibitors ritonavir and indinavir (and amprena-
vir when used together with ritonavir) as well as tiprana-
vir; and nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors 
nevirapine and, to a lesser extent, efavirenz. These drugs 
cause predominantly hepatocellular injury but cholestatic 
injury as well, and prolonged (>6 months) use of reverse 
transcriptase inhibitors has been associated with mitochondrial 
injury, steatosis, and lactic acidosis. Indirect hyperbili-
rubinemia, resulting from direct inhibition of bilirubin- 
conjugating activity by UDP-glucuronosyltransferase, usually 
without elevation of aminotransferase or alkaline phospha-
tase activities, occurs in ∼10% of patients treated with the 
protease inhibitor indinavir. Distinguishing the impact of 
HAART hepatotoxicity in patients with HIV and hepatitis 
virus co-infection is made challenging by the following: (1) 
both chronic hepatitis B and hepatitis C can affect the natu-
ral history of HIV infection and the response to HAART, 
and (2) HAART can have an impact on chronic viral 
hepatitis. For example, immunologic reconstitution with 
HAART can result in immunologically mediated liver-cell 
injury in patients with chronic hepatitis B co-infection if 
treatment with an antiviral agent for hepatitis B, e.g., the 
nucleoside analogue lamivudine, is withdrawn or if nucleo-
side analogue resistance emerges. Infection with HIV, espe-
cially with low CD4+ T cell counts, has been reported to 
increase the rate of hepatic fibrosis associated with chronic 
hepatitis C, and HAART therapy can increase levels of 
serum aminotransferases and hepatitis C virus RNA in 
patients with hepatitis C co-infection. Didanosine or stavu-
dine should not be used with ribavirin in patients with 
HIV/hepatitis C virus co-infection, because of an increased 
risk of severe mitochondrial toxicity and lactic acidosis.
Acknowledgement
Kurt J. Isselbacher, MD, contributed to this chapter in previous 
editions of Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine.
 Jules L. Dienstag 
397
 Chronic hepatitis represents a series of liver disorders of 
varying causes and severity in which hepatic infl amma-
tion and necrosis continue for at least 6 months. Milder 
forms are nonprogressive or only slowly progressive, 
while more severe forms may be associated with scarring 
and architectural reorganization, which, when advanced, 
lead ultimately to cirrhosis. Several categories of chronic 
hepatitis have been recognized. These include chronic 
viral hepatitis, druginduced chronic hepatitis  ( Chap. 305 ) , 
and autoimmune chronic hepatitis. In many cases, 
clinical and laboratory features are insuffi cient to allow 
assignment into one of these three categories; these 
“idiopathic” cases are also believed to represent auto-
immune chronic hepatitis. Finally, clinical and laboratory 
features of chronic hepatitis are observed occasionally 
in patients with such hereditary/metabolic disorders as 
Wilson’s disease (copper overload)  ( Chaps. 308 and  360 ) 
and nonalcoholic fatty liver disease  ( Chap. 309 ) and even 
occasionally in patients with alcoholic liver injury 
 ( Chap. 307 ) . Although all types of chronic hepatitis 
share certain clinical, laboratory, and histopathologic fea-
tures, chronic viral and chronic autoimmune hepatitis 
are suffi ciently distinct to merit separate discussions.  For 
discussion of acute hepatitis, see  Chap. 304 . 
 ClassiFiCation oF ChroniC hepatitis 
 Common to all forms of chronic hepatitis are histo-
pathologic distinctions based on localization and extent 
of liver injury. These vary from the milder forms, pre-
viously labeled  chronic persistent hepatitis and  chronic lobular 
hepatitis , to the more severe form, formerly called  chronic 
active hepatitis . When fi rst defi ned, these designations 
were believed to have prognostic implications, which 
have been challenged by more recent observations. 
Categorization of chronic hepatitis based primarily on 
histopathologic features has been replaced by a more 
informative classifi cation based on a combination of 
clinical, serologic, and histologic variables. Classifi cation 
of chronic hepatitis is based on (1) its  cause ; (2) its histo-
logic activity, or  grade ; and (3) its degree of progression, 
or  stage . Thus, neither clinical features alone nor histo-
logic features—requiring liver biopsy—alone are suffi -
cient to characterize and distinguish among the several 
categories of chronic hepatitis. 
 ClassifiCation by Cause 
 Clinical and serologic features allow the establishment of a 
diagnosis of  chronic viral hepatitis , caused by hepatitis B, hepa-
titis B plus D, or hepatitis C;  autoimmune hepatitis , includ-
ing several subcategories, I and II (perhaps III), based on 
serologic distinctions;  drug-associated chronic hepatitis ; and a 
category of unknown cause, or  cryptogenic chronic hepatitis
 ( Table 40-1 ) . These are addressed in more detail below. 
 ClassifiCation by grade 
 Grade, a histologic assessment of necroinfl ammatory 
activity, is based on examination of the liver biopsy. An 
assessment of important histologic features includes the 
degree of  periportal necrosis and the disruption of the limit-
ing plate of periportal hepatocytes by infl ammatory cells 
(so-called  piecemeal necrosis or  interface hepatitis ); the degree 
of confl uent necrosis that links or forms bridges between 
vascular structures—between portal tract and portal tract 
or even more important bridges between portal tract and 
central vein—referred to as  bridging necrosis ; the degree 
of hepatocyte degeneration and focal necrosis within 
the lobule; and the degree of  portal inﬂ ammation . Several 
scoring systems that take these histologic features into 
account have been devised, and the most popular are the 
histologic activity index (HAI), used commonly in the 
United States, and the METAVIR score, used in Europe 
( Table 40-2 ) . Based on the presence and degree of 
these features of histologic activity, chronic hepatitis can 
be graded as mild, moderate, or severe. 
 CHRONIC HEPATITIS 
 Chapter 40 
SECTION VI
Disorders of the Liver and Biliary Tree
398
Classification by Stage
The stage of chronic hepatitis, which reflects the level 
of progression of the disease, is based on the degree 
of hepatic fibrosis. When fibrosis is so extensive that 
fibrous septa surround parenchymal nodules and alter 
the normal architecture of the liver lobule, the histo-
logic lesion is defined as cirrhosis. Staging is based on the 
degree of fibrosis as categorized on a numerical scale 
from 0–6 (HAI) or 0–4 (METAVIR) (Table 40-2).
Chronic Viral Hepatitis
Both the enterically transmitted forms of viral hepatitis, 
hepatitis A and E, are self-limited and do not cause 
chronic hepatitis (rare reports notwithstanding in which 
acute hepatitis A serves as a trigger for the onset of auto-
immune hepatitis in genetically susceptible patients). 
In contrast, the entire clinicopathologic spectrum of 
chronic hepatitis occurs in patients with chronic viral 
hepatitis B and C as well as in patients with chronic 
hepatitis D superimposed on chronic hepatitis B.
Chronic Hepatitis B
The likelihood of chronicity after acute hepatitis B varies 
as a function of age. Infection at birth is associated 
with clinically silent acute infection but a 90% chance 
of chronic infection, while infection in young adult-
hood in immunocompetent persons is typically associ-
ated with clinically apparent acute hepatitis but a risk 
of chronicity of only approximately 1%. Most cases of 
chronic hepatitis B among adults, however, occur in 
patients who never had a recognized episode of clini-
cally apparent acute viral hepatitis. The degree of liver 
injury (grade) in patients with chronic hepatitis B is 
variable, ranging from none in inactive carriers to mild 
to moderate to severe. Among adults with chronic 
hepatitis B, histologic features are of prognostic impor-
tance. In one long-term study of patients with chronic 
hepatitis B, investigators found a 5-year survival rate of 
97% for patients with mild chronic hepatitis, 86% for 
patients with moderate to severe chronic hepatitis, and 
only 55% for patients with chronic hepatitis and post-
necrotic cirrhosis. The 15-year survival in these cohorts 
was 77, 66, and 40%, respectively. On the other hand, 
more recent observations do not allow us to be so 
sanguine about the prognosis in patients with mild chronic 
hepatitis; among such patients followed for 1–13 years, 
progression to more severe chronic hepatitis and cirrhosis 
has been observed in more than a quarter of cases.
More important to consider than histology alone 
in patients with chronic hepatitis B is the degree of 
hepatitis B virus (HBV) replication. As reviewed in 
Table 40-1 
Clinical and Laboratory Features of Chronic Hepatitis
Type of hepatitis
Diagnostic test(s)
Autoantibodies
Therapy
Chronic hepatitis B
HBsAg, IgG anti-HBc, HBeAg,  
HBV DNA
Uncommon
IFN-α, PEG 
IFN-α 
lamivudine 
adefovir 
entecavir 
telbivudine 
tenofovir
Chronic hepatitis C
Anti-HCV, HCV RNA
Anti-LKM1a
PEG IFN-α plus ribavirin 
Telaprevird
Boceprevird
Chronic hepatitis D
Anti-HDV, HDV RNA,  
HBsAg, IgG anti-HBc
Anti-LKM3
IFN-α, PEG 
IFN-αc
Autoimmune  
hepatitis
ANAb (homogeneous), 
anti-LKM1 (±) Hyperglobulinemia
ANA, anti-LKM1  
anti-SLAe
Prednisone,  
azathioprine
Drug-associated
—
Uncommon
Withdraw drug
Cryptogenic
All negative
None
Prednisone (?),  
azathioprine (?)
aAntibodies to liver-kidney microsomes type 1 (autoimmune hepatitis type II and some cases of hepatitis C)
bAntinuclear antibody (autoimmune hepatitis type I)
cClinical trials suggest benefit of IFN-α therapy; PEG IFN-α is as effective, if not more so.
dExpected approval date 2011.
eAntibodies to soluble liver antigen (autoimmune hepatitis type III)
Abbreviations: HBc, hepatitis B core; HBeAg, hepatitis B e antigen; HBsAg, hepatitis B surface antigen; HBV, hepatitis B virus; HCV, hepatitis 
C virus; HDV, hepatitis D virus; IFN-α, interferon-α; IgG, immunoglobulin G; LKM, liver-kidney microsome; PEG-IFN-α, pegylated interferon-α; 
SLA, soluble liver antigen.
 
CHAPTER 40
Chronic Hepatitis
399
Chap. 304, chronic HBV infection can occur in the pre­
sence or absence of serum hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg), and 
generally, for both HBeAg-reactive and HBeAg-negative 
chronic hepatitis B, the level of HBV DNA correlates 
with the level of liver injury and risk of progression. 
In HBeAg-reactive chronic hepatitis B, two phases have 
been recognized based on the relative level of HBV 
replication. The relatively replicative phase is character-
ized by the presence in the serum of HBeAg and HBV 
DNA levels well in excess of 105–106 virions/mL, by 
the presence in the liver of detectable intrahepatocyte 
nucleocapsid antigens [primarily hepatitis B core anti-
gen (HBcAg)], by high infectivity, and by accompany-
ing liver injury. In contrast, the relatively nonreplicative 
phase is characterized by the absence of the conven-
tional serum marker of HBV replication (HBeAg), the 
appearance of anti-HBe, levels of HBV DNA below a 
threshold of ∼103 virions/mL, the absence of intrahe-
patocytic HBcAg, limited infectivity, and minimal liver 
injury. Those patients in the replicative phase tend to 
have more severe chronic hepatitis, while those in the 
nonreplicative phase tend to have minimal or mild 
chronic hepatitis or to be inactive hepatitis B carriers; 
however, distinctions in HBV replication and in histo-
logic category do not always coincide. The likelihood 
in a patient with HBeAg-reactive chronic hepatitis B of 
converting spontaneously from relatively replicative to non­
replicative infection is approximately 10–15% per year. 
Table 40-2
Histologic Grading and Staging of Chronic Hepatitis
Histologic Activity Index (HAI)a
METAVIRb
Histologic Feature
Severity
Score
Severity
Score
Necroinflammatory Activity (grade)
Periportal necrosis, including 
piecemeal necrosis and/or  
bridging necrosis (BN)
None
Mild
Mild/Moderate
Moderate
Severe
0
1
2
3
4
None
Mild
Moderate
Severe
0
1
2
3
Bridging  
necrosis
Yes
No
Intralobular       Confluent  
necrosis
—none
—focal
—Zone 3 some
—Zone 3 most
—Zone 3 + BN few
—Zone 3 + BN multiple
—Panacinar/multiacinar
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
None or mild
Moderate
Severe
0
1
2
                    Focal
—none
—≤1 focus/10x field
—2–4 foci/10x field
—5–10 foci/10x field
—>10 foci/10x field
0
1
2
3
4
Portal Inflammation
None
Mild
Moderate
Moderate/marked
Marked
Total
0
1
2
3
4
0–18
A0–A3c
Fibrosis (stage)
None
0
F0
Portal fibrosis—some
1
F1
Portal fibrosis—most
2
F1
Bridging fibrosis—few
3
F2
Bridging fibrosis—many
4
F3
Incomplete cirrhosis
5
F4
Cirrhosis
6
F4
Total
6
4
aJ Hepatol 22:696, 1995
bHepatology 24:289, 1996
cNecroinflammatory grade: A0 = none; A1 = mild; A2 = moderate; A3 = severe
SECTION VI
Disorders of the Liver and Biliary Tree
400
In patients with HBeAg-reactive chronic HBV infec-
tion, especially when acquired at birth or in early child-
hood, as recognized commonly in Asian countries, a 
dichotomy is common between very high levels of 
HBV replication and negligible levels of liver injury. 
Yet despite the relatively immediate, apparently benign 
nature of liver disease for many decades in this popula-
tion, patients with childhood-acquired HBV infection 
are the ones at ultimately increased risk later in life of 
cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) (Chap. 92). 
A discussion of the pathogenesis of liver injury in 
patients with chronic hepatitis B appears in Chap. 304.
HBeAg-negative chronic hepatitis B [i.e., chronic 
HBV infection with active virus replication, 
readily detectable HBV DNA but without 
HBeAg (anti-HBe-reactive)], is more common than 
HBeAg-reactive chronic hepatitis B in Mediterranean 
and European countries and in Asia (and, correspond-
ingly, in HBV genotypes other than A). Compared to 
patients with HBeAg-reactive chronic hepatitis B, 
patients with HBeAg-negative chronic hepatitis B have 
levels of HBV DNA that are several orders of magni-
tude lower (no more than 105–106 virions/mL) than 
those observed in the HBeAg-reactive subset. Most 
such cases represent precore or core-promoter muta-
tions acquired late in the natural history of the disease 
(mostly early-life onset; age range 40–55 years, older 
than that for HBeAg-reactive chronic hepatitis B); these 
mutations prevent translation of HBeAg from the pre-
core component of the HBV genome (precore mutants) 
or are characterized by down-regulated transcription of 
precore mRNA (core-promoter mutants; Chap. 304). 
Although their levels of HBV DNA tend to be lower than 
among patients with HBeAg-reactive chronic hepatitis B, 
patients with HBeAg-negative chronic hepatitis B can 
have progressive liver injury (complicated by cirrhosis 
and HCC) and experience episodic reactivation of liver 
disease reflected in fluctuating levels of aminotransferase 
activity (“flares”). The biochemical and histologic 
activity of HBeAg-negative disease tends to correlate 
closely with levels of HBV replication, unlike the case 
mentioned above of Asian patients with HBeAg-­
reactive chronic hepatitis B during the early decades of 
their HBV infection. An important point worth reiter-
ating is the observation that the level of HBV replica-
tion is the most important risk factor for the ultimate 
development of cirrhosis and HCC in both HBeAg-
reactive and HBeAg-negative patients. Although levels 
of HBV DNA are lower and more readily suppressed by 
therapy to undetectable levels in HBeAg-negative 
(compared to HBeAg-reactive) chronic hepatitis B, 
achieving sustained responses that permit discontinua-
tion of antiviral therapy is less likely in HBeAg-negative 
patients (see below). Inactive carriers are patients with 
circulating hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg), normal 
serum aminotransferase levels, undetectable HBeAg, 
and levels of HBV DNA that are either undetectable or 
present at levels ≤103 virions/mL. This serologic profile 
can occur not only in inactive carriers but also in 
patients with HBeAg-negative chronic hepatitis B dur-
ing periods of relative inactivity; distinguishing between 
the two requires sequential biochemical and virologic 
monitoring over many months.
The spectrum of clinical features of chronic hepatitis B 
is broad, ranging from asymptomatic infection to debili-
tating disease or even end-stage, fatal hepatic failure. As 
noted above, the onset of the disease tends to be insidi-
ous in most patients, with the exception of the very 
few in whom chronic disease follows failure of resolu-
tion of clinically apparent acute hepatitis B. The clinical 
and laboratory features associated with progression from 
acute to chronic hepatitis B are discussed in Chap. 304.
Fatigue is a common symptom, and persistent or 
intermittent jaundice is a common feature in severe or 
advanced cases. Intermittent deepening of jaundice and 
recurrence of malaise and anorexia, as well as worsen-
ing fatigue, are reminiscent of acute hepatitis; such 
exacerbations may occur spontaneously, often coincid-
ing with evidence of virologic reactivation; may lead 
to progressive liver injury; and, when superimposed on 
well-established cirrhosis, may cause hepatic decompen-
sation. Complications of cirrhosis occur in end-stage 
chronic hepatitis and include ascites, edema, bleeding 
gastroesophageal varices, hepatic encephalopathy, coag-
ulopathy, or hypersplenism. Occasionally, these com-
plications bring the patient to initial clinical attention. 
Extrahepatic complications of chronic hepatitis B, simi-
lar to those seen during the prodromal phase of acute 
hepatitis B, are associated with deposition of circulating 
hepatitis B antigen–antibody immune complexes. These 
include arthralgias and arthritis, which are common, and 
the more rare purpuric cutaneous lesions (leukocytoclas-
tic vasculitis), immune-complex glomerulonephritis, and 
generalized vasculitis (polyarteritis nodosa) (Chaps. 304 
and 326).
Laboratory features of chronic hepatitis B do not distin-
guish adequately between histologically mild and severe 
hepatitis. Aminotransferase elevations tend to be modest 
for chronic hepatitis B but may fluctuate in the range 
of 100–1000 units. As is true for acute viral hepatitis B, 
alanine aminotransferase (ALT) tends to be more ele-
vated than aspartate aminotransferase (AST); however, 
once cirrhosis is established, AST tends to exceed ALT. 
Levels of alkaline phosphatase activity tend to be normal 
or only marginally elevated. In severe cases, moderate 
elevations in serum bilirubin [51.3–171 μmol/L (3–10 
mg/dL)] occur. Hypoalbuminemia and prolongation 
of the prothrombin time occur in severe or end-stage 
cases. Hyperglobulinemia and detectable circulating 
autoantibodies are distinctly absent in chronic hepatitis 
B (in contrast to autoimmune hepatitis). Viral markers 
of chronic HBV infection are discussed in Chap. 304.
 
CHAPTER 40
Chronic Hepatitis
401
Treatment	
Chronic Hepatitis B
Although progression to cirrhosis is more likely in severe 
than in mild or moderate chronic hepatitis B, all forms of 
chronic hepatitis B can be progressive, and progression 
occurs primarily in patients with active HBV replication.  
Moreover, in populations of patients with chronic  
hepatitis B who are at risk for HCC (Chap. 92), the risk is 
highest for those with continued, high-level HBV rep-
lication and lower for persons in whom initially high-
level HBV DNA falls spontaneously over time. Therefore, 
management of chronic hepatitis B is directed at sup-
pressing the level of virus replication. Although clinical 
trials tend to focus on clinical endpoints achieved over  
1–2 years (e.g., suppression of HBV DNA to undetectable 
levels, loss of HBeAg/HBsAg, improvement in histology, 
normalization of ALT), these short-term gains translate 
into reductions in the risk of clinical progression, hepatic 
decompensation, and death. To date, seven drugs have 
been approved for treatment of chronic hepatitis B: 
injectable interferon (IFN) α pegylated interferon [long-
acting IFN bound to polyethylene glycol (PEG), known 
as PEG IFN]; and the oral agents lamivudine, adefovir 
dipivoxil, entecavir, telbivudine, and tenofovir.
Antiviral therapy for hepatitis B has evolved rapidly 
since the mid-1990s, as has the sensitivity of tests for 
HBV DNA. When IFN and lamivudine were evaluated 
in clinical trials, HBV DNA was measured by insensi-
tive hybridization assays with detection thresholds of  
105–106 virions/mL; when adefovir, entecavir, telbivu-
dine, tenofovir, and PEG IFN were studied in clinical  
trials, HBV DNA was measured by sensitive amplification 
assays [polymerase chain reaction [(PCR)] with detection 
thresholds of 101–103 virions/mL. Recognition of these 
distinctions is helpful when comparing results of clini-
cal trials that established the efficacy of these therapies 
(reviewed below in chronological order of publication of 
these efficacy trials).
Interferon  IFN-α was the first approved therapy 
for chronic hepatitis B. Although it is no longer used 
to treat hepatitis B, standard IFN is important histori-
cally, having provided important lessons about antiviral 
therapy in general. For immunocompetent adults with 
HBeAg-reactive chronic hepatitis B [who tend to have 
high-level HBV DNA (>105–106 virions/mL) and histo-
logic evidence of chronic hepatitis on liver biopsy], a 
16-week course of IFN given subcutaneously at a daily 
dose of 5 million units, or three times a week at a dose 
of 10 million units, results in a loss of HBeAg and hybrid-
ization-detectable HBV DNA (i.e., a reduction to levels 
below 105–106 virions/mL) in ∼30% of patients, with 
a concomitant improvement in liver histology. Sero-
conversion from HBeAg to anti-HBe occurs in approxi-
mately 20%, and, in early trials, approximately 8% lost 
HBsAg. Successful IFN therapy and seroconversion are 
often accompanied by an acute hepatitis-like elevation 
in aminotransferase activity, which has been postu-
lated to result from enhanced cytolytic T cell clearance 
of HBV-infected hepatocytes. Relapse after success-
ful therapy is rare (1 or 2%). The likelihood of respond-
ing to IFN is higher in patients with lower levels of HBV  
DNA and substantial elevations of ALT. Although  
children can respond as well as adults, IFN therapy has not 
been effective in very young children infected at birth. 
Similarly, IFN therapy has not been effective in immu-
nosuppressed persons, Asian patients with minimal-to-
mild ALT elevations, or patients with decompensated 
chronic hepatitis B (in whom such therapy can actually 
be detrimental, sometimes precipitating decompen-
sation, often associated with severe adverse effects). 
Among patients with HBeAg loss during therapy, long-
term follow-up has demonstrated that 80% experience 
eventual loss of HBsAg [i.e., all serologic markers of 
infection, and normalization of ALT over a 9-year post-
treatment period]. In addition, improved longterm and 
complication-free survival as well as a reduction in the 
frequency of HCC have been documented among inter-
feron responders, supporting the conclusion that suc-
cessful interferon therapy improves the natural history 
of chronic hepatitis B.
Initial trials of brief-duration IFN therapy in patients 
with HBeAg-negative chronic hepatitis B were dis­
appointing, suppressing HBV replication transiently during 
therapy but almost never resulting in sustained antivi-
ral responses. In subsequent IFN trials among patients 
with HBeAg-negative chronic hepatitis B, however, more 
protracted courses, lasting up to 11/2 years, have been 
reported to result in sustained remissions documented 
to last for several years, with suppressed HBV DNA and 
aminotransferase activity, in ∼20%.
Complications of IFN therapy include systemic “flu-
like” symptoms; marrow suppression; emotional lability  
(irritability, depression, anxiety); autoimmune reactions 
(especially autoimmune thyroiditis); and miscellaneous 
side effects such as alopecia, rashes, diarrhea, and numb-
ness and tingling of the extremities. With the possible 
exception of autoimmune thyroiditis, all these side effects 
are reversible upon dose lowering or cessation of therapy.
Although no longer competitive with the newer gen-
eration of antivirals, IFN did represent the first success-
ful antiviral approach and set a standard against which 
to measure subsequent drugs in the achievement of 
durable virologic, serologic, biochemical, and histologic 
responses; consolidation of virologic and biochemical 
benefit in the ensuing years after therapy; and improve-
ment in the natural history of chronic hepatitis B. Stan-
dard IFN has been supplanted by long-acting PEG IFN 
(see below), and IFN nonresponders are now treated 
with one of the newer oral nucleoside analogues.
SECTION VI
Disorders of the Liver and Biliary Tree
402
Lamivudine  The first of the nucleoside analogues 
to be approved, the dideoxynucleoside lamivudine, 
inhibits reverse transcriptase activity of both HIV and 
HBV and is a potent and effective agent for patients  
with chronic hepatitis B. Although generally super-
seded by newer, more potent agents, lamivudine is still 
used in regions of the world where newer agents are 
not yet approved are or not affordable. In clinical trials 
among patients with HBeAg-reactive chronic hepatitis B,  
lamivudine therapy at daily doses of 100 mg for 48–52 weeks 
suppressed HBV DNA by a median of approximately  
5.5 log10 copies/mL and to undetectable levels, as 
measured by PCR amplification assays, in approxi-
mately 40% of patients. Therapy was associated with 
HBeAg loss in 32–33%; HBeAg seroconversion (i.e., 
conversion from HBeAg-reactive to anti-HBe-reactive) 
in 16–21%; normalization of ALT in 40–75%; improve-
ment in histology in 50–60%; retardation in fibrosis in 
20–30%; and prevention of progression to cirrhosis. 
HBeAg responses can occur even in subgroups who are 
resistant to IFN (e.g., those with high-level HBV DNA) 
or who failed in the past to respond to it. As is true for 
IFN therapy of chronic hepatitis B, patients with near-
normal ALT activity tend not to experience HBeAg 
responses (despite suppression of HBV DNA), and those 
with ALT levels exceeding five times the upper limit of 
normal can expect 1-year HBeAg seroconversion rates 
of 50–60%. Generally, HBeAg seroconversions are con-
fined to patients who achieve suppression of HBV DNA 
to <104 genomes/mL. Among patients who undergo 
HBeAg responses during a year-long course of therapy 
and in whom the response is sustained for 4–6 months 
after cessation of therapy, the response is durable there-
after in the vast majority, >80%; therefore, the achieve-
ment of an HBeAg response represents a viable stop-
ping point in therapy. Reduced durability has been 
reported in some Asian experiences; however, in most 
western and Asian patient study populations, long-
term durability of HBeAg responses is the rule, which, 
at least in western patients, is accompanied by a post-
treatment HBsAg seroconversion rate comparable to 
that seen after IFN-induced HBeAg responses. To sup-
port the durability of HBeAg responses, patients receive 
a period of consolidation therapy (at least 6 months in 
western patients, at least 1 year in Asian patients) after 
HBeAg seroconversion; close posttreatment monitoring 
is necessary to identify HBV reactivation promptly and 
to resume therapy. If HBeAg is unaffected by lamivudine 
therapy, the current approach is to continue therapy 
until an HBeAg response occurs, but longterm ther-
apy may be required to suppress HBV replication and, 
in turn, limit liver injury; HBeAg seroconversions can 
increase to a level of 50% after 5 years of therapy. His-
tologic improvement continues to accrue with ­therapy 
beyond the first year; after a cumulative course of  
3 years of lamivudine therapy, necroinflammatory activity 
is reduced in the majority of patients, and even cirrhosis 
has been shown to regress to precirrhotic stages.
Losses of HBsAg have been few during the first 
year of lamivudine therapy, and this observation had 
been cited as an advantage of IFN-based over lamivu-
dine therapy; however, in head-to-head comparisons 
between standard IFN and lamivudine monotherapy, 
HBsAg losses were rare in both groups. Trials in which 
lamivudine and IFN were administered in combination 
failed to show a benefit of combination therapy over 
lamivudine monotherapy for either treatment-naïve 
patients or prior IFN nonresponders.
In patients with HBeAg-negative chronic hepatitis B 
(i.e., in those with precore and core-promoter HBV 
mutations), 1 year of lamivudine therapy results in HBV 
DNA suppression and normalization of ALT in three-
quarters of patients and in histologic improvement in 
approximately two-thirds. Therapy has been shown to  
suppress HBV DNA by approximately 4.5 log10 copies/mL 
(baseline HBV DNA levels are lower than in patients 
with HBeAg-reactive hepatitis B) and to undetectable 
levels in approximately 70%, as measured by sensitive  
PCR amplification assays. Lacking HBeAg at the outset, 
patients with HBeAg-negative chronic hepatitis B cannot  
achieve an HBeAg response—a stopping point in 
HBeAg-reactive patients; almost invariably, when ther-
apy is discontinued, reactivation is the rule. Therefore, 
these patients require long-term therapy; with succes-
sive years, the proportion with suppressed HBV DNA 
and normal ALT increases.
Clinical and laboratory side effects of lamivudine 
are negligible, indistinguishable from those observed 
in placebo recipients. Still, lamivudine doses should be 
reduced in patients with reduced creatinine clearance. 
During lamivudine therapy, transient ALT elevations, 
resembling those seen during IFN therapy and dur-
ing spontaneous HBeAg-to-anti-HBe seroconversions, 
occur in one-fourth of patients. These ALT elevations  
may result from restored cytolytic T cell activation per-
mitted by suppression of HBV replication. Similar ALT 
elevations, however, occur at an identical frequency in 
placebo recipients, but ALT elevations associated with 
HBeAg seroconversion are confined to lamivudine-
treated patients. When therapy is stopped after a year 
of therapy, two- to threefold ALT elevations occur in 
20–30% of lamivudine-treated patients, represent-
ing renewed liver-cell injury as HBV replication returns. 
Although these posttreatment flares are almost always 
transient and mild, rare severe exacerbations, especially 
in cirrhotic patients, have been observed, mandating  
close and careful clinical and virologic monitoring  
after discontinuation of treatment. Many authorities 
 
CHAPTER 40
Chronic Hepatitis
403
caution against discontinuing therapy in patients with 
cirrhosis, in whom posttreatment flares could precipitate 
decompensation.
Long-term monotherapy with lamivudine is associated 
with methionine-to-valine (M204V) or methionine-to- 
isoleucine (M204I) mutations, primarily at amino acid 
204 in the tyrosine-methionine-aspartate-aspartate 
(YMDD) motif of HBV DNA polymerase, analogous to 
mutations that occur in HIV-infected patients treated 
with this drug. During a year of therapy, YMDD muta-
tions occur in 15–30% of patients; the frequency 
increases with each year of therapy, reaching 70% at 
year 5. Ultimately, patients with YMDD mutants experi-
ence degradation of clinical, biochemical, and histo-
logic responses; therefore, if treatment is begun with 
lamivudine monotherapy, the emergence of lamivudine 
resistance, reflected clinically by a breakthrough from 
suppressed levels of HBV DNA and ALT, is managed by 
adding another antiviral to which YMDD variants are 
sensitive (e.g., adefovir, tenofovir; see below).
Currently, although lamivudine is very safe and still 
used widely in other parts of the world, in the United 
States and Europe, lamivudine has been eclipsed by 
more potent antivirals that have superior resistance pro-
files (see below). Still, as the first successful oral antivi-
ral agent for use in hepatitis B, lamivudine has provided 
proof of the concept that polymerase inhibitors can 
achieve virologic, serologic, biochemical, and histologic 
benefits. In addition, lamivudine has been shown to be 
effective in the treatment of patients with decompen-
sated hepatitis B (for whom IFN is contraindicated), in 
some of whom decompensation can be reversed. More-
over, among patients with cirrhosis or advanced fibrosis, 
lamivudine has been shown to be effective in reducing 
the risk of progression to hepatic decompensation and, 
marginally, the risk of HCC.
Because lamivudine monotherapy can result uni-
versally in the rapid emergence of YMDD variants in  
persons with HIV infection, patients with chronic hepatitis  
B should be tested for anti-HIV prior to therapy; if HIV 
infection is identified, lamivudine monotherapy at the 
HBV daily dose of 100 mg is contraindicated. These 
patients should be treated for both HIV and HBV with 
an HIV drug regimen that includes or is supplemented 
by at least two drugs active against HBV; highly active 
antiretroviral therapy (HAART) often contains two drugs 
with antiviral activity against HBV (e.g., tenofovir and 
emtricitabine), but if lamivudine is part of the regimen, 
the daily dose should be 300 mg (Chap. 189). The safety 
of lamivudine during pregnancy has not been estab-
lished; however, the drug is not teratogenic in rodents 
and has been used safely in pregnant women with HIV  
infection and with HBV infection. Limited data even 
suggest that administration of lamivudine during the  
last months of pregnancy to mothers with high-level 
hepatitis B viremia (≥108 IU/ml) can reduce the likeli-
hood of perinatal transmission of hepatitis B.
Adefovir Dipivoxil  At an oral daily dose of 
10 mg, the acyclic nucleotide analogue adefovir dipivoxil, 
the prodrug of adefovir, reduces HBV DNA by approxi-
mately 3.5–4 log10 copies/mL and is equally effective 
in treatment-naïve patients and IFN nonresponders. In 
HBeAg-reactive chronic hepatitis B, a 48-week course 
of adefovir dipivoxil was shown to achieve histologic  
improvement (and reduce the progression of fibrosis)  
and normalization of ALT in just over one-half of 
patients, HBeAg seroconversion in 12%, HBeAg loss in 
23%, and suppression to an undetectable level of HBV 
DNA in 13–21%, as measured by PCR. Similar to IFN and 
lamivudine, adefovir dipivoxil is more likely to achieve 
an HBeAg response in patients with high baseline ALT 
(e.g., among adefovir-treated patients with ALT level 
>5 times the upper limit of normal), HBeAg serocon-
versions occurred in 25%. The durability of adefovir-
induced HBeAg responses is high (91% in one study); 
therefore, HBeAg response can be relied upon as a stop-
ping point for adefovir therapy, after a period of consoli-
dation therapy, as outlined above. Although data on the 
impact of additional therapy beyond 1 year are limited, 
biochemical, serologic, and virologic outcomes improve 
progressively as therapy is continued.
In patients with HBeAg-negative chronic hepatitis B, a 
48-week course of 10 mg/d of adefovir dipivoxil resulted 
in histologic improvement in two-thirds, normalization 
of ALT in threefourths, and suppression of HBV DNA to 
PCR-undetectable levels in one-half to two-thirds. As 
was true for lamivudine, because HBeAg responses—a 
potential stopping point—cannot be achieved in this 
group, reactivation is the rule when adefovir therapy 
is discontinued, and indefinite, long-term therapy 
is required. Treatment beyond the first year consoli-
dates the gain of the first year; after 5 years of therapy, 
improvement in hepatic inflammation and regression 
of fibrosis was observed in threefourths of patients, ALT 
was normal in 70%, and HBV DNA was undetectable in 
almost 70%.
Adefovir contains a flexible acyclic linker instead 
of the L-nucleoside ring of lamivudine, avoiding steric  
hindrance by mutated amino acids. In addition, the 
molecular structure of phosphorylated adefovir is very 
similar to that of its natural substrate; therefore muta-
tions to adefovir would also affect binding of the natu-
ral substrate, dATP. Hypothetically, these are among 
the reasons that resistance to adefovir dipivoxil is much 
less likely than resistance to lamivudine; no resistance 
was encountered in 1 year of clinical-trial therapy. In 
subsequent years, however, adefovir resistance begins 
SECTION VI
Disorders of the Liver and Biliary Tree
404
to emerge [asparagine to threonine at amino acid 236 
(N236T) and alanine to valine or threonine at amino 
acid 181 (A181V/T), primarily], occurring in 2.5% after 
2 years, but in 29% after 5 years of therapy (reported 
in HBeAg-negative patients). Among patients coin-
fected with HBV and HIV and who have normal CD4+ 
T cell counts, adefovir dipivoxil is effective in suppress-
ing HBV dramatically (by 5 logs10 in one study). Moreover, 
adefovir dipivoxil is effective in lamivudine-resistant,  
YMDD-mutant HBV and can be used when such lami-
vudine-induced variants emerge. When lamivudine 
resistance occurs, adding adefovir (i.e., maintaining 
lamivudine to preempt the emergence of adefovir 
resistance), is superior to switching to adefovir. Almost 
invariably, patients with adefovir-mutant HBV respond 
to lamivudine (or newer agents, such as entecavir, see 
below). When, in the past, adefovir had been evaluated 
as therapy for HIV infection, doses of 60–120 mg were 
required to suppress HIV, and, at these doses, the drug 
was nephrotoxic. Even at 30 mg/d, creatinine elevations 
of 44 μmol/L (0.5 mg/dL) occur in 10% of patients; how-
ever, at the HBV-effective dose of 10 mg, such elevations 
of creatinine are rarely encountered. If any nephrotox-
icity does occur, it rarely appears before 6–8 months of 
therapy. Although renal tubular injury is a rare poten-
tial side effect, and although creatinine monitoring is 
recommended during treatment, the therapeutic index 
of adefovir dipivoxil is high, and the nephrotoxicity 
observed in clinical trials at higher doses was reversible. 
For patients with underlying renal disease, frequency of 
administration of adefovir dipivoxil should be reduced 
to every 48 h for creatinine clearances of 20–49 mL/min; 
to every 72 h for creatinine clearances of 10–19 mL/min; 
and once a week, following dialysis, for patients under-
going hemodialysis. Adefovir dipivoxil is very well tol-
erated, and ALT elevations during and after withdrawal 
of therapy are similar to those observed and described 
above in clinical trials of lamivudine. An advantage 
of adefovir is its relatively favorable resistance pro-
file; however, it is not as potent as the other approved 
oral agents, it does not suppress HBV DNA as rapidly 
or as uniformly as the others, it is the least likely of all 
agents to result in HBeAg seroconversion, and 20–50% 
of patients fail to suppress HBV DNA by 2 log10 (“primary 
nonresponders”). For these reasons, adefovir has been 
supplanted in both treatment-naïve and lamivudine-
resistant patients by the more potent, less resistance-
prone nucleotide analogue tenofovir (see below).
Pegylated 
Interferon  After long-acting 
PEG IFN was shown to be effective in the treatment of 
hepatitis C (see below), this more convenient drug was  
evaluated in the treatment of chronic hepatitis B. 
Once-a-week PEG IFN is more effective than the more  
frequently administered, standard IFN, and several 
large-scale trials of PEG IFN versus oral nucleoside ana-
logues have been conducted among patients with 
HBeAg-reactive and HBeAg-negative chronic hepatitis B.
In HBeAg-reactive chronic hepatitis B, two large-
scale studies were done, one with PEG IFN-α 2b (100 μg 
weekly for 32 weeks, then 50 μg weekly for another 
20 weeks for a total of 52 weeks, with a comparison 
arm of combination PEG IFN with oral lamivudine) in 
307 subjects; the other involved PEG IFN-α 2a (180 μg 
weekly for 48 weeks) in 814 primarily Asian patients, 
three-fourths of whom had ALT ≥2 × the upper limit of 
normal, with comparison arms of lamivudine mono-
therapy and combination PEG IFN plus lamivudine. At 
the end of therapy (48–52 weeks) in the PEG IFN mono-
therapy arms, HBeAg loss occurred in approximately 
30%, HBeAg seroconversion in 22–27%, undetectable 
HBV DNA (<400 copies/mL by PCR) in 10–25%, normal 
ALT in 34–39%, and a mean reduction in HBV DNA of  
2 log10 copies/mL (PEG IFN-α 2b) to 4.5 log10 copies/mL 
(PEG IFN-α 2a). Six months after completing PEG IFN 
monotherapy in these trials, HBeAg losses were present 
in approximately 35%, HBeAg seroconversion in approx-
imately 30%, undetectable HBV DNA in 7–14%, normal 
ALT in 32–41%, and a mean reduction in HBV DNA of 
2–2.4 log10 copies/mL. Although the combination of 
PEG IFN and lamivudine was superior at the end of ther-
apy in one or more serologic, virologic, or biochemical  
outcomes, neither the combination arm (in both studies)  
nor the lamivudine monotherapy arm (in the PEG IFN-α 
2a trial) demonstrated any benefit compared to the 
PEG IFN monotherapy arms 6 months after therapy. 
Moreover, HBsAg seroconversion occurred in 3–7% of 
PEG IFN recipients (with or without lamivudine); some 
of these seroconversions were identified by the end of 
therapy, but many were identified during the posttreat-
ment follow-up period. The likelihood of HBeAg loss in 
PEG IFN–treated HBeAg-reactive patients is associated 
with HBV genotype A > B > C > D (shown for PEG IFN 
α-2b but not for α-2a).
Based on these results, some authorities concluded 
that PEG IFN monotherapy should be the first-line  
therapy of choice in HBeAg-reactive chronic hepatitis B;  
however, this conclusion has been challenged. Although 
a finite, 1-year course of PEG IFN results in a higher 
rate of sustained response (6 months after treatment) 
than is achieved with oral nucleoside/nucleotide ana-
logue therapy, the comparison is confounded by the 
fact that oral agents are not discontinued at the end 
of 1 year. Instead, taken orally and free of side effects, 
therapy with oral agents is extended indefinitely or until 
after the occurrence of an HBeAg response. The rate of 
HBeAg responses after 2 years of oralagent nucleoside 
analogue therapy is at least as high as, if not higher 
 
CHAPTER 40
Chronic Hepatitis
405
than, that achieved with PEG IFN after 1 year; favoring 
oral agents is the absence of injections and difficult-to-
tolerate side effects as well as lower direct and indirect 
medical costs and inconvenience. The association of 
HBsAg responses with PEG IFN therapy occurs in such a 
small proportion of patients that subjecting everyone to 
PEG IFN for the marginal gain of HBsAg responses dur-
ing or immediately after therapy in such a very small 
minority is questionable. Moreover, HBsAg responses 
occur in a comparable proportion of patients treated 
with earlygeneration nucleoside/nucleotide analogues 
in the years after therapy, and, with the newer, more 
potent nucleoside analogues, the frequency of HBsAg 
loss during the first year of therapy equals that of PEG 
IFN and is exceeded during year 2 (see below). Of 
course, resistance is not an issue during PEG IFN ther-
apy, but the risk of resistance is much lower with new 
agents (≤1% up to 3–5 years in previously treatment-
naïve, entecavir-treated and tenofovir-treated patients; 
see below). Finally, the level of HBV DNA inhibition that 
can be achieved with the newer agents, and even with 
lamivudine, exceeds that which can be achieved with 
PEG IFN, in some cases by several orders of magnitude.
In HBeAg-negative chronic hepatitis B, a trial of PEG 
IFN-α 2a (180 μg weekly for 48 weeks versus compari-
son arms of lamivudine monotherapy and of combi-
nation therapy) in 564 patients showed that PEG IFN  
monotherapy resulted at the end of therapy in sup-
pression of HBV DNA by a mean of 4.1 log10 copies/mL, 
undetectable HBV DNA (<400 copies/mL by PCR) in 
63%, normal ALT in 38%, and loss of HBsAg in 4%. 
Although lamivudine monotherapy and combination 
lamivudine–PEG IFN therapy were both superior to PEG 
IFN at the end of therapy, no advantage of lamivudine 
monotherapy or combination therapy was apparent 
over PEG IFN monotherapy 6 months after therapy— 
suppression of HBV DNA by a mean of 2.3 log10 copies/
mL, undetectable HBV DNA in 19%, and normal ALT in 
59%. In subjects involved in this trial followed for up to 
5 years, among the two-thirds followed who had been 
treated initially with PEG IFN, 17% maintained HBV DNA 
suppression to <400 copies/ml, but ALT remained nor-
mal in only 22%; HBsAg loss increased gradually to 12%. 
Among the half followed who had been treated initially 
with lamivudine monotherapy, HBV DNA remained 
<400 copies/ml in 7% and ALT normal in 16%; by year 
5, 3.5% had lost HBsAg. As was the case for standard 
IFN therapy in HBeAg-negative patients, longer after 
PEG IFN treatment, although a small subset maintained 
their responses, the proportion who benefited was very 
small, raising questions about the relative value of a 
finite period of PEG IFN, versus a longer course with a 
potent, low-resistance oral nucleoside analogue in these 
patients.
Entecavir  Entecavir, an oral cyclopentyl gua-
nosine analogue polymerase inhibitor, appears to be 
the most potent of the HBV antivirals and is just as well 
tolerated as lamivudine. In a 709-subject clinical trial 
among HBeAg-reactive patients, oral entecavir, 0.5 mg 
daily, was compared to lamivudine, 100 mg daily. At 48  
weeks, entecavir was superior to lamivudine in suppres-
sion of HBV DNA, mean 6.9 versus 5.5 log10 copies/mL 
and in percent with undetectable HBV DNA (<300 copies/ 
mL by PCR), 67% versus 36%; histologic improvement 
(≥2-point improvement in necroinflammatory HAI 
score), 72% versus 62%; and normal ALT (68% versus 
60%). The two treatments were indistinguishable in 
percent with HBeAg loss (22% versus 20%) and sero-
conversion (21% versus 18%). Among patients treated 
with entecavir for 96 weeks, HBV DNA was undetect-
able cumulatively in 80% (versus 39% for lamivudine), 
and HBeAg seroconversions had occurred in 31% (ver-
sus 26% for lamivudine); the HBeAg seroconversion rate  
after 3 years of entecavir in this cohort was 39%. Simi-
larly, in a 638-subject clinical trial among HBeAg- 
negative patients, at week 48, oral entecavir, 0.5 mg 
daily, was superior to lamivudine, 100 mg daily, in sup-
pression of HBV DNA, mean 5.0 versus 4.5 log10 copies/
mL and in percent with undetectable HBV DNA, 90% 
versus 72%; histologic improvement, 70% versus 61% 
and normal ALT, 78% versus 71%. No resistance muta-
tions were encountered in previously treatment-naïve, 
entecavir-treated patients during 96 weeks of therapy, 
and in a cohort of subjects treated for up to 5 years, 
resistance emerged in 1.2%. Its high barrier to resistance 
coupled with its high potency renders entecavir a first-
line drug for patients with chronic hepatitis B.
Entecavir is also effective against lamivudine-resis-
tant HBV infection. In a trial of 286 lamivudine-resistant 
patients, entecavir, at a higher daily dose of 1 mg, was 
superior to lamivudine, as measured at week 48, in 
achieving suppression of HBV DNA (mean 5.1 versus 
0.48 log10 copies/mL); undetectable HBV DNA, in 72% 
versus 19%; normal ALT, in 61% versus 15%; HBeAg loss, 
in 10% versus 3%; and HBeAg seroconversion, in 8% ver-
sus 3%. In this population of lamivudine-experienced 
patients, however, entecavir resistance emerged in 7% 
at 48 weeks. Although entecavir resistance requires 
both a YMDD mutation and a second mutation at one 
of several other sites (e.g., T184A, S202G/I, or M250V), 
resistance to entecavir in lamivudineresistant chronic 
hepatitis B has been recorded to increase progressively 
to 43% at 4 years; therefore, entecavir is not as attrac-
tive a choice as adefovir or tenofovir for patients with  
lamivudine-resistant hepatitis B.
At the end of 2 years of entecavir therapy in clinical 
trials among HBeAg-reactive patients, HBsAg serocon-
version was observed in 5% (≤2% during the first year). 
SECTION VI
Disorders of the Liver and Biliary Tree
406
In addition, ontreatment and posttreatment ALT flares 
are relatively uncommon and relatively mild in entecavir- 
treated patients. In clinical trials, entecavir has had an 
excellent safety profile; doses should be reduced for 
patients with reduced creatinine clearance. Entecavir 
does have low-level antiviral activity against HIV and 
cannot be used as monotherapy to treat HBV infection 
in HIVHBV co-infected persons.
Telbivudine  Telbivudine, a cytosine analogue, 
appears to be similar in efficacy to entecavir; however, 
it is slightly less potent in suppressing HBV DNA (a 
slightly more profound median 6.4 log10 reduction in 
HBeAg-reactive disease, a similar 5.2 log10 reduction in 
HBeAg-negative disease). In its registration trial, telbi-
vudine at an oral daily dose of 600 mg suppressed HBV 
DNA to <300 copies/ml in 60% of HBeAg-positive and 
88% of HBeAg-negative patients, reduced ALT to normal 
in 77% of HBeAg-positive and 74% of HBeAg-negative 
patients, and improved histology in 65% of HBeAg-
positive and 67% HBeAgnegative patients. Although 
resistance to telbivudine (M204I, not M204V mutations) 
was less frequent than resistance to lamivudine at the 
end of 1 year, resistance mutations after 2 years of treat-
ment occurred in up to 22%. Generally well tolerated, 
telbivudine has been associated with a low frequency 
of asymptomatic creatine kinase elevations and with a 
very low frequency of peripheral neuropathy; frequency 
of administration should be reduced for patients with  
impaired creatinine clearance. Its excellent potency  
notwithstanding, the inferior resistance profile of telbi-
vudine has limited its appeal; telbivudine is neither rec-
ommended as first-line therapy nor widely used.
Tenofovir  Tenofovir 
disoproxil 
fumarate, 
an 
acyclic nucleotide analogue and potent antiretroviral 
agent used to treat HIV infection, is similar to adefovir 
but more potent in suppressing HBV DNA and induc-
ing HBeAg responses; it is highly active against both 
wild-type and lamivudine-resistant HBV and active 
in patients whose response to adefovir is slow and/ 
or limited. At an oral once-daily dose of 300 mg for  
48 weeks, tenofovir suppressed HBV DNA by 6.2 log10 
[to undetectable levels (<400 copies/ml) in 76%] in HBeAg-
positive and 4.6 log10 (to undetectable levels in 93%) in 
HBeAg-negative patients; reduced ALT to normal in 68% 
of HBeAg-positive and 76% of HBeAg-negative patients; 
and improved histology in 74% of HBeAg-positive and 
72% of HBeAg-negative patients. In HBeAg-positive 
patients, HBeAg seroconversions occurred in 21% by the  
end of year 1 and in 27% by the end of year 2 of tenofo-
vir treatment; HBsAg loss occurred in 3% by the end of 
year 1 and 6% by the end of year 2. The safety (negligible  
renal toxicity and mild reduction in bone density) and 
resistance profile (none recorded through 3 years)  
of tenofovir are very favorable as well; therefore, teno-
fovir has supplanted adefovir both as first-line therapy 
for chronic hepatitis B and as add-on therapy for lami-
vudineresistant chronic hepatitis B. Frequency of teno-
fovir administration should be reduced for patients with 
impaired creatinine clearance.
A comparison of the six antiviral therapies in current 
use appears in Table 40-3; their relative potencies in 
suppressing HBV DNA are shown in Fig. 40-1.
Combination Therapy  Although the combi-
nation of lamivudine and PEG IFN suppresses HBV DNA 
more profoundly during therapy than does monother-
apy with either drug alone (and is much less likely to be 
associated with lamivudine resistance), this combina-
tion used for a year is no better than a year of PEG IFN 
in achieving sustained responses. To date, combinations 
of oral nucleoside/nucleotide agents have not achieved 
an enhancement in virologic, serologic, or biochemical 
efficacy over that achieved by the more potent of the 
combined drugs given individually. On the other hand, 
combining agents that are not cross-resistant (e.g., lami-
vudine and adefovir or tenofovir) has the potential to 
reduce the risk or perhaps even to preempt entirely the 
emergence of drug resistance. In the future, the treat-
ment paradigm may shift from the current approach of 
sequential monotherapy to preemptive combination 
therapy; however, designing and executing clinical tri-
als that demonstrate superior efficacy and resistance 
profile of combination therapy over monotherapy with 
entecavir or tenofovir will be very challenging.
Novel Antivirals and Strategies  In 
addition to the seven approved antiviral drugs for  
hepatitis B, emtricitabine, a fluorinated cytosine ana-
logue very similar to lamivudine in structure, efficacy, and 
resistance profile, offers no advantage over lamivudine.  
A combination of emtricitabine and tenofovir is 
approved for the treatment of HIV infection and is an 
appealing combination therapy for hepatitis B; however, 
neither emtricitabine nor the combination are approved 
yet for hepatitis B. Several initially promising antiviral 
agents have been abandoned because of toxicity (e.g., 
clevudine, which was linked to myopathy during its clinical 
development). Because direct-acting antivirals have been 
so successful in the management of chronic hepatitis B, 
more unconventional approaches—e.g., immunologic  
or genetic manipulation—are not likely to be com-
petitive. Finally, initial emphasis in the development of  
antiviral therapy for hepatitis B was placed on mono-
therapy; whether combination regimens will yield addi-
tive or synergistic efficacy remains to be determined).
Treatment 
Recommendations  Several 
learned societies and groups of expert physicians have 
issued treatment recommendations for patients with 
 
CHAPTER 40
Chronic Hepatitis
407
Table 40-3 
Comparison of Pegylated Interferon (PEG IFN), Lamivudine, Adefovir, Entecavir, Telbivudine, and 
Tenofovir Therapy for Chronic Hepatitis Ba
Feature
PEG IFNb
Lamivudine Adefovir
Entecavir
Telbivudine
Tenofovir
Route of administration
Subcutaneous 
Injection
Oral
Oral
Oral
Oral
Oral
Duration of therapyc
48–52 weeks
≥52 weeks
≥48 weeks
≥48 weeks
≥52 weeks
≥48 weeks
Tolerability
Poorly  
tolerated
Well  
tolerated
Well tolerated; 
creatinine 
monitoring 
recommended
Well tolerated
Well tolerated
Well tolerated 
creatinine 
monitoring 
recommended
HBeAg seroconversion
1 yr Rx
18–20%
16–21%
12%
21%
22%
21%
>1 yr Rx
NA
up to 50% 
@ 5 yrs
43% @ 3 yrsd
31% @ 2 yrs
39% @ 3 yrs
30% @ 2 yrs
27% @ 2 yrs
Log10 HBV DNA reduction 
(mean copies/ml)
HBeAg-reactive
4.5
5.5
median 3.5–5
6.9
6.4
6.2
HBeAg-negative
4.1
4.4–4.7
median 3.5–3.9
5.0
5.2
4.6
HBV DNA PCR negative 
(<300–400 copies/ml; 
<1,000 copies/ml for 
adefovir) end of yr 1
HBeAg-reactive
10–25%
36–44%
13–21%
67% (91% @ 
4 yrs)
60%
76%
HBeAg-negative
63%
60–73%
48–77%
90%
88%
93%
ALT normalization at end 
of yr 1
HBeAg-reactive
39%
41–75%
48–61%
68%
77%
68%
HBeAg-negative
34–38%
62–79%
48–77%
78%
74%
76%
HBsAg loss yr 1
3–4%
≥1%
0%
2%
<1%
3%
         yr 2
12% 5 yr after 
1 yr of Rx
no data
5% at yr 5
5%
no data
6%
Histologic improvement 
(≥2 point reduction in 
HAI) at yr 1
HBeAg-reactive
38% 6 months 
after
49–62%
53–68%
72%
65%
74%
HBeAg-negative
48% 6 months 
after
61–66%
64%
70%
67%
72%
Viral resistance
None
15-30%  
@ 1 yr
None @ 1 yr
≤1% @ 1 yre
up to  
5% @ yr 1
0% @ yr 1
70%  
@ 5 yrs
29% at 5 yrs
1.2% @ 5 yre
up to  
22% @ yr 2
0% through 
yr 3
Cost (US$) for 1 yr
∼$18,000
∼$2,500
∼$6,500
∼$8,700f
∼$6,000
∼$6,000
aGenerally, these comparisons are based on data on each drug tested individually versus placebo in registration clinical trials; because, with 
rare exception, these comparisons are not based on head-to-head testing of these drugs, relative advantages and disadvantages should be 
interpreted cautiously.
bAlthough standard interferon α administered daily or three times a week is approved as therapy for chronic hepatitis B, it has been supplanted 
by PEG IFN, which is administered once a week and is more effective. Standard interferon has no advantages over PEG IFN.
cDuration of therapy in clinical efficacy trials; use in clinical practice may vary.
dBecause of a computer-generated randomization error that resulted in misallocation of drug versus placebo during the second year of clinical-
trial treatment, the frequency of HBeAg seroconversion beyond the first year is an estimate (Kaplan-Meier analysis) based on the small subset in 
whom adefovir was administered correctly.
e7% during a year of therapy (43% at year 4) in lamivudine-resistant patients.
f∼17,400 for lamivudine-refractory patients.
Abbreviations: ALT, alanine aminotransferase; HAI, histologic activity index; HBeAg, hepatitis B e antigen; HBsAg, hepatitis B surface antigen; 
HBV, hepatitis B virus; NA, not applicable; PEG IFN, pegylated interferon; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; Rx, therapy; yr, year.
SECTION VI
Disorders of the Liver and Biliary Tree
408
chronic hepatitis B; the most authoritative and updated 
(and free of financial support by pharmaceutical com-
panies) are those of the American Association for the 
Study of Liver Diseases (AASLD) and of the European 
Association for the Study of the Liver (EASL). Although 
the recommendations differ slightly, a consensus has 
emerged on most of the important points (Table 40-4). 
No treatment is recommended or available for inac-
tive “nonreplicative” hepatitis B carriers (undetectable 
HBeAg with normal ALT and HBV DNA ≤103 IU/ml docu-
mented serially over time). In patients with detectable 
HBeAg and HBV DNA levels >2 ×104 IU/ml, treatment is 
recommended by the AASLD for those with ALT levels 
above 2 × the upper limit of normal. (The EASL recom-
mends treatment in HBeAg-positive patients for HBV 
DNA levels >2 × 103 IU/ml and ALT above the upper limit 
of normal.) For HBeAgpositive patients with ALT ≤2 × 
the upper limit of normal, in whom sustained responses 
are not likely and who would require multiyear ther-
apy, antiviral therapy is not recommended currently. 
This pattern is common during the early decades of 
life among Asian patients infected at birth; even in this 
group, therapy would be considered for those >40 years 
of age, ALT persistently at the high end of the twofold 
range, and/or with a family history of hepatocellular car-
cinoma, especially if the liver biopsy shows moderate 
to severe necroinflammatory activity or fibrosis. In this 
–3
–2
–1
0
–7
–6
–5
–4
ADV
PEG IFN
LAM
–3.5
–4.5
–5.5
Log10 HBV DNA
TDF
TBV
ETV
–6.2
–6.4
–6.9
Figure 40-1 
Relative potency of antiviral drugs for hepatitis B, as 
reflected by median log10 HBV DNA reduction in HBeAg-
positive chronic hepatitis B. These data are from individual 
reports of large, randomized controlled registration trials that 
were the basis for approval of the drugs. In most instances, 
these data do not represent direct comparisons among the 
drugs, because study populations were different, baseline 
patient variables were not always uniform, and the sensitivity 
and dynamic range of the HBV DNA assays used in the trials 
varied. ADV, adefovir dipivoxil; PEG IFN, pegylated interferon 
α-2a; LAM, lamivudine; TDF, tenofovir disoproxil fumarate; 
TBV, telbivudine; ETV, entecavir.
group, when, eventually, ALT becomes elevated later in 
life, antiviral therapy should be instituted. For patients 
with HBeAg-negative chronic hepatitis B, ALT >2 × the 
upper limit of normal (above the upper limit of normal 
according to EASL) and HBV DNA >2 × 103 IU/ml, anti-
viral therapy is recommended. If HBV DNA is >2 × 103 
IU/ml and ALT is 1 to >2 × the upper limit of normal, 
liver biopsy should be considered to help in arriving 
at a decision to treat if substantial liver injury is pres-
ent (treatment in this subset would be recommended 
according to EASL guidelines, because ALT is elevated).
For patients with compensated cirrhosis, because 
antiviral therapy has been shown to retard clinical pro-
gression, treatment is recommended regardless of 
HBeAg status and ALT as long as HBV DNA is detectable 
at >2 × 103 IU/ml (detectable at any level according to 
the EASL); monitoring without therapy is recommended 
for those with HBV DNA <2 × 103 IU/ml, unless ALT is 
elevated. For patients with decompensated cirrhosis, 
treatment is recommended regardless of serologic and 
biochemical status, as long as HBV DNA is detectable. 
Patients with decompensated cirrhosis should be evalu-
ated as candidates for liver transplantation.
Among the seven available drugs for hepatitis B, PEG  
IFN has supplanted standard IFN, entecavir has  
supplanted lamivudine, and tenofovir has supplanted 
adefovir. PEG IFN, entecavir, or tenofovir are recom-
mended as first-line therapy (Table 40-3). PEG IFN requires 
finite-duration therapy, achieves the highest rate of 
HBeAg responses after a year of therapy, and does not 
support viral mutations, but it requires subcutaneous 
injections and is associated with inconvenience and 
intolerability. Oral nucleoside analogues require long-
term therapy in most patients, and when used alone, 
lamivudine and telbivudine foster the emergence of 
viral mutations, adefovir somewhat less so, and entecavir 
(except in lamivudine-experienced patients) and teno-
fovir rarely at all. Oral agents do not require injections, 
are very well tolerated, lead to improved histology in 
50–90% of patients, suppress HBV DNA more profoundly 
than PEG IFN, and are effective even in patients who fail 
to respond to IFN-based therapy. Although oral agents 
are less likely to result in HBeAg responses during the 
first year of therapy, as compared to PEG IFN, treatment 
with oral agents tends to be extended beyond the first 
year and, by the end of the second year, yields HBeAg 
responses (and even HBsAg responses) comparable 
in frequency to those achieved after 1 year of PEG IFN 
(and without the associated side effects) (Table 40-5). 
Although adefovir and tenofovir are safe, creatinine 
monitoring is recommended. Substantial experience 
with lamivudine during pregnancy (see above) has 
identified no teratogenicity. Although interferons do 
not appear to cause congenital anomalies, interferons 
 
CHAPTER 40
Chronic Hepatitis
409
have antiproliferative properties and should not be used 
during pregnancy. Adefovir during pregnancy has not 
been associated with birth defects; however, there may 
be an increased risk of spontaneous abortion. Data on 
the safety of entecavir during pregnancy have not been 
published. Sufficient data in animals and limited data in 
humans suggest that telbivudine and tenofovir can be 
used safely during pregnancy. In general, except per-
haps for lamivudine, and until additional data become 
Table 40-4
Recommendations for Treatment of Chronic Hepatitis Ba
HBeAg status
Clinical
HBV DNA (IU/ml)
ALT
Recommendation
HBeAg-reactive
b
>2 × 104
≤2 × ULNc
No treatment; monitor. In patients >40, with 
family history of hepatocellular carcinoma, 
and/or ALT persistently at the high end of 
the twofold range, liver biopsy may help in 
decision to treat
Chronic hepatitis
>2 × 104d
>2 × ULNd
Treate
Cirrhosis  
compensated
>2 × 103
< or > ULN
Treate with oral agents, not PEG IFN
<2 × 103
>ULN
Consider treatmentf
Cirrhosis  
decompensated
Detectable
< or > ULN
Treate with oral agentsg, not PEG IFN; refer 
for liver transplantation
Undetectable
< or > ULN
Observe; refer for liver transplantation
HBeAg-negative
b
≤2 × 103
≤ULN
Inactive carrier; treatment not necessary
Chronic hepatitis
>103
1->2 × ULNd
Consider liver biopsy; treath if biopsy 
shows moderate to severe inflammation 
or fibrosis
Chronic hepatitis
>104
>2 × ULNd
Treath,i
Cirrhosis  
compensated
>2 × 103
< or > ULN
Treate with oral agents, not PEG IFN
<2 × 103
>ULN
Consider treatmentf
Cirrhosis  
decompensated
Detectable
< or > ULN
Treath with oral agentsg, not PEG IFN; refer 
for liver transplantation
Undetectable
< or > ULN
Observe; refer for liver transplantation
aBased on practice guidelines of the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases (AASLD). Except as indicated in footnotes, these 
guidelines are similar to those issued by the European Association for the Study of the Liver (EASL).
bLiver disease tends to be mild or inactive clinically; most such patients do not undergo liver biopsy.
cThis pattern is common during early decades of life in Asian patients infected at birth.
dAccording to the EASL guidelines, treat if HBV DNA is >2 × 103 IU/ml and ALT >ULN.
eOne of the potent oral drugs with a high barrier to resistance (entecavir or tenofovir) or PEG IFN can be used as first-line therapy (see text). 
These oral agents, but not PEG IFN, should be used for interferon-refractory/intolerant and immunocompromised patients. PEG IFN is adminis-
tered weekly by subcutaneous injection for a year; the oral agents are administered daily for at least a year and continued indefinitely or until at 
least 6 months after HBeAg seroconversion.
fAccording to EASL guidelines, patients with compensated cirrhosis and detectable HBV DNA at any level, even with normal ALT, are candidates 
for therapy. Most authorities would treat indefinitely, even in HBeAg-positive disease after HBeAg seroconversion.
gBecause the emergence of resistance can lead to loss of antiviral benefit and further deterioration in decompensated cirrhosis, a low-resistance 
regimen is recommended-entecavir or tenofovir monotherapy or combination therapy with the more resistance-prone lamivudine (or telbivudine) 
plus adefovir. Therapy should be instituted urgently.
hBecause HBeAg seroconversion is not an option, the goal of therapy is to suppress HBV DNA and maintain a normal ALT. PEG IFN is admin-
istered by subcutaneous injection weekly for a year; caution is warranted in relying on a 6-month posttreatment interval to define a sustained 
response, because the majority of such responses are lost thereafter. Oral agents, entecavir or tenofovir, are administered daily, usually indefi-
nitely or, until as very rarely occurs, virologic and biochemical responses are accompanied by HBsAg seroconversion.
iFor older patients and those with advanced fibrosis, consider lowering the HBV DNA threshold to >2 × 103 IU/ml.
Abbreviations: ALT, alanine aminotransferase; AASLD, American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases; EASL, European Association for 
the Study of the Liver; HBeAg, hepatitis B e antigen; HBsAg, hepatitis B surface antigen; HBV, hepatitis B virus; PEG IFN, pegylated interferon; 
ULN, upper limits of normal.
available, the other antivirals for hepatitis B should  
be avoided or used with extreme caution during  
pregnancy.
As noted above, some physicians prefer to begin with 
PEG IFN, while other physicians and patients prefer oral 
agents as first-line therapy. For patients with decompen-
sated cirrhosis, the emergence of resistance can result in  
further deterioration and loss of antiviral effectiveness.  
Therefore, in this patient subset, the threshold for  
SECTION VI
Disorders of the Liver and Biliary Tree
410
relying on therapy with a very favorable resistance  
profile (e.g., entecavir or tenofovir) or on combination 
therapy (e.g., lamivudine or telbivudine with adefovir) is 
low. PEG IFN should not be used in patients with com-
pensated or decompensated cirrhosis.
For patients with end-stage chronic hepatitis B who 
undergo liver transplantation, reinfection of the new  
liver is almost universal in the absence of antiviral  
therapy. The majority of patients become high-level 
viremic carriers with minimal liver injury. Before the 
availability of antiviral therapy, an unpredictable propor-
tion experienced severe hepatitis B–related liver injury, 
sometimes a fulminant-like hepatitis, sometimes a rapid 
recapitulation of the original severe chronic hepatitis B 
(Chap. 304). Currently, however, prevention of recurrent 
hepatitis B after liver transplantation has been achieved 
definitively by combining hepatitis B immune globulin 
with one of the oral nucleoside or nucleotide analogues 
(Chap. 310).
For patients treated with the more resistance-prone 
(lamivudine, telbivudine) or less potent (adefovir) oral 
agents, assessment of response at 24 weeks (48 weeks 
for adefovir) can identify those at high risk for inad-
equate response and breakthrough resistance (i.e., 
the presence of residual detectable viremia). When 
such inadequate responses are identified, a second, 
noncross-resistant agent can be added or the initial 
agent can be replaced by a more potent agent. This 
“roadmap” approach has been rendered irrelevant by 
the use of the current generation of highly potent, 
low-resistant agents entecavir and tenofovir. Still, at 
24 weeks, if HBV DNA exceeds 2 × 103 IU/ml, switch-
ing to a different agent or adding a second agent is 
advisable.
Patients with HBV-HIV co-infection can have pro-
gressive HBV-associated liver disease and, occasion-
ally, a severe exacerbation of hepatitis B resulting from 
immunologic reconstitution following highly active 
antiretroviral therapy. Lamivudine should never be 
used as monotherapy in patients with HBVHIV infec-
tion because HIV resistance emerges rapidly to both 
viruses. Adefovir has been used successfully to treat 
chronic hepatitis B in HBV-HIV co-infected patients but 
is no longer considered a first-line agent for HBV. Ente-
cavir has low-level activity against HIV and can result 
in selection of HIV resistance; therefore, it should be 
avoided in HBV-HIV co-infection. Tenofovir and the 
combination of tenofovir and emtricitabine in one pill 
are approved therapies for HIV and represent excel-
lent choices for treating HBV infection in HBV-HIV 
co-infected patients. Generally, even for HBV-HIV co-
infected patients who do not yet meet treatment cri-
teria for HIV infection, treating for both HBV and HIV is 
recommended.
Table 40-5
Pegylated Interferon Versus Oral 
Nucleoside Analogues for the Treatment of 
Chronic Hepatitis B
PEG IFN
Nucleoside 
Analogues
Administration
Weekly injection
Daily, orally
Tolerability
Poorly tolerated, 
intensive  
monitoring
Well tolerated,  
limited  
monitoring
Duration of  
therapy
Finite 48 weeks
≥1 year, indefinite 
in most patients
Maximum mean 
HBV DNA  
suppression
4.5 log10
6.9 log10
Effective in high-
level HBV DNA 
(≥109 IU/ml)
No
Yes
HBeAg seroconversion
During 1 year of 
therapy
∼30%
∼20%
During >1 year of 
therapy
Not applicable
30% (year 
2)–50% (year 5)
HBeAg-negative
posttreatment 
HBV 
DNA suppression
17% @ 5 years
7% @ 4 years 
(lamivudine)
HBsAg loss
During 1 year of 
therapy
3–4%
0–3%
During >1 year of 
therapy
Not applicable
3–6% @ 2 years 
of therapy
After 1 year 
of therapy–
HBeAg- 
negative
12% @ 5 years
3.5% @ 5 years
Antiviral  
resistance
None
Lamivudine: 
∼30% year 1, 
∼70% year 5
Adefovir: 0% year 1, 
 ∼30% year 5
Telbivudine: up to 
4% year 1, 22% 
year 2
Entecavir: ≤1.2% 
through year 5
Tenofovir: 0% 
through year 3
Use in cirrhosis, 
transplantation,  
immuno­
suppressed
No
Yes
Cost, 1 year of 
therapy
++++
+ to ++
Abbreviations: HBV, hepatitis B virus; HBeAg, hepatitis B e antigen; 
HBsAg, hepatitis B surface antigen; IU/ml, international units per 
milliliter; PEG IFN, pegylated interferon.
 
CHAPTER 40
Chronic Hepatitis
411
Patients with chronic hepatitis B who undergo cyto-
toxic chemotherapy for treatment of malignancies 
as well as patients treated with immunosuppressive, 
anticytokine, or antitumor necrosis factor therapies 
experience enhanced HBV replication and viral expres-
sion on hepatocyte membranes during chemotherapy 
coupled with suppression of cellular immunity. When 
chemotherapy is withdrawn, such patients are at risk 
for reactivation of hepatitis B, often severe and occa-
sionally fatal. Such rebound reactivation represents 
restoration of cytolytic T cell function against a target 
organ enriched in HBV expression. Preemptive treat-
ment with lamivudine prior to the initiation of che-
motherapy has been shown to reduce the risk of such 
reactivation. In all likelihood, the newer, more potent 
oral antiviral agents will work as well and with a lower 
risk of antiviral drug resistance. The optimal duration 
of antiviral therapy after completion of chemotherapy 
is not known, but a suggested approach is 6 months 
for inactive hepatitis B carriers and longer-duration  
therapy in patients with baseline HBV DNA levels  
>2 × 103 IU/ml, until standard clinical endpoints are 
met (Table 40-4).
Chronic Hepatitis D (Delta Hepatitis)
Chronic hepatitis D (HDV) may follow acute co-
infection with HBV but at a rate no higher than 
the rate of chronicity of acute hepatitis B. That is, 
although HDV co-infection can increase the severity 
of acute hepatitis B, HDV does not increase the like-
lihood of progression to chronic hepatitis B. When, 
however, HDV super-infection occurs in a person 
who is already chronically infected with HBV, long-
term HDV infection is the rule and a worsening of 
the liver disease the expected consequence. Except for 
severity, chronic hepatitis B plus D has similar clini-
cal and laboratory features to those seen in chronic 
hepatitis B alone. Relatively severe and progressive 
chronic hepatitis, with or without cirrhosis, is the rule, 
and mild chronic hepatitis is the exception. Occasion-
ally, mild hepatitis or even, rarely, inactive carriage 
occurs in patients with chronic hepatitis B plus D, and 
the disease may become indolent after several years of 
infection. A distinguishing serologic feature of chronic 
hepatitis D is the presence in the circulation of anti-
bodies to liver-kidney microsomes (anti-LKM); how-
ever, the anti-LKM seen in hepatitis D, anti-LKM3, 
are directed against uridine diphosphate glucurono-
syltransferase and are distinct from anti-LKM1 seen 
in patients with autoimmune hepatitis and in a subset 
of patients with chronic hepatitis C (see below). The 
clinical and laboratory features of chronic HDV infec-
tion are summarized in Chap. 304.
Treatment	
Chronic Hepatitis D
Management is not well defined. Glucocorticoids are 
ineffective and are not used. Preliminary experimental 
trials of IFN-α suggested that conventional doses and 
durations of therapy lower levels of HDV RNA and ami-
notransferase activity only transiently during treatment 
but have no impact on the natural history of the dis-
ease. In contrast, high-dose IFN-α (9 million units three 
times a week) for 12 months may be associated with a 
sustained loss of HDV replication and clinical improve-
ment in up to 50% of patients. Moreover, the benefi-
cial impact of treatment has been observed to persist 
for 15 years and to be associated with a reduction in 
grade of hepatic necrosis and inflammation, reversion 
of advanced fibrosis (improved stage), and clearance of 
HDV RNA in some patients. A suggested approach to 
therapy has been high-dose, long-term IFN for at least a 
year and, in responders, extension of therapy until HDV 
RNA and HBsAg clearance. PEG IFN has also been shown 
to be effective in the treatment of chronic hepatitis 
D and is likely to become a more convenient replace-
ment for standard IFN. None of the nucleoside analogue  
antiviral agents for hepatitis B is effective in hepatitis D.  
In patients with end-stage liver disease secondary to 
chronic hepatitis D, liver transplantation has been effective.  
If hepatitis D recurs in the new liver without the expres-
sion of hepatitis B (an unusual serologic profile in 
immunocompetent persons but common in transplant 
patients), liver injury is limited. In fact, the outcome of 
transplantation for chronic hepatitis D is superior to that 
for chronic hepatitis B; in such patients, combination 
hepatitis B immune globulin and nucleoside analogue 
therapy for hepatitis B is indicated (Chap. 310).
Chronic Hepatitis C
Regardless of the epidemiologic mode of acquisition 
of hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection, chronic hepatitis 
follows acute hepatitis C in 50–70% of cases; chronic 
infection is common even in those with a return to 
normal in aminotransferase levels after acute hepatitis C, 
adding up to an 85% likelihood of chronic HCV infec-
tion after acute hepatitis C. Few clues had emerged to 
explain host differences associated with chronic infec-
tion until recently, when variation in a single nucleo-
tide polymorphism (SNP) on chromosome 19, IL28B 
(which codes for interferon-λ3), was identified that dis-
tinguished between responders and nonresponders to 
antiviral therapy (see below). The same variants corre-
lated with spontaneous resolution after acute infection: 
53% in genotype C/C, 30% in genotype C/T, but only 
23% in genotype T/T.
In patients with chronic hepatitis C followed for 
20 years, progression to cirrhosis occurs in about 
SECTION VI
Disorders of the Liver and Biliary Tree
412
20–25%. Such is the case even for patients with relatively 
clinically mild chronic hepatitis, including those without 
symptoms, with only modest elevations of aminotrans-
ferase activity and with mild chronic hepatitis on liver 
biopsy. Even in cohorts of well-compensated patients 
with chronic hepatitis C referred for clinical research tri-
als (no complications of chronic liver disease and with 
normal hepatic synthetic function), the prevalence of cir-
rhosis may be as high as 50%. Most cases of hepatitis C 
are identified initially in asymptomatic patients who have 
no history of acute hepatitis C (e.g., those discovered 
while attempting to donate blood, while undergoing lab 
testing as part of an application for life insurance, or as a 
result of routine laboratory tests). The source of HCV 
infection in many of these cases is not defined, although 
a long-forgotten percutaneous exposure in the remote 
past can be elicited in a substantial proportion and proba-
bly accounts for most infections; most of these infections 
were acquired in the 1960s and 1970s, coming to clinical 
attention decades later.
Approximately one-third of patients with chronic 
hepatitis C have normal or near-normal aminotrans-
ferase activity; although one-third to one-half of these 
patients have chronic hepatitis on liver biopsy, the 
grade of liver injury and stage of fibrosis tend to be mild 
in the vast majority. In some cases, more severe liver 
injury has been reported—even, rarely, cirrhosis, most 
likely the result of previous histologic activity. Among 
patients with persistent normal aminotransferase activity 
sustained over ≥5–10 years, histologic progression has 
been shown to be rare; however, approximately one-
fourth of patients with normal aminotransferase activity 
experience subsequent aminotransferase elevations, and 
histologic injury can be progressive once abnormal bio-
chemical activity resumes. Therefore, continued clinical 
monitoring is indicated, even for patients with normal 
aminotransferase activity.
Despite this substantial rate of progression of chronic 
hepatitis C, and despite the fact that liver failure can 
result from end-stage chronic hepatitis C, the long-
term prognosis for chronic hepatitis C in a majority of 
patients is relatively benign. Mortality over 10–20 years 
among patients with transfusion-associated chronic 
hepatitis C has been shown not to differ from mortal-
ity in a matched population of transfused patients in 
whom hepatitis C did not develop. Although death in 
the hepatitis group is more likely to result from liver 
failure, and although hepatic decompensation may 
occur in ∼15% of such patients over the course of a 
decade, the majority (almost 60%) of patients remain 
asymptomatic and well compensated, with no clinical 
sequelae of chronic liver disease. Overall, chronic hepa-
titis C tends to be very slowly and insidiously progres-
sive, if at all, in the vast majority of patients, while in 
approximately one-fourth of cases, chronic hepatitis C 
will progress eventually to end-stage cirrhosis. In fact, 
because HCV infection is so prevalent, and because a 
proportion of patients progress inexorably to endstage 
liver disease, hepatitis C is the most frequent indica-
tion for liver transplantation (Chap. 310). Referral bias 
may account for the more severe outcomes described 
in cohorts of patients reported from tertiary care centers 
(20-year progression of ≥20%) versus the more benign 
outcomes in cohorts of patients monitored from initial 
blood-product-associated acute hepatitis or identified in 
community settings (20-year progression of only 4–7%). 
Still unexplained, however, are the wide ranges in 
reported progression to cirrhosis, from 2% over 17 years 
in a population of women with hepatitis C infection 
acquired from contaminated anti-D immune globulin to 
30% over ≤11 years in recipients of contaminated intra-
venous immune globulin.
Progression of liver disease in patients with chronic 
hepatitis C has been reported to be more likely in 
patients with older age, longer duration of infec-
tion, advanced histologic stage and grade, genotype 1, 
more complex quasispecies diversity, increased hepatic 
iron, concomitant other liver disorders (alcoholic liver 
disease, chronic hepatitis B, hemochromatosis, α1-
antitrypsin deficiency, and steatohepatitis), HIV infection, 
and obesity. Among these variables, however, duration 
of infection appears to be one of the most important, 
and some of the others probably reflect disease duration 
to some extent (e.g., quasispecies diversity, hepatic iron 
accumulation). No other epidemiologic or clinical fea-
tures of chronic hepatitis C (e.g., severity of acute hepa-
titis, level of aminotransferase activity, level of HCV 
RNA, presence or absence of jaundice during acute 
hepatitis) are predictive of eventual outcome. Despite 
the relatively benign nature of chronic hepatitis C over 
time in many patients, cirrhosis following chronic hepa-
titis C has been associated with the late development, 
after several decades, of HCC (Chap. 88); the annual 
rate of HCC in cirrhotic patients with hepatitis C is 
1–4%, occurring primarily in patients who have had 
HCV infection for 30 years or more.
Perhaps the best prognostic indicator in chronic hep-
atitis C is liver histology; the rate of hepatic fibrosis may 
be slow, moderate, or rapid. Patients with mild necrosis 
and inflammation as well as those with limited fibrosis 
have an excellent prognosis and limited progression to 
cirrhosis. In contrast, among patients with moderate to 
severe necroinflammatory activity or fibrosis, includ-
ing septal or bridging fibrosis, progression to cirrhosis 
is highly likely over the course of 10–20 years. Among 
patients with compensated cirrhosis associated with 
hepatitis C, the 10-year survival rate is close to 80%; 
mortality occurs at a rate of 2–6% per year; decompen-
sation at a rate of 4–5% per year; and, as noted above, 
HCC at a rate of 1–4% per year. A discussion of the 
pathogenesis of liver injury in patients with chronic 
hepatitis C appears in Chap. 304.
 
CHAPTER 40
Chronic Hepatitis
413
Clinical features of chronic hepatitis C are similar to 
those described above for chronic hepatitis B. Gener-
ally, fatigue is the most common symptom; jaundice is 
rare. Immune complex–mediated extrahepatic com-
plications of chronic hepatitis C are less common than 
in chronic hepatitis B (despite the fact that assays for 
immune complexes are often positive in patients with 
chronic hepatitis C), with the exception of essential 
mixed cryoglobulinemia (Chap. 304), which is linked 
to cutaneous vasculitis and membranoproliferative glo-
merulonephritis as well as lymphoproliferative disorders 
such as B-cell lymphoma and unexplained monoclonal 
gammopathy. In addition, chronic hepatitis C has been 
associated with extrahepatic complications unrelated 
to immune-complex injury. These include Sjögren’s 
syndrome, lichen planus, porphyria cutanea tarda, 
type-II diabetes mellitus and the metabolic syndrome 
(including insulin resistance and steatohepatitis).
Laboratory features of chronic hepatitis C are similar to 
those in patients with chronic hepatitis B, but amino-
transferase levels tend to fluctuate more (the character-
istic episodic pattern of aminotransferase activity) and 
to be lower, especially in patients with long-standing 
disease. An interesting and occasionally confusing find-
ing in patients with chronic hepatitis C is the presence 
of autoantibodies. Rarely, patients with autoimmune 
hepatitis (see below) and hyperglobulinemia have false-
positive immunoassays for anti-HCV. On the other 
hand, some patients with serologically confirmable chronic 
hepatitis C have circulating anti-LKM. These antibod-
ies are anti-LKM1, as seen in patients with autoimmune 
hepatitis type 2 (see below), and are directed against a 
33-aminoacid sequence of cytochrome P450 IID6. The 
occurrence of anti-LKM1 in some patients with chronic 
hepatitis C may result from the partial sequence homology 
between the epitope recognized by anti-LKM1 and two 
segments of the HCV polyprotein. In addition, the pres-
ence of this autoantibody in some patients with chronic 
hepatitis C suggests that autoimmunity may be playing a 
role in the pathogenesis of chronic hepatitis C.
Histopathologic features of chronic hepatitis C, espe-
cially those that distinguish hepatitis C from hepatitis B, 
are described in Chap. 304.
Treatment	
Chronic Hepatitis C
Therapy for chronic hepatitis C has evolved substantially 
in the two decades since IFN-α was introduced for this 
indication. When first approved, IFN-α was adminis-
tered via subcutaneous injection three times a week for 
6 months but achieved a sustained virologic response, 
SVR (Fig. 40-2) (a reduction of HCV RNA to undetectable 
levels by PCR when measured ≥6 months after comple-
tion of therapy) below 10%. Doubling the duration of 
therapy—but not increasing the dose or changing IFN 
preparations—increased the SVR rate to ∼20%, and 
addition to the regimen of daily ribavirin, an oral gua-
nosine nucleoside, increased the SVR rate to 40%. When 
used alone, ribavirin is ineffective and does not reduce 
HCV RNA levels, but ribavirin enhances the efficacy 
of IFN by reducing the likelihood of virologic relapse 
after the achievement of an end-treatment response 
(ETR) (Fig. 40-2) (response measured during, and main-
tained to the end of, treatment). Proposed mechanisms 
to explain the role of ribavirin include subtle direct 
reduction of HCV replication, inhibition of host inosine  
monophosphate dehydrogenase activity (and associ-
ated depletion of guanosine pools), immune modula-
tion, induction of virologic mutational catastrophe, and 
enhancement of interferon-stimulated gene expression.  
Interferon therapy results in activation of the JAKSTAT 
signal transduction pathway, which culminates in the  
Peginterferon and Ribavirin
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
HCV RNA log10 IU/ml
–8 –4 –2
0
4
8
12
Weeks after start of therapy
16 20 24 32 40 48 52 60 72
Undetectable
RVR
EVR
ETR
SVR
Relapse
Partial
Null
Nonresponse
Figure 40-2 
Virologic responses during a 48-week course of antiviral 
therapy in patients with hepatitis C, genotype 1 or 4 (for 
genotypes 2 or 3, the course would be 24 weeks). Non-
responders can be classified as null responders (HCV RNA 
reduction of <2 log10 IU/ml) or partial responders (HCV RNA 
reduction ≥2 log10 IU/ml but not suppressed to undetect-
able) by week 24 of therapy. In responders, HCV RNA can 
become undetectable, as shown with sensitive amplification 
assays, within 4 weeks (RVR, rapid virologic response); can 
be reduced by ≥2 log10 IU/ml within 12 weeks (early virologic 
response, EVR; if HCV RNA is undetectable at 12 weeks, the 
designation is “complete” EVR); or at the end of therapy, 
48 weeks (ETR, end-treatment response). In responders, 
if HCV RNA remains undetectable for 24 weeks after ETR, 
week 72, the patient has a sustained virologic response 
(SVR), but if HCV RNA becomes detectable again, the 
patient is considered to have relapsed. (Reproduced with 
permission, courtesy of Marc G. Ghany, National Institute of 
Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Insti-
tutes of Health and the American Association for the Study of 
Liver Diseases Hepatology 49:1335, 2009.)
SECTION VI
Disorders of the Liver and Biliary Tree
414
intracellular elaboration of genes and their protein prod-
ucts that have antiviral properties. Hepatitis C proteins 
inhibit JAK-STAT signaling at several steps along the 
pathway, and exogenous interferon restores expression 
of interferon-stimulated genes and their antiviral effects.
The current standard of care is the combination of 
longacting pegylated IFN (PEG IFN) and ribavirin, which 
has increased responsiveness (frequency of SVR) to as 
high as 55% overall, >40% in genotypes 1 and 4 and to  
>80% in genotypes 2 and 3. Still, many important  
lessons about antiviral therapy for chronic hepatitis C were 
learned from the experience with IFN monotherapy and 
combination IFN-ribavirin therapy. Even in the absence of 
biochemical and virologic responses, histologic improve-
ment occurs in approximately three-fourths of all treated 
patients. In chronic hepatitis C, unlike the case in hepati-
tis B, responses to therapy are not accompanied by tran-
sient, acute hepatitis-like aminotransferase elevations. 
Instead, ALT levels fall precipitously during therapy. Up to 
90% of virologic responses are achieved within the first 
12 weeks of therapy; responses thereafter are rare. Most 
relapses occur within the first 12 weeks after treatment. 
Sustained virologic responses are very durable; normal 
ALT, improved histology, and absence of HCV RNA in 
serum and liver have been documented a decade after 
successful therapy, and “relapses” 2 years after sustained 
responses are almost unheard of. Thus, an SVR to antiviral 
therapy of chronic hepatitis C is tantamount to a cure.
Patient variables that tend to correlate with sustained 
virologic responsiveness to IFN-based therapy include 
favorable genotype (genotypes 2 and 3 as opposed to 
genotypes 1 and 4), low baseline HCV RNA level (<2 mil-
lion copies/mL, which is equivalent to ∼800,000 IU/ml, 
the current convention of quantitation), histologically 
mild hepatitis and minimal fibrosis, age <40, absence  
of obesity as well as insulin resistance and type-II  
diabetes mellitus, and female gender. Patients with cir-
rhosis can respond, but they are less likely to do so. 
Studies of combination IFN-ribavirin therapy have 
shown that in patients with genotype 1, therapy should 
last a full 48 weeks, while in those with genotypes 2 
and 3, a 24-week course of therapy suffices (although 
more recent observations allow refined tailoring of 
treatment duration based on rapidity of response, see 
below). The response rate in African Americans is dis-
appointingly low for reasons that are not fully under-
stood. Potentially contributing to, but not explaining 
entirely, low responsiveness in African Americans are a 
higher proportion with genotype 1, slower early viral 
kinetics during therapy, impaired HCV-specific immu-
nity, and recently recognized host genetic differences 
in IL28B alleles, described below. The response rate in 
Latino patients is also low, despite the fact that the fre-
quency of the favorable IL28B C allele is as common in  
Hispanic patients as in whites. Moreover, the likelihood of a  
sustained response is best if adherence to the treatment 
regimen is high (i.e., if patients receive ≥80% of the IFN 
and ribavirin doses and if they continue treatment for 
≥80% of the anticipated duration of therapy). Other 
variables reported to correlate with increased respon-
siveness include brief duration of infection, low HCV 
quasispecies diversity, immunocompetence, absence 
of hepatic steatosis and insulin resistance, and low liver 
iron levels. High levels of HCV RNA, more histologically 
advanced liver disease, and high quasispecies diversity 
all go hand in hand with advanced duration of infec-
tion, which may be the single most important clinical 
variable determining IFN responsiveness. The ironic 
fact, then, is that patients whose disease is least likely 
to progress are the ones most likely to respond to inter-
feron and vice versa.
Genetic changes in the virus may explain differ-
ences in treatment responsiveness in some patients 
(e.g., among patients with genotype 1b, responsiveness 
to IFN is enhanced in those with amino-acid-substitu-
tion mutations in the nonstructural protein 5A gene). 
As described above in the discussion of spontaneous 
recovery from acute hepatitis C, interferon gene vari-
ants discovered recently in gene-wide association stud-
ies have been shown to have a substantial impact on 
responsiveness of patients with genotype 1 to antiviral 
therapy. In studies of patients treated with PEG IFN and  
ribavirin, variants of the IL28B SNP that code for  
IFN-λ3 (a type-III IFN, the receptors for which are more 
discretely distributed than IFN α receptors and more 
concentrated in hepatocytes) correlate significantly 
with responsiveness. Patients homozygous for the C 
allele at this locus have the highest frequency of achiev-
ing an SVR (∼80%), those homozygous for the T allele at 
this locus are least likely to achieve an SVR (∼25%), and 
those heterozygous at this locus (C/T) have an interme-
diate level of responsiveness (SVRs in ∼35%). The fact 
that C/C is common in whites of European ancestry and 
even more so in Japanese persons but rare in African 
Americans helps explain the differences in observed 
responsiveness among these population groups.
Side effects of IFN therapy are described above in the 
section on treatment of chronic hepatitis B. The most pro-
nounced side effect of ribavirin therapy is hemolysis; a 
reduction in hemoglobin of up to 2–3 g or in hematocrit 
of 5–10% can be anticipated. A small, unpredictable pro-
portion of patients experience profound, brisk hemolysis, 
resulting in symptomatic anemia; therefore, close moni-
toring of blood counts is crucial, and ribavirin should be 
avoided in patients with anemia or hemoglobinopathies 
and in patients with coronary artery disease or cerebro-
vascular disease, in whom anemia can precipitate an isch-
emic event. When symptomatic anemia occurs, ribavirin 
 
CHAPTER 40
Chronic Hepatitis
415
dose reductions or addition of erythropoietin to boost 
red blood cell levels may be required; erythropoietin has 
been shown to improve patients’ quality of life but not 
the likelihood of achieving an SVR. If ribavirin is stopped 
during therapy, SVR rates fall, but responsiveness can be 
maintained as long as the ribavirin is not stopped and 
the total ribavirin dose exceed 60% of the planned dose. 
In addition, ribavirin, which is renally excreted, should 
not be used in patients with renal insufficiency; the drug  
is teratogenic, precluding its use during pregnancy and 
mandating the scrupulous use of efficient contraception 
during therapy (interferons, too, because of their antiprolif-
erative properties, are contraindicated during pregnancy).
Ribavirin can also cause nasal and chest congestion, 
pruritus, and precipitation of gout. Combination IFN-
ribavirin therapy is more difficult to tolerate than IFN 
monotherapy. In one large clinical trial of combination 
therapy versus monotherapy, among those in the 1-year 
treatment group, 21% of the combination group (but 
only 14% of the monotherapy group) had to discon-
tinue treatment, while 26% of the combination group 
(but only 9% of the monotherapy group) required dose 
reductions.
Studies of viral kinetics have shown that despite  
a virion halflife in serum of only 2–3 h, the level of  
HCV is maintained by a high replication rate of 1012 
hepatitis C virions per day. IFN-α blocks virion produc-
tion or release with an efficacy that increases with 
increasing drug doses; moreover, the calculated death 
rate for infected cells during IFN therapy is inversely 
related to viral load; patients with the most rapid death 
rate of infected hepatocytes are more likely to achieve 
undetectable HCV RNA at 3 months; in practice, failure 
to achieve an early virologic response (EVR), a ≥2-log10 
reduction in HCV RNA by week 12, predicts failure to 
experience a subsequent SVR. Similarly, patients in 
whom HCV RNA becomes undetectable within 4 weeks 
[i.e., who achieve a rapid virologic response (RVR)], have 
a very high likelihood of achieving a sustained virologic 
response (Fig. 40-2). Therefore, to achieve rapid viral 
clearance from serum and the liver, high-dose induction 
therapy has been advocated. In practice, however, high-
dose induction with IFN-based therapy has not yielded 
higher sustained response rates.
Treatment of Choice  For the treatment of 
chronic hepatitis C, standard IFNs have now been sup-
planted by PEG IFNs. These have elimination times 
up to sevenfold longer than standard IFNs (i.e., a sub-
stantially longer half-life), and achieve prolonged con-
centrations, permitting administration once (rather 
than three times) a week. Instead of the frequent drug 
peaks (linked to side effects) and troughs (when drug 
is absent) associated with frequent administration of 
short-acting IFNs, administration of PEG IFNs results 
in drug concentrations that are more stable and sus-
tained over time. Once-a-week PEG IFN monotherapy is 
twice as effective as monotherapy with its standard IFN 
counterpart, approaches the efficacy of combination 
standard IFN plus ribavirin, and is as well tolerated as 
standard IFNs, without more difficult-to-manage throm-
bocytopenia and leukopenia than standard IFNs. The 
current standard of care, however, is a combination of 
PEG IFN plus ribavirin.
Two PEG IFNs are available: PEG IFN α-2b and α-2a. 
PEG IFN α-2b consists of a 12-kD, linear PEG molecule 
bound to IFN α-2b, while PEG IFN α-2a consists of a 
larger, 40kD, branched PEG molecule bound to IFN α-2a; 
because of its larger size and smaller volume of extra-
vascular distribution, PEG IFN α-2a can be given at a uni-
form dose independent of weight, while the dose of the 
smaller PEG IFN α-2b, which has a much wider volume 
distribution, must be weight-based (Table 40-6). In the 
registration trial for PEG IFN α-2b plus ribavirin, the best 
regimen was 48 weeks of 1.5 μg/kg of PEG IFN once a 
week plus 800 mg of ribavirin daily. A post hoc analysis 
suggested that weight-based dosing of ribavirin would 
have been more effective than the fixed 800-mg dose 
used in the study. In the first registration trial for PEG 
IFN α-2a plus ribavirin, the best regimen was 48 weeks 
of 180 μg of PEG IFN plus 1000 mg (for patients <75 kg) 
to 1200 mg (for patients ≥75 kg) of ribavirin. Sustained 
virologic responses of 54 and 56% were reported in 
these two studies, respectively. A subsequent study of 
PEG IFN α-2a plus ribavirin showed that, for patients 
with genotypes 2 and 3, a duration of 24 weeks and a 
ribavirin dose of 800 mg was sufficient. Among the 
three studies, for patients in the optimal treatment arm, 
SVR rates for patients with genotype 1 were 42–51% 
and for patients with genotypes 2 and 3 rates were 
76–82%. Between genotypes 2 and 3, genotype 3 is 
somewhat more refractory, and some authorities would 
extend therapy for a full 48 weeks in patients with geno-
type 3, especially if they have advanced hepatic fibrosis 
or cirrhosis and/or high-level HCV RNA.
In the initial registration trials for combination PEG 
IFN plus ribavirin, both combination PEG IFN regimens 
were compared to standard IFN α-2b plus ribavirin. 
Side effects of the combination PEG IFN α-2b regimen 
were comparable to those for the combination stan-
dard IFN regimen; however, when the combination 
PEG IFN α-2a regimen was compared to the combina-
tion standard IFN α-2b regimen, flu-like symptoms and 
depression were less common in the combination PEG 
IFN group. Although ascertainment of side effects dif-
fered between studies of the two drugs, when each was 
tested against standard IFN α-2b plus ribavirin, combi-
nation PEG IFN α-2a plus ribavirin appeared to be better 
SECTION VI
Disorders of the Liver and Biliary Tree
416
tolerated. In a recent head-to-head trial of the two PEG 
IFNs (the “IDEAL” trial), the two PEG IFNs were found  
to be comparable in efficacy (achievement of SVR)  
(Fig. 40-3) and tolerability, although headache, nausea, 
fever, myalgia, depression, and drug discontinuation 
for any reason were less frequent in patients treated 
with PEG IFN α-2a than standard-dose PEG IFN α-2b. In 
contrast, neutropenia and rash were more frequent in 
patients treated with PEG IFN α-2a than standarddose 
PEG IFN α-2b. In two subsequent head-to-head trials 
and a systematic review of randomized trials, PEG IFN 
α–2a was more effective than α–2b (SVR in genotype 
1-4: 48–55% versus 32–40%, respectively). In trials of 
PEG IFN α-2b among patients with HCV genotype 1, a 
broader range of weight-based daily ribavirin doses has 
been validated: 800 mg for weight <65 kg, 1000 mg for 
weight 65–85 kg, 1200 mg for weight >85–105 kg, and 
1400 mg for weight >105 kg. Recommended doses for 
the two PEG IFNs plus ribavirin and other comparisons 
between the two therapies are shown in Table 40-6.
Unless ribavirin is contraindicated (see above), com-
bination PEG IFN plus ribavirin is the recommended 
course of therapy—24 weeks for genotypes 2 and 3 
and 48 weeks for genotype 1. Measurement of quanti­
tative HCV RNA levels at 12 weeks is helpful in guid-
ing therapy; if a 2-log10 drop in HCV RNA has not been 
achieved by this time, chances for an SVR are negligible. 
If the 12-week HCV RNA has fallen by two logs10 (EVR), 
the chances for an SVR at the end of therapy are approx-
imately two-thirds; if the 12-week HCV RNA is undetect-
able (“complete” EVR), the chances for a sustained viro-
logic response exceed 80% (Fig. 40-2). Because absence 
of an EVR is such a strong predictor of the absence of an 
ultimate sustained virologic response, failure to achieve 
a 12-week 2-log10 drop in HCV RNA (EVR) may be used 
as a signal to discontinue therapy.
Studies have suggested that the frequency of an SVR 
to PEG IFN/ribavirin therapy can be increased in patients 
with baseline variables weighing against a response 
(e.g., HCV RNA >8 × 105 IU/ml, weight >85 kg) by rais-
ing the dose of PEG IFN (e.g., to as high as 270 μg of PEG 
IFN α-2a) and/or the dose of ribavirin to as high as 1600 
mg daily (if tolerated or supplemented by erythropoi-
etin) or by tailoring treatment based on viral response  
to prolong the duration of viral clearance before dis-
continuing therapy, i.e., extending therapy from 48 to  
72 weeks for patients with genotype 1 and a slow viro-
logic response, i.e., those whose HCV RNA has not fallen 
rapidly to undetectable levels within 4 weeks (absence 
of “rapid virologic response”). Tailoring therapy based on 
the kinetics of HCV RNA reduction has also been applied 
to abbreviating the duration of therapy in patients with 
genotype 1 (and 4). The results of several clinical trials 
suggest that, in patients with genotype 1 (and 4) who 
Table 40-6 
Pegylated Interferon `-2a and `-2b for 
Chronic Hepatitis C
PEG IFN `-2b
PEG IFN `-2a
PEG size
12 kD linear
40 kD branched
Elimination half-life
54 hours
65 hours
Clearance
725 mL/hour
60 mL/hour
Dose
1.5 μg/kg (weight-
based)
180 μg
Storage
Room temperature
Refrigerated
Ribavirin dose
Genotype 1
800–1400 mga
1000–1200 mgb
Genotype 2/3
800 mg
800 mg
Duration of therapy
Genotype 1
48 weeks
48 weeks
Genotype 2/3
48 weeksc
24 weeks
Efficacy of  
combination Rxd
54%
56%
Genotype 1
40–42%
41–51%
Genotype 2/3
82%
76–78%
aIn the registration trial for PEG IFN α-2b plus ribavirin, the optimal 
regimen was 1.5 μg of PEG IFN plus 800 mg of ribavirin; however, 
a posthoc analysis of this study suggested that higher ribavirin 
doses are better. In subsequent trials of PEG IFN α-2b with ribavirin 
in patients with genotype 1, the following daily ribavirin doses have 
been validated: 800 mg for patients weighing <65 kg, 1000 mg for 
patients weighing >65-85 kg, 1200 for patients weighing >85–105 kg, 
and 1400 mg for patients weighing >105 kg.
b1000 mg for patients weighing <75 kg; 1200 mg for patients weighing 
≥75 kg.
cIn the registration trial for PEG IFN α-2b plus ribavirin, all patients 
were treated for 48 weeks; however, data from other trials of stan-
dard interferons and the other PEG IFN demonstrated that 24 weeks 
suffices for patients with genotypes 2 and 3. For patients with geno-
type 3 who have advanced fibrosis/cirrhosis and/or high-level HCV 
RNA, a full 48 weeks is preferable.
dAttempts to compare the two PEG IFN preparations based on the 
results of registration clinical trials are confounded by differences 
between trials of the two agents in methodological details (differ-
ent ribavirin doses, different methods for recording depression, and 
other side effects) and study-population composition (different pro-
portion with bridging fibrosis/cirrhosis, proportion from the United 
States versus international, mean weight, proportion with genotype 1, 
and proportion with high-level HCV RNA). In the head-to-head 
comparison of the two PEG IFN preparations in the “IDEAL” trial 
reported in 2009, the two drugs were comparable in tolerability and 
efficacy. PEG IFN α-2b was administered at a weekly weight-based 
dose of 1.0 μg/kg or 1.5 μg/kg, and PEG IFN α-2a was administered 
at a weekly fixed dose of 180 μg. For PEG IFN α-2b, daily ribavirin 
weight-based doses ranged between 800–1400 mg based on weight 
criteria (see footnote a, above), while for PEG IFN α-2a, daily ribavirin 
weight-based doses ranged between 1000–1200 mg (footnote b, 
above). For the two PEG IFN α-2b study arms, ribavirin dose reduc-
tions for ribavirin-associated adverse effects were done in 200–400-mg 
decrements; for PEG IFN α-2a, the ribavirin dose was reduced to 
600 mg for intolerability. Sustained virologic responses occurred in 
38.0% of the low-dose PEG IFN α-2b group, 39.8% of the standard, 
full-dose PEG IFN α-2b group, and 40.9% of the PEG IFN α-2a 
group.
Abbreviations: PEG, polyethylene glycol; PEG IFN, pegylated 
interferon; HCV RNA, hepatitis C virus RNA.
 
CHAPTER 40
Chronic Hepatitis
417
have a 4-week RVR (which occurs in ≤20%), especially 
in the subset with a baseline low level of HCV RNA, 24  
weeks of therapy with PEG IFN and weight-based riba-
virin suffices, yielding SVR rates of ∼90% and comparable 
to those achieved in this cohort with 48 weeks of therapy. 
Although initial reports suggested that, for patients 
with genotype 2 and (somewhat less so) genotype 3, 
in rapid virologic responders with undetectable HCV 
RNA at week 4, the total duration of therapy required to 
achieve an SVR could be as short as 12–16 weeks, a very 
sizable, definitive subsequent trial showed that relapse 
is increased if treatment duration is curtailed and that a 
full 24 weeks is superior for these genotypes (except for 
the minority with very low baseline levels of HCV RNA).
Persons with chronic HCV infection have been shown 
to suffer increased liver-related mortality. On the other 
hand, successful antiviral therapy of chronic hepatitis C 
resulting in an SVR has been shown to improve survival, 
to lower the risk of liver failure and liver-related death, 
to slow the progression of chronic hepatitis C, and to 
reverse fibrosis and even cirrhosis. Although successful 
treatment reduces mortality in cirrhotic patients (and 
those with advanced fibrosis) and reduces the likelihood 
of hepatocellular carcinoma, the risk of decompensa-
tion, death, and liver cancer persists, albeit at a much  
reduced level, necessitating continued clinical moni-
toring and cancer surveillance after SVR in cirrhotics. 
On the other hand, in the absence of an SVR, IFNbased 
therapy does not reduce the risk of hepatocellular  
carcinoma. Similarly, for nonresponders to PEG IFN/riba-
virin therapy, three trials of long-term maintenance ther-
apy with PEG IFN have shown no benefit in reducing the 
risk of histologic progression or clinical decompensation, 
including the development of hepatocellular carcinoma. 
For PEG IFN/ribavirin nonresponders who have had  
a full, adequate course of therapy, the benefit of  
retreatment—with higher doses or a longer course of 
the original PEG IFN regimen or the alternative PEG IFN 
regimen or with a different type of IFN preparation (e.g., 
consensus IFN)—is marginal at best.
Indications for Antiviral Therapy  
Patients with chronic hepatitis C who have detectable 
HCV RNA in serum, whether or not aminotransferase 
levels are increased, and chronic hepatitis of at least  
moderate grade and stage (portal or bridging fibrosis)  
are candidates for antiviral therapy with PEG IFN plus 
ribavirin. Most authorities recommend 800 mg of rib-
avirin for patients with genotypes 2 and 3 for both 
types of PEG IFN and weight-based 1000–1200 mg 
(when used with PEG IFN α-2a) or 800–1400 mg (when 
used with PEG IFN α-2b) ribavirin for patients with 
genotype 1 (and 4), unless ribavirin is contraindicated 
(Table 40-7). Although patients with persistently normal 
ALT activity tend to progress histologically very slowly 
or not at all, they respond to antiviral therapy just as 
well as do patients with elevated ALT levels; therefore, 
while observation without therapy is an option, such 
patients are potential candidates for antiviral therapy. 
As noted above, therapy with IFN has been shown to 
improve survival and complication-free survival and to 
slow progression of fibrosis.
Prior to therapy, HCV genotype should be deter-
mined, and the genotype dictates the duration of ther-
apy: 48 weeks for patients with genotype 1, 24 weeks  
for those with genotypes 2 and 3. For patients with  
60%
80%
100%
40%
45%
53%
64%
40% 41%
0%
20%
40%
RVR
EVR
ETR
SVR
Relapse
11% 12%
24%
32%
Figure 40-3 
Head-to-head comparison of standard-dose PEG IFN α-2b 
1.5 μg/kg weekly and PEG IFN α-2a 180 μg weekly adminis-
tered with daily ribavirin in the “IDEAL” trial. Percent achiev-
ing treatment milestones for PEG IFN α-2b (green boxes) 
and PEG IFN α-2a (orange boxes). RVR, rapid virologic 
response, HCV RNA undetectable at week 4; EVR, early 
virologic response, HCV RNA undetectable at week 12; 
ETR, end-treatment response, HCV RNA undetectable at end 
of treatment week 48; SVR, sustained virologic response, 
HCV RNA remaining undetectable 24 weeks after complet-
ing 48 weeks of therapy. Relapse, reappearance of detect-
able HCV RNA by week 72 in patients with an end-treatment 
response at week 48. PEG IFN α-2a suppressed HCV RNA 
in a higher proportion of patients at weeks 12 and 48 but, 
because of a higher relapse rate at week 72, resulted in the 
same SVR rate as PEG IFN α-2b.
SECTION VI
Disorders of the Liver and Biliary Tree
418
Table 40-7
Indications and Recommendations for Antiviral Therapy of Chronic Hepatitis C
Standard Indications for Therapy
Detectable HCV RNA (with or without elevated ALT)
Portal/bridging fibrosis or moderate to severe hepatitis on liver biopsy (the necessity of a pretreatment biopsy is being debated).
These indications apply to adults as well as to children aged 2–17, in whom treatment may be considered at reduced weight-
based doses (see product inserts).
Retreatment Recommended
Relapsers after a previous course of standard interferon monotherapy or combination standard interferon/ribavirin therapy.
A course of PEG IFN plus ribavirin (retreatment not recommended with PEG IFN/ribavirin if relapse occurred after a full 
course of PEG IFN/ribavirin).
Nonresponders to a previous course of standard IFN monotherapy or combination standard IFN/ribavirin therapy.
A course of PEG IFN plus ribavirin—more likely to achieve a sustained virologic response in white patients without previous 
ribavirin therapy, with low baseline HCV RNA levels, with a ≥2-log10 reduction in HCV RNA during previous therapy, with 
genotypes 2 and 3, and without reduction in ribavirin dose. (Retreatment not recommended with PEG IFN/ribavirin if  
nonresponse occurred to a full course of PEG IFN/ribavirin.)
Antiviral Therapy not Recommended Routinely but Management Decisions Made on an Individual Basis
Age >60
Mild hepatitis on liver biopsy.
Persons with severe renal insufficiency (glomerular filtration rate <60 ml/min) who do not require hemodialysis (reduced-dose 
PEG IFN and ribavirin). Antiviral therapy in patients requiring hemodialysis is more complicated, less successful, and  
associated with more adverse effects; if treatment is pursued, either standard doses of standard interferon 3 times a week or 
reduced doses of weekly PEG IFN in combination with reduced doses of daily ribavirin should be used.
Long-Term Maintenance Therapy Recommended
Cutaneous vasculitis and glomerulonephritis associated with chronic hepatitis C.
Long-Term Maintenance Therapy in Nonresponders not Recommended
Antiviral Therapy not Recommended
Decompensated cirrhosis (except, perhaps, in transplantation centers with experience in graded escalation, low-dose  
treatment to achieve undetectable HCV RNA prior to transplantation; results are mixed).
Pregnancy (teratogenicity of ribavirin).
Contraindications to use of interferon or ribavirin.
Standard Therapeutic Regimens
First-line treatment: PEG IFN subcutaneously once a week plus daily ribavirin orally
HCV genotypes 1 and 4—48 weeks of therapy
PEG IFN α-2a 180 μg weekly plus ribavirin 1000 mg/day (weight <75 kg) to 1200 mg/day (weight <75 kg) or
PEG IFN α-2b 1.5 μg/kg weekly plus daily oral ribavirin 800 mg for weight <65 kg, 1000 mg for weight 65–85 kg, 1200 mg 
for weight >85–105 kg, and 1400 mg for weight >105 kg
HCV genotypes 2 and 3—24 weeks of therapy
PEG IFN α-2a 180 μg weekly plus ribavirin 800 mg/day or
PEG IFN α-2b 1.5 μg/kg weekly plus ribavirin 800 mg/day (For patients with genotype 3 who have advanced fibrosis and/or 
high-level HCV RNA, a full 48 weeks of therapy may be preferable.)
Alternative regimen: PEG IFN (α-2a 180 μg or α-2b 1.0 μg/kg) subcutaneously once a week (primarily for patients in whom 
ribavirin is contraindicated or not tolerated) for 24 (genotypes 2 and 3) or 48 (genotypes 1 and 4) weeks.
Early discontinuation: Failure to achieve an EVR, i.e., ≥2 log10 HCV RNA reduction by week 12 or, if EVR is achieved, failure to 
achieve suppression of HCV RNA to undetectable by week 24.
“Tailored” Therapeutic Regimens Based on Rapid Treatment Milestones
HCV genotypes 1 and 4.
For RVR, i.e., undetectable HCV RNA at week 4, especially in patients with low baseline HCV RNA, consider truncating the 
course of therapy to 24 weeks.
For patients with slow, delayed response, i.e., who clear detectable HCV RNA between weeks 12 and 24, consider prolonging 
the course of therapy to 72 weeks.
“Tailored” Therapeutic Regimens Based on Baseline Variables Associated with Reduced Responsiveness
HCV genotypes 1 and 4
For patients with HCV RNA >8 × 105 IU/ml and weighing >85 kg, consider increasing the weekly PEG IFN dose (e.g., for 
PEG IFN α-2a up to 270 μg) and the daily ribavirin dose (e.g., up to 1600 mg).
For HCV-HIV co-infected patients: 48 weeks, regardless of genotype, of weekly PEG IFN α-2a (180 μg) or PEG IFN α-2b 
(1.5 μg/kg) plus a daily ribavirin dose of at least 600–800 mg, up to full weight-based dosing, at doses comparable to those 
for HCV-monoinfected patients, if tolerated.
(continued )
 
CHAPTER 40
Chronic Hepatitis
419
genotype 1 (and 4), especially those with low baseline 
HCV RNA, 24 weeks of PEG IFN/ribavirin therapy may 
suffice if HCV RNA becomes undetectable within 4 
weeks (RVR); for patients with genotypes 2 and 3, a full, 
24-week course is most effective, although the duration 
may be reduced to 12–16 weeks for patients with geno-
type 2, a low baseline level of viremia, and an RVR, espe-
cially to be considered for patients who tolerate therapy 
poorly. As noted above, the absence of a 2-log10 drop in 
HCV RNA at week 12 (EVR) weighs heavily against the 
likelihood of an SVR; therefore, measuring HCV RNA at 
12 weeks is recommended routinely (Fig. 40-2), espe-
cially for patients with genotype 1, and therapy can be 
discontinued if an EVR is not achieved. Among patients 
with an EVR (≥2-log10 HCV RNA reduction) but with HCV 
RNA still detectable at week 24, an SVR is unlikely, and 
therapy can be discontinued. Although response rates 
are lower in patients with certain pretreatment vari-
ables, selection for treatment should not be based on 
symptoms, genotype, HCV RNA level, mode of acquisi-
tion of hepatitis C, or advanced hepatic fibrosis. Patients 
with cirrhosis can respond and should not be excluded 
as candidates for therapy.
Patients who have relapsed (Fig. 40-2) after a course 
of IFN monotherapy are candidates for retreatment 
with PEG IFN plus ribavirin (i.e., a more effective treat-
ment regimen is required). For nonresponders to a 
prior course of IFN monotherapy, retreatment with IFN 
monotherapy or combination IFN plus ribavirin therapy 
is unlikely to achieve a sustained virologic response; 
however, a trial of combination PEG IFN plus ribavirin 
may be worthwhile. End-treatment virologic responses 
as high as 40% can occur in this setting, but an SVR  
is the outcome in <15–20% of patients. Sustained  
virologic responses to retreatment of nonresponders are 
more frequent in those who had never received ribavi-
rin in the past, those with genotypes 2 and 3, those with 
low pretreatment HCV RNA levels, and noncirrhotics, 
but less frequent in African Americans, those who failed 
to achieve a substantial reduction in HCV RNA during  
their previous course of therapy (null responders,  
Fig. 40-2), and those who required ribavirin-dose reduc-
tions. Potential approaches to improving responsive-
ness to PEG IFN/ribavirin in prior nonresponders include 
longer duration of treatment; higher doses of either PEG 
IFN, ribavirin, or both; and switching to a different IFN 
preparation; however, as noted above, none of these 
approaches achieves more than a marginal benefit.
Early treatment is indicated for persons with acute 
hepatitis C (Chap. 304). In patients with biochemically 
and histologically mild chronic hepatitis C, the rate of 
progression is slow, and monitoring without therapy is 
an option; however, such patients respond just as well  
to combination PEG IFN plus ribavirin therapy as those 
with elevated ALT and more histologically severe hepatitis.  
Therefore, therapy for these patients should be consid-
ered and the decision made based on such factors as 
patient motivation, genotype, stage of fibrosis, age, and 
comorbid conditions. A pretreatment liver biopsy to 
assess histologic grade and stage provides substantial 
information about progression of hepatitis C in the past, 
has prognostic value for future progression, and can 
identify such histologic factors as steatosis and stage of 
fibrosis, which can influence responsiveness to therapy. 
As therapy has improved for patients with a broad range 
of histologic severity, and as noninvasive laboratory 
markers and imaging correlates of fibrosis have gained 
popularity, some authorities, especially in Europe, have 
Features Associated with Reduced Responsiveness
Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) T allele (as opposed to C allele) at IL28B locus
Genotype 1
High-level HCV RNA (>2 × 106 copies/ml or >8 × 105 IU/ml)
Advanced fibrosis (bridging fibrosis, cirrhosis)
Long-duration disease
Age >40
High HCV quasispecies diversity
Immunosuppression
African-American ethnicity
Latino ethnicity
Obesity
Hepatic steatosis
Insulin resistance, type-II diabetes mellitus
Reduced adherence (lower drug doses and reduced duration of therapy)
Abbreviations: ALT, alanine aminotransferase; HCV, hepatitis C virus; IFN, interferon; PEG IFN, pegylated interferon; IU, international units (1 IU/ml 
is equivalent to ∼2.5 copies/ml).
Table 40-7
Indications and Recommendations for Antiviral Therapy of Chronic Hepatitis C (CONTINUED )
SECTION VI
Disorders of the Liver and Biliary Tree
420
placed less value on, and do not recommend, pretreat-
ment liver biopsies. On the other hand, serum markers 
of fibrosis are not considered sufficiently accurate, and 
histologic findings provide important prognostic infor-
mation to physician and patient. Therefore, although 
the contemporary role of a pretreatment liver biopsy 
commands less of a consensus, a pretreatment liver 
biopsy still provides useful information and should be 
considered.
Patients with compensated cirrhosis can respond 
to therapy, although their likelihood of a sustained  
response is lower than in noncirrhotics; moreover,  
survival has been shown to improve after successful 
antiviral therapy in cirrhotics. Similarly, although several 
retrospective studies have suggested that antiviral ther-
apy in cirrhotics with chronic hepatitis C, independent 
of treatment outcome per se, reduces the frequency 
of HCC, less advanced disease in the treated cirrhot-
ics, not treatment itself (i.e., lead-time bias), may have 
accounted for the reduced frequency of HCC observed 
in the treated cohorts in these reports; prospective 
studies to address this question have failed to demon-
strate benefit, unless a sustained virologic response is 
achieved. Patients with decompensated cirrhosis are not 
candidates for IFN-based antiviral therapy but should be 
referred for liver transplantation. Some liver-transplan-
tation centers have evaluated progressively escalated, 
low-dose antiviral therapy in an attempt to eradicate 
hepatitis C viremia prior to transplantation; however, 
such therapy has been shown to reduce but not to pre-
vent the risk of HCV reinfection after transplantation. 
After liver transplantation for end-stage liver disease 
caused by hepatitis C, recurrent hepatitis C is the rule, 
and the pace of disease progression is more accelerated 
than in immunocompetent patients (Chap. 310). Current 
therapy with PEG IFN and ribavirin after liver transplan-
tation is unsatisfactory in most patients, but attempts to 
minimize immunosuppression are beneficial. The cuta-
neous and renal vasculitis of HCV-associated essential 
mixed cryoglobulinemia (Chap. 304) may respond to 
antiviral therapy, but sustained responses are rare after 
discontinuation of therapy; therefore, prolonged, per-
haps indefinite, therapy is recommended in this group. 
Anecdotal reports suggest that antiviral therapy may 
be effective in porphyria cutanea tarda or lichen planus 
associated with hepatitis C.
In patients with HCV/HIV co-infection, hepatitis C is 
more progressive and severe than in HCV-monoinfected 
patients. Although patients with HCV/HIV co-infection 
respond to antiviral therapy for hepatitis C, they do not 
respond as well as patients with HCV infection alone. 
Four large national and international trials of antivi-
ral therapy among patients with HCV/HIV co-infection  
have shown that PEG IFN (both α-2a and α-2b) 
plus ribavirin (daily doses ranging from flat-dosed  
600–800 mg to weight-based 1000/1200 mg) is supe-
rior to standard IFN regimens; however, SVR rates were 
lower than in HCV-monoinfected patients, ranging from 
14 to 38% for patients with genotypes 1 and 4 and from 
44 to 73% for patients with genotypes 2 and 3. In the 
three largest trials, all patients, including those with 
genotypes 2 and 3, were treated for a full 48 weeks. In 
addition, tolerability of therapy was lower than in HCV-
monoinfected patients; therapy was discontinued 
because of side effects in 12–39% of patients in these 
clinical trials. Based on these trials, weekly PEG IFN plus 
daily ribavirin at a daily dose of at least 600–800 mg, 
up to full weight-based doses, at doses recommended 
for HCV-monoinfected patients, if tolerated, is recom-
mended for a full 48 weeks, regardless of genotype. An 
alternative recommendation for ribavirin doses was 
issued by a European Consensus Conference and con-
sisted of standard, weight-based 1000–1200 mg for 
genotypes 1 and 4, but 800 mg for genotypes 2 and 3. 
A head-to-head trial of combination PEG IFN/ribavirin 
therapy in HCV/HIV co-infection demonstrated statisti-
cally indistinguishable efficacy of the two types of PEG 
IFN, despite a small advantage for PEG IFN α-2a: for PEG 
IFN α-2b and α-2a, SVRs occurred in 28% versus 32%, 
respectively, of patients with genotypes 1 and 4 and in 
62% versus 71%, respectively, of patients with geno-
types 2 and 3. In HCV/HIV-infected patients, ribavirin 
can potentiate the toxicity of didanosine (e.g., lactic aci-
dosis) and the lipoatrophy of stavudine, and zidovudine 
can exacerbate ribavirin-associated hemolytic anemia; 
therefore, these drug combinations should be avoided.
Patients with a history of injection-drug use and alco-
holism can be treated successfully for chronic hepatitis C,  
preferably in conjunction with drug- and alcohol- 
treatment programs. Because ribavirin is excreted 
renally, patients with end-stage renal disease, includ-
ing those undergoing dialysis (which does not clear 
ribavirin), are not ideal candidates for ribavirin therapy. 
Rare reports suggest that reduced-dose ribavirin can 
be used, but the frequency of anemia is very high and 
data on efficacy are limited. If patients with renal fail-
ure (glomerular filtration rate <60 ml/min) are treated, 
the PEG IFN α-2a dose should be reduced from 180 to 
135 μg weekly and the PEG IFN α-2b dose reduced from 
1.5 to 1 μg/kg weekly; similarly, the daily ribavirin dose in 
this population should be reduced to 200–800 mg (but 
not used or used cautiously at very low doses) if hemo-
dialysis is required. Neither the optimal regimen nor the 
efficacy of therapy is well established in this population.
Novel Antivirals  To date, attempts to develop 
better-tolerated ribavirin successors or improved types 
of IFN α or longer acting IFNs than PEG IFN have not 
 
CHAPTER 40
Chronic Hepatitis
421
been successful. The demonstration that responsiveness 
to antiviral therapy is influenced by genetic variation 
in IL28B, which codes for IFN-λ (as noted above), raises 
the possibility that IFN-λ might be an effective or even 
more effective IFN for treating hepatitis C; early trials are 
in progress. Among the most exciting new approaches 
to antiviral therapy are orally administered direct anti-
virals that target HCV polymerase or protease. Two pro-
tease inhibitors that are in late stages of development,  
are expected to be approved in 2011. The NS3-4A  
serine protease inhibitors telaprevir and boceprevir  
suppress HCV RNA profoundly and, when used together 
with PEG IFN and ribavirin in patients with genotype-1 
HCV infection, can increase RVR rates to as high as 80% 
(telaprevir) and SVR rates from those achieved with cur-
rent standard-of-care therapy by 20–30% to ∼65–75%, 
in most patients with only half the duration of current  
therapy. These triple-drug combinations appear to 
yield even higher rates of SVR in >50% of prior relapsers  
(>70–90%) but also to achieve SVR in prior nonre-
sponders, even in null responders to PEG IFN/ribavirin  
therapy (∼30%). Although these new drugs add 
elements of additional toxicity (severe rash in ∼5% of 
telaprevir-treated patients and anemia in half of bocepre-
vir-treated patients), they represent an opportunity for 
curing a substantially larger proportion of patients with 
shorter treatment courses. Because resistance to these 
oral agents used alone has been both anticipated and 
observed, polymerase and protease inhibitors are being 
evaluated in combinations with PEG IFN and ribavirin 
to preempt the emergence of resistance. Potentially, in 
the future, combinations of direct antiviral agents will  
be used in drug cocktails that may replace IFN-based reg-
imens entirely.
Autoimmune Hepatitis
Definition
Autoimmune hepatitis is a chronic disorder char-
acterized by continuing hepatocellular necrosis and 
inflammation, usually with fibrosis, which can prog-
ress to cirrhosis and liver failure. When fulfilling cri-
teria of severity, this type of chronic hepatitis, when 
untreated, may have a 6-month mortality of as high as 
40%. Based on contemporary estimates of the natural 
history of treated autoimmune hepatitis, the 10-year 
survival is 80–90%. The prominence of extrahepatic 
features of autoimmunity as well as seroimmunologic 
abnormalities in this disorder supports an autoimmune 
process in its pathogenesis; this concept is reflected in 
the labels lupoid, plasma cell, or autoimmune hepatitis. 
Autoantibodies and other typical features of autoim-
munity, however, do not occur in all cases; among 
the broader categories of “idiopathic” or cryptogenic 
chronic hepatitis, many, perhaps the majority, are 
probably autoimmune in origin. Cases in which 
hepatotropic viruses, metabolic/genetic derangements, 
and hepatotoxic drugs have been excluded represent a 
spectrum of heterogeneous liver disorders of unknown 
cause, a proportion of which are most likely auto­
immune hepatitis.
Immunopathogenesis
The weight of evidence suggests that the progres-
sive liver injury in patients with autoimmune hepatitis 
is the result of a cell-mediated immunologic attack 
directed against liver cells. In all likelihood, predisposi-
tion to autoimmunity is inherited, while the liver speci-
ficity of this injury is triggered by environmental (e.g., 
chemical or viral) factors. For example, patients have 
been described in whom apparently self-limited cases of 
acute hepatitis A, B, or C led to autoimmune hepatitis, 
presumably because of genetic susceptibility or pre­
disposition. Evidence to support an autoimmune patho-
genesis in this type of hepatitis includes the following: 
(1) In the liver, the histopathologic lesions are com-
posed predominantly of cytotoxic T cells and plasma 
cells; (2) circulating autoantibodies (nuclear, smooth 
muscle, thyroid, etc.; see below), rheumatoid factor, 
and hyperglobulinemia are common; (3) other autoim-
mune disorders—such as thyroiditis, rheumatoid arthritis, 
autoimmune hemolytic anemia, ulcerative colitis, mem-
branoproliferative glomerulonephritis, juvenile diabetes 
mellitus, celiac disease, and Sjögren’s syndrome—occur 
with increased frequency in patients and in their rela-
tives who have autoimmune hepatitis; (4) histocom-
patibility haplotypes associated with autoimmune 
diseases, such as HLA-B1, -B8, -DR3, and -DR4 as 
well as extended haplotype DRB1 alleles, are common 
in patients with autoimmune hepatitis; and (5) this type 
of chronic hepatitis is responsive to glucocorticoid/
immunosuppressive therapy, effective in a variety of 
autoimmune disorders.
Cellular immune mechanisms appear to be important 
in the pathogenesis of autoimmune hepatitis. In vitro 
studies have suggested that in patients with this disor-
der, lymphocytes are capable of becoming sensitized 
to hepatocyte membrane proteins and of destroying 
liver cells. Abnormalities of immunoregulatory con-
trol over cytotoxic lymphocytes (impaired regulatory 
CD4+CD25+ T cell influences) may play a role as well. 
Studies of genetic predisposition to autoimmune hepa-
titis demonstrate that certain haplotypes are associated 
with the disorder, as enumerated above. The precise 
triggering factors, genetic influences, and cytotoxic and 
immunoregulatory mechanisms involved in this type of 
liver injury remain incompletely defined.
SECTION VI
Disorders of the Liver and Biliary Tree
422
Intriguing clues into the pathogenesis of autoim-
mune hepatitis come from the observation that circu-
lating autoantibodies are prevalent in patients with this 
disorder. Among the autoantibodies described in these 
patients are antibodies to nuclei [so-called antinuclear 
antibodies (ANAs), primarily in a homogeneous pat-
tern] and smooth muscle (so-called anti-smooth-muscle 
antibodies, directed at actin), anti-LKM (see below), 
antibodies to “soluble liver antigen/liver pancreas anti-
gen” (directed against a uracil-guanineadenine transfer 
RNA suppressor protein), as well as antibodies to the 
liver-specific asialoglycoprotein receptor (or “hepatic 
lectin”) and other hepatocyte membrane proteins. 
Although some of these provide helpful diagnostic 
markers, their involvement in the pathogenesis of auto-
immune hepatitis has not been established.
Humoral immune mechanisms have been shown to 
play a role in the extrahepatic manifestations of auto-
immune and idiopathic hepatitis. Arthralgias, arthritis, 
cutaneous vasculitis, and glomerulonephritis occur-
ring in patients with autoimmune hepatitis appear to be 
mediated by the deposition of circulating immune com-
plexes in affected tissue vessels, followed by comple-
ment activation, inflammation, and tissue injury. While 
specific viral antigen-antibody complexes can be identi-
fied in acute and chronic viral hepatitis, the nature of 
the immune complexes in autoimmune hepatitis has not 
been defined.
Many of the clinical features of autoimmune hepatitis 
are similar to those described for chronic viral hepatitis. 
The onset of disease may be insidious or abrupt; the 
disease may present initially like, and be confused with, 
acute viral hepatitis; a history of recurrent bouts of what 
had been labeled acute hepatitis is not uncommon. A 
subset of patients with autoimmune hepatitis has dis-
tinct features. Such patients are predominantly young to 
middle-aged women with marked hyperglobulinemia 
and high-titer circulating ANAs. This is the group with 
positive lupus erythematosus (LE) preparations (initially 
labeled “lupoid” hepatitis) in whom other autoimmune 
features are common. Fatigue, malaise, anorexia, amen-
orrhea, acne, arthralgias, and jaundice are common. 
Occasionally arthritis, maculopapular eruptions (includ-
ing cutaneous vasculitis), erythema nodosum, colitis, 
pleurisy, pericarditis, anemia, azotemia, and sicca syn-
drome (keratoconjunctivitis, xerostomia) occur. In some 
patients, complications of cirrhosis, such as ascites and 
edema (associated with hypoalbuminemia), encephalop-
athy, hypersplenism, coagulopathy, or variceal bleeding 
may bring the patient to initial medical attention.
The course of autoimmune hepatitis may be vari-
able. In those with mild disease or limited histologic 
lesions (e.g., piecemeal necrosis without bridging), 
progression to cirrhosis is limited. In those with severe 
symptomatic autoimmune hepatitis (aminotransferase 
levels >10 times normal, marked hyperglobulinemia, 
“aggressive” histologic lesions—bridging necrosis or 
multilobular collapse, cirrhosis), the 6-month mortal-
ity without therapy may be as high as 40%. Such severe 
disease accounts for only 20% of cases; the natural his-
tory of milder disease is variable, often accentuated by 
spontaneous remissions and exacerbations. Especially 
poor prognostic signs include the presence histologi-
cally of multilobular collapse at the time of initial pre-
sentation and failure of the bilirubin to improve after 2 
weeks of therapy. Death may result from hepatic fail-
ure, hepatic coma, other complications of cirrhosis (e.g., 
variceal hemorrhage), and intercurrent infection. In 
patients with established cirrhosis, HCC may be a late 
complication (Chap. 92) but occurs less frequently than 
in cirrhosis associated with viral hepatitis.
Laboratory features of autoimmune hepatitis are similar 
to those seen in chronic viral hepatitis. Liver biochemi-
cal tests are invariably abnormal but may not correlate 
with the clinical severity or histopathologic features in 
individual cases. Many patients with autoimmune hepa-
titis have normal serum bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase, 
and globulin levels with only minimal aminotransferase 
elevations. Serum AST and ALT levels are increased and 
fluctuate in the range of 100–1000 units. In severe cases, 
the serum bilirubin level is moderately elevated [51–171 
μmol/L (3–10 mg/dL)]. Hypoalbuminemia occurs in 
patients with very active or advanced disease. Serum 
alkaline phosphatase levels may be moderately ele-
vated or near normal. In a small proportion of patients, 
marked elevations of alkaline phosphatase activity occur; 
in such patients, clinical and laboratory features overlap 
with those of primary biliary cirrhosis (Chap. 308). The 
prothrombin time is often prolonged, particularly late in 
the disease or during active phases.
Hypergammaglobulinemia (>2.5 g/dL) is common 
in autoimmune hepatitis. Rheumatoid factor is com-
mon as well. As noted above, circulating autoantibod-
ies are also prevalent. The most characteristic are ANAs 
in a homogeneous staining pattern. Smoothmuscle 
antibodies are less specific, seen just as frequently in 
chronic viral hepatitis. Because of the high levels of 
globulins achieved in the circulation of some patients 
with autoimmune hepatitis, occasionally the globulins 
may bind nonspecifically in solid-phase binding immu-
noassays for viral antibodies. This has been recognized 
most commonly in tests for antibodies to hepatitis C 
virus, as noted above. In fact, studies of autoantibodies 
in autoimmune hepatitis have led to the recognition of 
new categories of autoimmune hepatitis. Type I auto­
immune hepatitis is the classic syndrome occurring in young 
women, associated with marked hyperglobulinemia, 
lupoid features, circulating ANAs, and HLA-DR3 or 
HLA-DR4 (especially B8-DRB1*03). Also associated 
with type I autoimmune hepatitis are autoantibodies 
against actin as well as atypical perinuclear antineutro-
philic cytoplasmic antibodies (pANCA).
 
CHAPTER 40
Chronic Hepatitis
423
Type II autoimmune hepatitis, often seen in children, 
more common in Mediterranean populations, and 
linked to HLA-DRB1 and HLA-DQB1 haplotypes, is 
associated not with ANA but with anti-LKM. Actu-
ally, anti-LKM represent a heterogeneous group of 
antibodies. In type II autoimmune hepatitis, the anti-
body is anti-LKM1, directed against cytochrome P450 
2D6. This is the same anti-LKM seen in some patients 
with chronic hepatitis C. Anti-LKM2 is seen in drug-
induced hepatitis, and anti-LKM3 is seen in patients 
with chronic hepatitis D. Another autoantibody 
observed in type II autoimmune hepatitis is directed 
against liver cytosol formiminotransferase cyclode-
aminase (anti-liver cytosol 1). More controversial is 
whether or not a third category of autoimmune hepa-
titis exists, type III autoimmune hepatitis. These patients 
lack ANA and anti-LKM1 but have circulating antibod-
ies to soluble liver antigen/liver pancreas antigen. Most 
of these patients are women and have clinical features 
similar to, perhaps more severe than, those of patients 
with type I autoimmune hepatitis. Type III autoim-
mune hepatitis does not appear to represent a distinct 
category but, instead, is part of the spectrum of type I 
autoimmune hepatitis; this subcategory has not been 
adopted by a consensus of international experts.
Liver biopsy abnormalities are similar to those 
described for chronic viral hepatitis. Expanding por-
tal tracts and extending beyond the plate of periportal 
hepatocytes into the parenchyma (designated interface 
hepatitis or piecemeal necrosis) is a mononuclear cell infil-
trate that, in autoimmune hepatitis, may include the 
presence of plasma cells. Necroinflammatory activ-
ity characterizes the lobular parenchyma, and evidence 
of hepatocellular regeneration is reflected by “rosette” 
formation, the occurrence of thickened liver cell plates, 
and regenerative “pseudolobules.” Septal fibrosis, bridg-
ing fibrosis, and cirrhosis are frequent. Bile duct injury 
and granulomas are uncommon; however, a subgroup 
of patients with autoimmune hepatitis has histologic, 
biochemical, and serologic features overlapping those of 
primary biliary cirrhosis (Chap. 308).
Diagnostic Criteria
An international group has suggested a set of criteria for 
establishing a diagnosis of autoimmune hepatitis. Exclu-
sion of liver disease caused by genetic disorders, viral 
hepatitis, drug hepatotoxicity, and alcohol are linked 
with such inclusive diagnostic criteria as hyperglobu-
linemia, autoantibodies, and characteristic histologic 
features. This international group has also suggested 
a comprehensive diagnostic scoring system that, rarely 
required for typical cases, may be helpful when typi-
cal features are not present. Factors that weigh in favor 
of the diagnosis include female gender; predomi-
nant aminotransferase elevation; presence and level of 
globulin elevation; presence of nuclear, smooth mus-
cle, LKM1, and other autoantibodies; concurrent other 
auto­immune diseases; characteristic histologic features 
(interface hepatitis, plasma cells, rosettes); HLA DR3 or 
DR4 markers; and response to treatment (see below). 
Weighing against the diagnosis are predominant alka-
line phosphatase elevation, mitochondrial antibodies, 
markers of viral hepatitis, history of hepatotoxic drugs 
or excessive alcohol, histologic evidence of bile duct 
injury, or such atypical histologic features as fatty infil-
tration, iron overload, and viral inclusions.
Differential Diagnosis
Early during the course of chronic hepatitis, autoim-
mune hepatitis may resemble typical acute viral hepatitis 
(Chap. 304). Without histologic assessment, severe 
chronic hepatitis cannot be readily distinguished based 
on clinical or biochemical criteria from mild chronic 
hepatitis. In adolescence, Wilson’s disease (Chaps. 308 
and 360) may present with features of chronic hepatitis 
long before neurologic manifestations become apparent 
and before the formation of Kayser-Fleischer rings. 
In this age group, serum ceruloplasmin and serum and 
urinary copper determinations plus measurement of 
liver copper levels will establish the correct diagnosis. 
Postnecrotic or cryptogenic cirrhosis and primary biliary cirrho-
sis (Chap. 308) share clinical features with autoimmune 
hepatitis, and both alcoholic hepatitis (Chap. 307) and 
nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (Chap. 309) may present 
with many features common to autoimmune hepatitis; 
historic, biochemical, serologic, and histologic assess-
ments are usually sufficient to allow these entities to be 
distinguished from autoimmune hepatitis. Of course, 
the distinction between autoimmune and chronic viral 
hepatitis is not always straightforward, especially when 
viral antibodies occur in patients with autoimmune 
disease or when autoantibodies occur in patients with 
viral disease. Furthermore, the presence of extrahepatic 
features such as arthritis, cutaneous vasculitis, or 
pleuritis—not to mention the presence of circulating 
autoantibodies—may cause confusion with rheumatologic 
disorders such as rheumatoid arthritis and systemic lupus 
erythematosus. The existence of clinical and biochemi-
cal features of progressive necroinflammatory liver dis-
ease distinguishes chronic hepatitis from these other 
disorders, which are not associated with severe liver 
disease.
Finally, occasionally, features of autoimmune hepa-
titis overlap with features of autoimmune biliary disor-
ders such as primary biliary cirrhosis, primary sclerosing 
cholangitis (Chaps. 308 and 311), or, even more rarely, 
mitochondrial antibody-negative autoimmune cholan-
gitis. Such overlap syndromes are difficult to categorize, 
and often response to therapy may be the distinguishing 
factor that establishes the diagnosis.
SECTION VI
Disorders of the Liver and Biliary Tree
424
Treatment	
Autoimmune Hepatitis
The mainstay of management in autoimmune hepa-
titis is glucocorticoid therapy. Several controlled clini-
cal trials have documented that such therapy leads 
to symptomatic, clinical, biochemical, and histologic 
improvement as well as increased survival. A therapeu-
tic response can be expected in up to 80% of patients. 
Unfortunately, therapy has not been shown to prevent 
ultimate progression to cirrhosis; however, instances 
of reversal of fibrosis and cirrhosis have been reported 
in patients responding to treatment. Although some 
advocate the use of prednisolone (the hepatic metabo-
lite of prednisone), prednisone is just as effective and is 
favored by most authorities. Therapy may be initiated 
at 20 mg/d, but a popular regimen in the United States 
relies on an initiation dose of 60 mg/d. This high dose is 
tapered successively over the course of a month down 
to a maintenance level of 20 mg/d. An alternative, but 
equally effective, approach is to begin with half the  
prednisone dose (30 mg/d) along with azathioprine  
(50 mg/d). With azathioprine maintained at 50 mg/d, the 
prednisone dose is tapered over the course of a month 
down to a maintenance level of 10 mg/d. The advantage 
of the combination approach is a reduction, over the 
span of an 18-month course of therapy, in serious, life-
threatening complications of steroid therapy from 66% 
down to under 20%. In combination regimens, 6-mer-
captopurine may be substituted for its prodrug aza-
thioprine, but this is rarely required. Azathioprine alone, 
however, is not effective in achieving remission, nor is  
alternateday glucocorticoid therapy. Limited experience 
with budesonide in noncirrhotic patients suggests that 
this steroid side effect–sparing drug may be effective.  
Although therapy has been shown to be effective for 
severe autoimmune hepatitis (AST ≥10 times the upper 
limit of normal or ≥5 times the upper limit of normal in 
conjunction with serum globulin greater than or equal 
to twice normal; bridging necrosis or multilobular 
necrosis on liver biopsy; presence of symptoms), ther-
apy is not indicated for mild forms of chronic hepatitis, 
and the efficacy of therapy in mild or asymptomatic 
autoimmune hepatitis has not been established.
Improvement of fatigue, anorexia, malaise, and 
jaundice tends to occur within days to several weeks; 
biochemical improvement occurs over the course of 
several weeks to months, with a fall in serum bilirubin 
and globulin levels and an increase in serum albumin. 
Serum aminotransferase levels usually drop promptly, 
but improvements in AST and ALT alone do not appear 
to be reliable markers of recovery in individual patients; 
histologic improvement, characterized by a decrease in 
mononuclear infiltration and in hepatocellular necro-
sis, may be delayed for 6–24 months. Still, if interpreted 
cautiously, aminotransferase levels are valuable indi-
cators of relative disease activity, and many authori-
ties do not advocate for serial liver biopsies to assess 
therapeutic success or to guide decisions to alter or 
stop therapy. Rapidity of response is more common in 
older patients (≥69 years) and those with HLA DBR1*04; 
although rapid responders may progress less slowly to 
cirrhosis and liver transplantation, they are no less likely 
than slower responders to relapse after therapy. Therapy 
should continue for at least 12–18 months. After taper-
ing and cessation of therapy, the likelihood of relapse 
is at least 50%, even if posttreatment histology has 
improved to show mild chronic hepatitis, and the major-
ity of patients require therapy at maintenance doses 
indefinitely. Continuing azathioprine alone (2 mg/kg  
body weight daily) after cessation of prednisone  
therapy may reduce the frequency of relapse.
In medically refractory cases, an attempt should be  
made to intensify treatment with high-dose gluco-
corticoid monotherapy (60 mg daily) or combination  
glucocorticoid (30 mg daily) plus high-dose azathioprine 
(150 mg daily) therapy. After a month, doses of predni-
sone can be reduced by 10 mg a month, and doses of 
azathioprine can be reduced by 50 mg a month toward 
ultimate, conventional maintenance doses. Patients 
refractory to this regimen may be treated with cyclo-
sporine, tacrolimus, or mycophenolate mofetil; however, 
to date, only limited anecdotal reports support these 
approaches. If medical therapy fails, or when chronic 
hepatitis progresses to cirrhosis and is associated with 
life-threatening complications of liver decompensation, 
liver transplantation is the only recourse (Chap. 310); 
failure of the bilirubin to improve after 2 weeks of ther-
apy should prompt early consideration of the patient  
for liver transplantation. Recurrence of autoimmune 
hepatitis in the new liver occurs rarely in most experi-
ences but in as many as 35–40% of cases in others.
Acknowledgment
Kurt J. Isselbacher, MD, contributed to this chapter in previous 
editions of Harrison’s.
 Mark E. Mailliard  I   Michael F. Sorrell 
425
 ALCOHOLIC LIVER DISEASE 
 CHAPTER 41 
 Chronic and excessive alcohol ingestion is one of the 
major causes of liver disease. Per capita, alcohol con-
sumption and cirrhosis have risen in the last decade in 
United Kingdom and Russia but has decreased in many 
developed countries including the United States. The 
pathology of alcoholic liver disease consists of three major 
lesions, with the injury rarely existing in a pure form: 
(1) fatty liver, (2) alcoholic hepatitis, and (3) cirrho-
sis. Fatty liver is present in >90% of binge and chronic 
drinkers. A much smaller percentage of heavy drink-
ers will progress to alcoholic hepatitis, thought to be a 
precursor to cirrhosis. The prognosis of severe alcoholic 
liver disease is dismal; the mortality of patients with 
alcoholic hepatitis concurrent with cirrhosis is nearly 
60% at 4 years. Although alcohol is considered a direct 
hepatotoxin, only between 10 and 20% of alcoholics 
will develop alcoholic hepatitis. The explanation for 
this apparent paradox is unclear but involves the com-
plex interaction of facilitating factors, such as intake 
 frequency, diet, and gender. 
 ETIOLOGY AND PATHOGENESIS 
 Quantity and duration of alcohol intake are the most 
important risk factors involved in the development of 
alcoholic liver disease  ( Table 41-1 ) . The roles of bev-
erage type(s), i.e. wine, beer, or spirits, and pattern of 
drinking (daily versus binge drinking) are less clear. 
Progress of the hepatic injury beyond the fatty liver 
stage seems to require additional risk factors that remain 
incompletely defi ned. Although there are genetic pre-
dispositions for alcoholism  ( Chapter 392 ) , and candidate 
genes for liver steatosis and fi brosis, gender is a strong 
determinant for alcoholic liver disease. Women are 
more susceptible to alcoholic liver injury when com-
pared to men. They develop advanced liver disease with 
substantially less alcohol intake. In general, the time it 
takes to develop liver disease is directly related to the 
amount of alcohol consumed. It is useful in estimating 
alcohol consumption to understand that one beer, four 
ounces of wine, or one ounce of 80% spirits all contain 
∼12 g of alcohol. The threshold for developing alco-
holic liver disease in men is an intake of >60–80 g/d of 
alcohol for 10 years, while women are at increased risk 
for developing similar degrees of liver injury by con-
suming 20–40 g/d. Ingestion of 160 g/d is associated 
with a 25-fold increased risk of developing alcoholic 
cirrhosis. Gender-dependent differences result from 
poorly understood effects of estrogen and the metabo-
lism of alcohol. Diet, particularly an increase in liver 
TABLE 41-1 
 RISK FACTORS FOR ALCOHOLIC LIVER DISEASE 
RISK FACTOR
COMMENT
Quantity
In men, 40–80 g/d of ethanol produces 
fatty liver; 160 g/d for 10–20 years 
causes hepatitis or cirrhosis. Only 15% of 
alcoholics develop alcoholic liver disease.
Gender
Women exhibit increased susceptibility to 
alcoholic liver disease at amounts 
>20 g/d; two drinks per day is probably 
safe.
Hepatitis C
HCV infection concurrent with alcoholic 
liver disease is associated with younger 
age for severity, more advanced histology, 
decreased survival.
Genetics
Gene polymorphisms may include alcohol 
dehydrogenase, cytochrome P4502E1, 
and those associated with alcoholism 
(twin studies).
Malnutrition
Alcohol injury does not require malnutrition, 
but obesity and fatty liver from the effect 
of carbohydrate on the transcriptional 
control of lipid synthesis and transport 
may be factors. Patients should receive 
vigorous attention to nutritional support.
SECTION VI
Disorders of the Liver and Biliary Tree
426
FIGURE 41-1 
Biomedical and cellular pathogenesis of liver injury 
secondary to chronic ethanol ingestion. MAA, malond­
ialdehyde-acetaldehyde; TNF, tumor necrosis factor; TGF, 
transforming growth factor; IL, interleukin; PPAR, peroxisome 
proliferator-activated receptor; RXR, retinoid X receptor.
+
Chronic Ethanol Ingestion
Acetaldehyde
Lipid
peroxidation
Aldehydes
Intestine
Hepatocyte
PPARγ/RXR
Endotoxin
MAA
adducts
Autoantibodies
Autoimmune
response
Collagen
Stellate cell
Fibrotic
response
TNF-α IL-1
TGF-β IL-6
Inflammatory
response
Kupffer cell
Protein
adducts
injury from high fat or the protective effect of coffee, 
has been postulated to play a part in the development of 
the pathogenic process.
Chronic infection with hepatitis C (HCV) (Chap. 306) 
is an important comorbidity in the progression of alco­
holic liver disease to cirrhosis in chronic and excessive 
drinkers. Even moderate alcohol intake of 20–50 g/d 
increases the risk of cirrhosis and hepatocellular cancer 
in HCV-infected individuals. Patients with both alco­
holic liver injury and HCV infection develop decom­
pensated liver disease at a younger age and have poorer 
overall survival. Increased liver iron stores and, rarely, 
porphyria cutanea tarda can occur as a consequence of 
the overlapping injurious processes secondary to alcohol 
abuse and HCV infection. In addition, alcohol intake of 
>50 g/d by HCV-infected patients decreases the effi­
cacy of interferon-based antiviral therapy.
Our understanding of the pathogenesis of alcoholic 
liver injury is incomplete. Alcohol is a direct hepa­
totoxin, but ingestion of alcohol initiates a variety of 
metabolic responses that influence the final hepatotoxic 
response. The initial concept of malnutrition as the 
major pathogenic mechanism has been replaced by the 
understanding that the hepatic metabolism of alcohol 
initiates a pathogenic process including the production 
of toxic protein-aldehyde adducts, the generation of 
reducing equivalents that promotes lipogenesis, and the 
inhibition of fatty-acid oxidation. Endotoxins, oxida­
tive stress, immunologic activity, and pro-inflammatory 
cytokine release contribute to the resulting liver injury 
(Fig. 41-1). The complex interaction of intestinal and 
hepatic cells is crucial to alcohol-mediated liver injury. 
Tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α) and intestine-derived 
endotoxemia facilitate hepatocyte apoptosis and ­necrosis. 
Stellate cell activation and collagen production are key 
events in hepatic fibrogenesis. The resulting fibrosis 
determines the architectural derangement of the liver 
following chronic alcohol ingestion.
PATHOLOGY
The liver has a limited repertoire in response to injury. 
Fatty liver is the initial and most common histologic 
response to hepatotoxic stimuli, including excessive 
alcohol ingestion. The accumulation of fat within the 
perivenular hepatocytes coincides with the location of 
alcohol dehydrogenase, the major enzyme responsible 
for alcohol metabolism. Continuing alcohol ingestion 
results in fat accumulation throughout the entire hepatic 
lobule. Despite extensive fatty change and distortion of 
the hepatocytes with macrovesicular fat, the cessation 
of drinking results in normalization of hepatic archi­
tecture and fat content within the liver. Alcoholic fatty 
liver has traditionally been regarded as entirely benign, 
but similar to the spectrum of nonalcoholic fatty-liver 
­disease (Chap. 309), the appearance of steatohepatitis 
and certain pathologic features such as giant mitochon­
dria, perivenular fibrosis, and macrovesicular fat may be 
associated with progressive liver injury.
The transition between fatty liver and the develop­
ment of alcoholic hepatitis is blurred. The hallmark of 
alcoholic hepatitis is hepatocyte injury characterized by 
ballooning degeneration, spotty necrosis, polymorpho­
nuclear infiltrate, and fibrosis in the perivenular and 
perisinusoidal space of Disse. Mallory bodies are often 
present in florid cases but are neither specific nor neces­
sary to establishing the diagnosis. Alcoholic hepatitis is 
thought to be a precursor to the development of ­cirrhosis. 
However, like fatty liver, it is potentially reversible 
with cessation of drinking. Cirrhosis is present in up to 
50% of patients with biopsy-proven alcoholic hepatitis 
and its regression is uncertain, even with abstention.
CLINICAL FEATURES
The clinical manifestations of alcoholic fatty liver are 
subtle and characteristically detected as a consequence 
of the patient’s visit for a seemingly unrelated matter. 

CHAPTER 41
Alcoholic Liver Disease
427
TABLE 41-2
LABORATORY DIAGNOSIS OF ALCOHOLIC FATTY 
LIVER AND ALCOHOLIC HEPATITIS
TEST
COMMENT
AST
Increased two- to sevenfold, <400 U/L, 
greater than ALT
ALT
Increased two- to sevenfold, <400 U/L
AST/ALT
Usually >1
GGTP
Not specific to alcohol, easily inducible, 
elevated in all forms of fatty liver
Bilirubin
May be markedly increased in alcoholic 
hepatitis despite modest elevation in 
alkaline phosphatase
PMN
If >5500/μL, predicts severe alcoholic 
hepatitis when discriminant function >32
Note: AST, aspartate aminotransferase; ALT, alanine aminotransferase; 
GGTP, gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase; PMN, polymorphonuclear 
cells.
Previously unsuspected hepatomegaly is often the only 
clinical finding. Occasionally, patients with fatty liver will 
present with right upper quadrant discomfort, nausea, and, 
rarely, jaundice. Differentiation of alcoholic fatty liver 
from nonalcoholic fatty liver is difficult unless an accu­
rate drinking history is ascertained. In every instance 
where liver disease is present, a thoughtful and sensitive 
drinking history should be obtained. Standard, ­validated 
questions accurately detect alcohol-related problems 
(Chap. 392). Alcoholic hepatitis is associated with a 
wide gamut of clinical features. Fever, spider nevi, jaun­
dice, and abdominal pain simulating an acute abdomen 
represent the extreme end of the spectrum, while many 
patients will be entirely asymptomatic. Portal hyper­
tension, ascites, or variceal bleeding can occur in the 
absence of cirrhosis. Recognition of the clinical fea­
tures of alcoholic hepatitis is central to the initiation of 
an effective and appropriate diagnostic and therapeutic 
strategy. It is important to recognize that patients with 
alcoholic cirrhosis often exhibit clinical features identi­
cal to other causes of cirrhosis.
LABORATORY FEATURES
Patients with alcoholic liver disease are often identi­
fied through routine screening tests. The typical labo­
ratory abnormalities seen in fatty liver are nonspecific 
and include modest elevations of the aspartate amino­
transferase (AST), alanine aminotransferase (ALT), and 
γ-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGTP), accompanied by 
hypertriglyceridemia, hypercholesterolemia, and, occa­
sionally, hyperbilirubinemia. In alcoholic hepatitis and in 
contrast to other causes of fatty liver, the AST and ALT 
are usually elevated two- to sevenfold. They are rarely 
>400 IU, and the AST/ALT ratio >1 (Table 41-2). 
Hyperbilirubinemia is common and is accompanied 
by modest increases in the alkaline phosphatase level. 
Derangement in hepatocyte synthetic function indicates 
more serious disease. Hypoalbuminemia and coagulop­
athy are common in advanced liver injury. Ultrasono­
graphy is useful in detecting fatty infiltration of the liver 
and determining liver size. The demonstration by ultra­
sound of portal vein flow reversal, ascites, and intraab­
dominal collaterals indicates serious liver injury with less 
potential for complete reversal of liver disease.
PROGNOSIS
Critically ill patients with alcoholic hepatitis have short-
term (30-day) mortality rates >50%. Severe alcoholic 
hepatitis is heralded by coagulopathy (prothrombin 
time increased >5 s), anemia, serum albumin concentra­
tions <25 g/L (2.5 mg/dL), serum bilirubin levels >137 
μmol/L (8 mg/dL), renal failure, and ascites. A discrim­
inant function calculated as 4.6 X [the prolongation of 
the prothrombin time above control (seconds)] + serum 
bilirubin (mg/dL) can identify patients with a poor 
prognosis (discriminant function >32). A Model for 
End-Stage Liver Disease score (MELD, Chap. 310) ≥21 
also is associated with significant mortality in alcoholic 
hepatitis. The presence of ascites, variceal hemorrhage, 
deep encephalopathy, or hepatorenal syndrome predicts 
a dismal prognosis. The pathologic stage of the injury 
can be helpful in predicting prognosis. Liver biopsy 
should be performed whenever possible to confirm the 
diagnosis, to establish potential reversibility of the liver 
disease, and to guide the therapeutic decisions.
TREATMENT	
Alcoholic Liver Disease
Complete abstinence from alcohol is the cornerstone in 
the treatment of alcoholic liver disease. Improved sur­
vival and the potential for reversal of histologic injury 
regardless of the initial clinical presentation are associ­
ated with total avoidance of alcohol ingestion. Refer­
ral of patients to experienced alcohol counselors and/
or alcohol treatment programs should be routine in the 
management of patients with alcoholic liver disease. 
Attention should be directed to the nutritional and psy­
chosocial states during the evaluation and treatment 
periods. Because of data suggesting that the patho­
genic mechanisms in alcoholic hepatitis involve cytokine 
release and the perpetuation of injury by immuno­
logic processes, glucocorticoids have been extensively 
evaluated in the treatment of alcoholic hepatitis. 
Patients with severe alcoholic hepatitis, defined as a 
discriminant function >32 or MELD >20, should be given 
prednisone, 40 mg/d, or prednisolone, 32 mg/d, for 
SECTION VI
Disorders of the Liver and Biliary Tree
428
4 weeks, followed by a steroid taper (Fig. 41-2). Exclu­
sion criteria include active gastrointestinal bleeding, 
renal failure, or pancreatitis. Women with encephalopa­
thy from severe alcoholic hepatitis may be particularly 
good candidates for glucocorticoids. A Lille score >0.45, 
at http://www.lillemodel.com, uses pretreatment vari­
ables plus the change in total bilirubin at day seven of 
glucocorticoids to identify patients unresponsive to 
therapy.
The role of TNF-α expression and receptor activity in 
alcoholic liver injury has led to an examination of TNF 
inhibition as an alternative to glucocorticoids for severe 
alcoholic hepatitis. The nonspecific TNF inhibitor, pent­
oxifylline, demonstrated improved survival in the ther­
apy of severe alcoholic hepatitis (Fig. 41-3). Monoclonal 
FIGURE 41-2 
Effect of glucocorticoid therapy of severe alcoholic 
hepatitis on short-term survival: the result of a meta-anal­
ysis of individual data from three studies. Prednisolone, solid 
line; placebo, dotted line. (Adapted from Mathurin et al., with 
permission from Elsevier Science.)
Cumulative survival, %
100
75
50
25
0
0
7
14
Days
21
84.6  3.4%
p = .001
65.1  4.8%
28
FIGURE 41-3 
Treatment algorithm for alcoholic hepatitis. As identified 
by a calculated discriminant function >32 (see text), patients 
with severe alcoholic hepatitis, without the presence of gas­
trointestinal bleeding or infection, would be candidates for 
either glucocorticoids or pentoxifylline administration.
Alcoholic Hepatitis
Alcohol abstinence
Nutritional support
Treatment options
Preferred
Alternative
Discriminant function ≥ 32
or MELD ≥ 21
(with absence of co-morbidity)
Prednisolone 32 mg
p.o. daily for 4 weeks,
then taper for 4 weeks
Pentoxifylline 400 mg
p.o. TID for 4 weeks
­antibodies that neutralize serum TNF-α should not be 
used in alcoholic hepatitis because of recent studies 
reporting increased deaths secondary to infection and 
renal failure. Because of inordinate surgical mortality 
and the high rates of recidivism following transplanta­
tion, patients with alcoholic hepatitis are not candidates 
for immediate liver transplantation. The transplant can­
didacy of these patients should be reevaluated after a 
defined period of sobriety.
 Bruce R. Bacon 
429
 CIRRHOSIS AND ITS COMPLICATIONS 
 Chapter 42 
 Cirrhosis is a condition that is defi ned histopathologi-
cally and has a variety of clinical manifestations and 
complications, some of which can be life-threatening. 
In the past, it has been thought that cirrhosis was never 
reversible; however, it has become apparent that when 
the underlying insult that has caused the cirrhosis has 
been removed, there can be reversal of fi brosis. This is 
most apparent with the successful treatment of chronic 
hepatitis C; however, reversal of fi brosis is also seen in 
patients with hemochromatosis who have been success-
fully treated and in patients with alcoholic liver disease 
who have discontinued alcohol use. 
 Regardless of the cause of cirrhosis, the patho-
logic features consist of the development of fi brosis to 
the point that there is architectural distortion with the 
formation of regenerative nodules. This results in a 
decrease in hepatocellular mass, and thus function, and 
an alteration of blood fl ow. The induction of fi brosis 
occurs with activation of hepatic stellate cells, resulting 
in the formation of increased amounts of collagen and 
other components of the extracellular matrix. 
 Clinical features of cirrhosis are the result of patho-
logic changes and mirror the severity of the liver  disease. 
Most hepatic pathologists provide an assessment of grading 
and staging when evaluating liver biopsy samples. These 
grading and staging schemes vary between disease states 
and have been developed for most conditions, includ-
ing chronic viral hepatitis,  nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, 
and primary biliary cirrhosis. Advanced fi brosis usually 
includes bridging fi brosis with nodularity designated 
as stage 3 and cirrhosis designated as stage 4. Patients 
who have cirrhosis have varying degrees of compen-
sated liver function, and clinicians need to differentiate 
between those who have stable, compensated cirrhosis 
and those who have decompensated cirrhosis. Patients 
who have developed complications of their liver disease 
and have become decompensated should be considered 
for liver transplantation. Many of the complications of 
cirrhosis will require specifi c therapy.  Portal hypertension
is a signifi cant complicating feature of decompensated 
 cirrhosis and is responsible for the development of asci-
tes and bleeding from esophagogastric varices, two com-
plications that signify decompensated cirrhosis. Loss of 
hepatocellular function results in jaundice, coagulation 
disorders, and hypoalbuminemia and contributes to the 
causes of portosystemic encephalopathy. The complica-
tions of cirrhosis are basically the same regardless of the 
etiology. Nonetheless, it is useful to classify patients by 
the cause of their liver disease  ( Table 42-1 ) ; patients 
can be divided into broad groups with alcoholic cirrho-
sis, cirrhosis due to chronic viral hepatitis, biliary cir-
rhosis, and other, less-common causes such as cardiac 
 cirrhosis, cryptogenic cirrhosis, and other miscellaneous 
causes. 
 alCoholiC Cirrhosis 
 Excessive chronic alcohol use can cause several differ-
ent types of chronic liver disease, including alcoholic 
fatty liver, alcoholic hepatitis, and alcoholic cirrhosis. 
Table 42-1 
 CauSeS of CirrhoSiS 
 Alcoholism 
 Chronic viral hepatitis 
 Hepatitis B 
 Hepatitis C 
 Autoimmune hepatitis 
 Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis 
 Biliary cirrhosis 
 Primary biliary cirrhosis 
 Primary sclerosing 
 cholangitis 
 Autoimmune 
 cholangiopathy 
 Cardiac cirrhosis 
 Inherited metabolic liver 
disease 
 Hemochromatosis 
 Wilson’s disease 
α 1 Antitrypsin defi ciency 
 Cystic fi brosis 
 Cryptogenic cirrhosis 
SECTION VI
Disorders of the Liver and Biliary Tree
430
Furthermore, use of excessive alcohol can contribute to 
liver damage in patients with other liver diseases, such 
as hepatitis C, hemochromatosis, and those patients 
who have fatty liver disease related to obesity. Chronic 
alcohol use can produce fibrosis in the absence of 
accompanying inflammation and/or necrosis. Fibrosis 
can be centrilobular, pericellular, or periportal. When 
fibrosis reaches a certain degree, there is disruption of 
the normal liver architecture and replacement of liver 
cells by regenerative nodules. In alcoholic cirrhosis, 
the nodules are usually <3 mm in diameter; this form 
of cirrhosis is referred to as micronodular. With cessation 
of alcohol use, larger nodules may form, resulting in a 
mixed micronodular and macronodular cirrhosis.
Pathogenesis
Alcohol is the most commonly used drug in the United 
States, and more than two-thirds of adults drink alco-
hol each year. Thirty percent have had a binge within 
the past month, and over 7% of adults regularly con-
sume more than two drinks per day. Unfortunately, 
more than 14 million adults in the United States meet 
the diagnostic criteria for alcohol abuse or dependence. 
In the United States, chronic liver disease is the tenth 
most common cause of death in adults, and alcoholic 
cirrhosis accounts for approximately 40% of deaths due 
to cirrhosis.
Ethanol is mainly absorbed by the small intestine and, 
to a lesser degree, through the stomach. Gastric alcohol 
dehydrogenase (ADH) initiates alcohol metabolism.­ 
Three enzyme systems account for metabolism of 
­alcohol in the liver. These include cytosolic ADH, the 
microsomal ethanol oxidizing system (MEOS), and 
peroxisomal catalase. The majority of ethanol oxida-
tion occurs via ADH to form acetaldehyde, which is a 
highly reactive molecule that may have multiple effects. 
Ultimately, acetaldehyde is metabolized to acetate by 
aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH). Intake of ethanol 
increases intracellular accumulation of triglycerides by 
increasing fatty acid uptake and by reducing fatty acid 
oxidation and lipoprotein secretion. Protein synthesis, 
glycosylation, and secretion are impaired. Oxidative 
damage to hepatocyte membranes occurs due to the 
formation of reactive oxygen species; acetaldehyde is a 
highly reactive molecule that combines with proteins 
to form protein-acetaldehyde adducts. These adducts 
may interfere with specific enzyme activities, including 
microtubular formation and hepatic protein trafficking. 
With acetaldehyde-mediated hepatocyte damage, cer-
tain reactive oxygen species can result in Kupffer cell 
activation. As a result, profibrogenic cytokines are pro-
duced that initiate and perpetuate stellate cell activation, 
with the resultant production of excess collagen and 
extracellular matrix. Connective tissue appears in both 
periportal and pericentral zones and eventually connects 
portal triads with central veins forming regenerative 
nodules. Hepatocyte loss occurs, and with increased 
collagen production and deposition, together with con-
tinuing hepatocyte destruction, the liver contracts and 
shrinks in size. This process generally takes from years 
to decades to occur and requires repeated insults.
Clinical features
The diagnosis of alcoholic liver disease requires an 
accurate history regarding both amount and duration 
of alcohol consumption. Patients with alcoholic liver 
disease can present with nonspecific symptoms such 
as vague right upper quadrant pain, fever, nausea and 
vomiting, diarrhea, anorexia, and malaise. Alternatively, 
they may present with more specific complications of 
chronic liver disease, including ascites, edema, or upper 
gastrointestinal (GI) hemorrhage. Many cases present 
incidentally at the time of autopsy or elective surgery. 
Other clinical manifestations include the development 
of jaundice or encephalopathy. The abrupt onset of any 
of these complications may be the first event prompt-
ing the patient to seek medical attention. Other patients 
may be identified in the course of an evaluation of rou-
tine laboratory studies that are found to be abnormal. 
On physical examination, the liver and spleen may be 
enlarged, with the liver edge being firm and nodular. 
Other frequent findings include scleral icterus, palmar 
erythema (Fig. 42-1), spider angiomas (Fig. 42-2), 
parotid gland enlargement, digital clubbing, muscle 
wasting, or the development of edema and ascites. Men 
may have decreased body hair and gynecomastia as well 
as testicular atrophy, which may be a consequence of 
hormonal abnormalities or a direct toxic effect of alco-
hol on the testes. In women with advanced alcoholic 
cirrhosis, menstrual irregularities usually occur, and 
Figure 42-1 
Palmar erythema. This figure shows palmar erythema in a 
patient with alcoholic cirrhosis. The erythema is peripheral 
over the palm with central pallor.
 
CHAPTER 42
Cirrhosis and Its Complications
431
Figure 42-2 
Spider angioma. This figure shows a spider angioma in 
a patient with hepatitis C cirrhosis. With release of central 
compression, the arteriole fills from the center and spreads 
out peripherally.
some women may be amenorrheic. These changes are 
often reversible following cessation of alcohol.
Laboratory tests may be completely normal in patients 
with early compensated alcoholic cirrhosis. Alternatively, 
in advanced liver disease, many abnormalities usually 
are present. Patients may be anemic either from chronic 
GI blood loss, nutritional deficiencies, or hypersplenism 
related to portal hypertension, or as a direct suppressive 
effect of alcohol on the bone marrow. A unique form 
of hemolytic anemia (with spur cells and acanthocytes) 
called Zieve’s syndrome can occur in patients with severe 
alcoholic hepatitis. Platelet counts are often reduced 
early in the disease, reflective of portal hypertension 
with hypersplenism. Serum total bilirubin can be normal 
or elevated with advanced disease. Direct bilirubin is fre-
quently mildly elevated in patients with a normal total 
bilirubin, but the abnormality typically progresses as the 
disease worsens. Prothrombin times are often prolonged 
and usually do not respond to administration of paren-
teral vitamin K. Serum sodium levels are usually normal 
unless patients have ascites and then can be depressed, 
largely due to ingestion of excess free water. Serum 
­alanine and aspartate aminotransferases (ALT, AST) are 
typically elevated, particularly in patients who continue 
to drink, with AST levels being higher than ALT levels, 
usually by a 2:1 ratio.
Diagnosis
Patients who have any of the above-mentioned clinical­ 
features, physical examination findings, or labora-
tory studies should be considered to have alcoholic 
liver disease.­ The diagnosis, however, requires accu-
rate knowledge that the patient is continuing to use 
and abuse alcohol. Furthermore, other forms of chronic 
liver disease (e.g., chronic viral hepatitis or metabolic or 
autoimmune liver diseases) must be considered or ruled 
out or, if present, an estimate of relative causality along 
with the alcohol use should be determined. Liver biopsy 
can be helpful to confirm a diagnosis, but generally 
when patients present with alcoholic hepatitis and are 
still drinking, liver biopsy is withheld until abstinence 
has been maintained for at least 6 months to determine 
residual, nonreversible disease.
In patients who have had complications of ­cirrhosis 
and who continue to drink, there is a <50% 5-year 
survival. In contrast, in those patients who are able to 
remain abstinent, the prognosis is significantly improved. 
In patients with advanced liver disease, the prognosis 
remains poor; however, in those individuals who are 
able to remain abstinent, liver transplantation is a viable 
option.
Treatment	
Alcoholic Cirrhosis
Abstinence is the cornerstone of therapy for patients 
with alcoholic liver disease. In addition, patients require 
good nutrition and long-term medical supervision to 
manage underlying complications that may develop. 
Complications such as the development of ascites 
and edema, variceal hemorrhage, or portosystemic 
encephalopathy all require specific management and 
treatment. Glucocorticoids are occasionally used in 
patients with severe alcoholic hepatitis in the absence 
of infection. Survival has been shown to improve in 
certain studies. Treatment is restricted to patients with 
a ­discriminant function (DF) value of >32. The DF is cal-
culated as the serum total bilirubin plus the difference 
in the patient’s prothrombin time compared to control 
(in seconds) multiplied by 4.6. In patients for whom this 
value is >32, there is improved survival at 28 days with 
the use of glucocorticoids.
Other therapies that have been used include oral 
pentoxifylline, which decreases the production of tumor 
necrosis factor α (TNF-α) and other proinflammatory 
cytokines. In contrast to glucocorticoids, with which 
complications can occur, pentoxifylline is relatively easy 
to administer and has few if any side effects. A variety of 
nutritional therapies have been tried with either paren-
teral or enteral feedings; however, it is unclear whether 
any of these modalities have significantly improved 
­survival.
Recent studies have used parenterally administered 
inhibitors of TNF-α such as infliximab or etanercept. 
Early results have shown no adverse events; how-
ever, there was no clear-cut improvement in survival. 
­Anabolic steroids, propylthiouracil, antioxidants, colchi-
cine, and penicillamine have all been used but do not 
show clear-cut benefits and are not recommended.
SECTION VI
Disorders of the Liver and Biliary Tree
432
As mentioned above, the cornerstone to treatment is 
cessation of alcohol use. Recent experience with medi-
cations that reduce craving for alcohol such as acam-
prosate calcium has been favorable. Patients may take 
other necessary medications even in the presence of 
cirrhosis. Acetaminophen use is often discouraged in 
patients with liver disease; however, if no more than 2 g 
of acetaminophen per day are consumed, there gener-
ally are no problems.
Cirrhosis Due to Chronic Viral 
Hepatitis B or C
Of patients exposed to the hepatitis C virus 
(HCV), approximately 80% develop chronic hep-
atitis C, and of those, about 20–30% will develop 
cirrhosis over 20–30 years. Many of these patients have 
had concomitant alcohol use, and the true incidence of 
cirrhosis due to hepatitis C alone is unknown. Nonethe-
less, this represents a significant number of patients. It is 
expected that an even higher percentage will go on to 
develop cirrhosis over longer periods of time. In the 
United States, approximately 5 million people have been 
exposed to the hepatitis C virus, with about 3.5 to 
4 million­ who are chronically viremic. Worldwide, about 
170 million individuals have hepatitis C, with some areas 
of the world (e.g., Egypt) having up to 15% of the popu-
lation infected. HCV is a noncytopathic virus, and liver 
damage is probably immune-mediated. Progression of 
liver disease due to chronic hepatitis C is characterized by 
portal-based fibrosis with bridging fibrosis and nodularity 
developing, ultimately culminating in the development 
of cirrhosis. In cirrhosis due to chronic hepatitis C, the 
liver is small and shrunken with characteristic features of a 
mixed micro- and macronodular cirrhosis seen on liver 
biopsy. In addition to the increased fibrosis that is seen in 
cirrhosis due to hepatitis C, an inflammatory infiltrate is 
found in portal areas with interface hepatitis and occa-
sionally some lobular hepatocellular injury and inflamma-
tion. In patients with HCV genotype 3, steatosis is often 
present.
Similar findings are seen in patients with cirrho-
sis due to chronic hepatitis B. Of adult patients 
exposed to hepatitis B, about 5% develop 
chronic hepatitis B, and about 20% of those patients will 
go on to develop cirrhosis. Special stains for hepatitis B 
core (HBc) and hepatitis B surface (HBs) antigen will be 
positive, and ground-glass hepatocytes signifying hepati-
tis B surface antigen (HBsAg) may be present. In the 
United States, there are about 2 million carriers of 
­hepatitis B, whereas in other parts of the world where 
hepatitis B virus (HBV) is endemic (i.e., Asia, Southeast 
Asia, sub-Saharan Africa), up to 15% of the population 
may be infected having acquired the infection vertically 
at the time of birth. Thus, over 300–400 million indi-
viduals are thought to have hepatitis B worldwide. 
Approximately 25% of these individuals may ultimately 
develop cirrhosis.
Clinical features and diagnosis
Patients with cirrhosis due to either chronic hepatitis C 
or B can present with the usual symptoms and signs of 
chronic liver disease. Fatigue, malaise, vague right upper 
quadrant pain, and laboratory abnormalities are frequent 
presenting features. Diagnosis requires a thorough labora-
tory evaluation, including quantitative HCV RNA ­testing 
and analysis for HCV genotype, or hepatitis B serologies to 
include HBsAg, anti-HBs, HBeAg (hepatitis B e antigen), 
anti-HBe, and quantitative HBV DNA levels.
Treatment	
Cirrhosis Due to Chronic Viral Hepatitis B 
or C
Management of complications of cirrhosis revolves around 
specific therapy for treatment of whatever complications 
occur, whether they be esophageal variceal hemorrhage, 
development of ascites and edema, or encephalopathy. 
In patients with chronic hepatitis B, numerous studies 
have shown beneficial effects of antiviral therapy, which 
is effective at viral suppression, as evidenced by reducing 
aminotransferase levels and HBV DNA levels, and improv-
ing histology by reducing inflammation and fibrosis. Sev-
eral clinical trials and case series have demonstrated that 
patients with decompensated liver disease can become 
compensated with the use of antiviral therapy directed 
against hepatitis B. Currently available therapy includes 
lamivudine, adefovir, telbivudine, entecavir, and tenofovir. 
Interferon α can also be used for treating hepatitis B, but it 
should not be used in cirrhotics.
Treatment of patients with cirrhosis due to hepati-
tis C is a little more difficult because the side effects of 
pegylated interferon and ribavirin therapy are often-
times difficult to manage. Dose-limiting cytopenias 
(platelets, white blood cells, red blood cells) or severe 
side effects can result in discontinuation of treatment. 
Nonetheless, if patients can tolerate treatment, and if it 
is successful, the benefit is great and disease progres-
sion is reduced.
Cirrhosis from Autoimmune 
Hepatitis and Nonalcoholic  
Fatty Liver Disease
Other causes of posthepatitic cirrhosis include autoim-
mune hepatitis and cirrhosis due to nonalcoholic steato-
hepatitis. Many patients with autoimmune hepatitis (AIH) 
present with cirrhosis that is already established. Typically, 
 
CHAPTER 42
Cirrhosis and Its Complications
433
these patients will not benefit from immunosuppressive 
therapy with glucocorticoids or azathioprine because the 
AIH is “burned out.” In this situation, liver biopsy does 
not show a significant inflammatory infiltrate. Diagnosis­ 
in this setting requires positive autoimmune markers such 
as antinuclear antibody (ANA) or anti-smooth-muscle­ 
antibody (ASMA). When patients with AIH present 
with cirrhosis and active inflammation accompanied by 
elevated liver enzymes, there can be considerable benefit 
from the use of immunosuppressive therapy.
Patients with nonalcoholic steatohepatitis are increas-
ingly being found to have progressed to cirrhosis. With 
the epidemic of obesity that continues in Western 
countries, more and more patients are identified with 
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Of these, a significant 
subset have nonalcoholic steatohepatitis and can prog-
ress to increased fibrosis and cirrhosis. Over the past 
several years, it has been increasingly recognized that 
many patients who were thought to have cryptogenic 
cirrhosis in fact have nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. As 
their cirrhosis progresses, they become catabolic and 
then lose the telltale signs of steatosis seen on biopsy. 
Management of complications of cirrhosis due to either 
AIH or nonalcoholic steatohepatitis is similar to that for 
other forms of cirrhosis.
Biliary Cirrhosis
Biliary cirrhosis has pathologic features that are different 
from either alcoholic cirrhosis or posthepatitic cirrhosis, 
yet the manifestations of end-stage liver disease are the 
same. Cholestatic liver disease may result from necro-
inflammatory lesions, congenital or metabolic processes, 
or external bile duct compression. Thus, two broad 
categories reflect the anatomic sites of abnormal bile 
retention: intrahepatic and extrahepatic. The distinction is 
important for obvious therapeutic reasons. Extrahepatic 
obstruction may benefit from surgical or endoscopic 
biliary tract decompression, whereas intrahepatic choles-
tatic processes will not improve with such interventions 
and require a different approach.
The major causes of chronic cholestatic syndromes 
are primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC), autoimmune chol-
angitis (AIC), primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC), and 
idiopathic adulthood ductopenia. These syndromes are 
usually clinically distinguished from each other by anti-
body testing, cholangiographic findings, and clinical 
presentation. However, they all share the histopatho-
logic features of chronic cholestasis, such as cholate 
­stasis; copper deposition; xanthomatous transformation 
of hepatocytes; and irregular, so-called biliary fibrosis.­ 
In addition, there may be chronic portal inflammation, 
interface activity, and chronic lobular inflammation.­ 
Ductopenia is a result of this progressive disease as 
patients develop cirrhosis.
Primary Biliary Cirrhosis
PBC is seen in about 100–200 individuals per million, 
with a strong female preponderance and a median age 
of around 50 years at the time of diagnosis. The cause 
of PBC is unknown; it is characterized by portal inflam-
mation and necrosis of cholangiocytes in small- and 
medium-sized bile ducts. Cholestatic features prevail, 
and biliary cirrhosis is characterized by an elevated 
­bilirubin level and progressive liver failure. Liver trans-
plantation is the treatment of choice for patients with 
decompensated cirrhosis due to PBC. A variety of ther-
apies have been proposed, but ursodeoxycholic acid 
(UDCA) is the only approved treatment that has some 
degree of efficacy by slowing the rate of progression of 
the disease.
Antimitochondrial antibodies (AMA) are present in 
about 90% of patients with PBC. These autoantibodies 
recognize intermitochondrial membrane proteins that are 
enzymes of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDC), 
the branched-chain 2-oxoacid dehydrogenase complex, 
and the 2-oxogluterate dehydrogenase complex. Most 
relate to pyruvate dehydrogenase. These autoantibodies­ 
are not pathogenic but rather are useful markers for 
making a diagnosis of PBC.
Pathology
Histopathologic analyses of liver biopsies of patients 
with PBC have resulted in identifying four distinct 
stages of the disease as it progresses. The earliest lesion 
is termed chronic nonsuppurative destructive cholangitis and is 
a necrotizing inflammatory process of the portal tracts. 
Medium and small bile ducts are infiltrated with lym-
phocytes and undergo duct destruction. Mild fibrosis 
and sometimes bile stasis can occur. With progression, 
the inflammatory infiltrate becomes less prominent, but 
the number of bile ducts is reduced and there is prolif-
eration of smaller bile ductules. Increased fibrosis ensues 
with the expansion of periportal fibrosis to bridging 
fibrosis. Finally, cirrhosis, which may be micronodular 
or macronodular, develops.
Clinical features
Currently, most patients with PBC are diagnosed well 
before the end-stage manifestations of the disease are 
present, and, as such, most patients are actually asymp-
tomatic. When symptoms are present, they most promi-
nently include a significant degree of fatigue out of 
proportion to what would be expected for either the 
severity of the liver disease or the age of the patient. 
Pruritus is seen in approximately 50% of patients at the 
time of diagnosis, and it can be debilitating. It might 
be intermittent and usually is most bothersome in the 
evening. In some patients, pruritus can develop toward 
SECTION VI
Disorders of the Liver and Biliary Tree
434
the end of pregnancy, and there are examples of patients 
having been diagnosed with cholestasis of pregnancy 
rather than PBC. Pruritus that presents prior to the 
development of jaundice indicates severe disease and a 
poor prognosis.
Physical examination can show jaundice and other 
complications of chronic liver disease, including hepa-
tomegaly, splenomegaly, ascites, and edema. Other 
­features that are unique to PBC include hyperpigmenta-
tion, xanthelasma, and xanthomata, which are related to 
the altered cholesterol metabolism seen in this ­disease. 
Hyperpigmentation is evident on the trunk and the 
arms and is seen in areas of exfoliation and lichenifica-
tion associated with progressive scratching related to the 
pruritus. Bone pain resulting from osteopenia or osteo-
porosis is occasionally seen at the time of diagnosis.
Laboratory findings
Laboratory findings in PBC show cholestatic liver 
enzyme abnormalities with an elevation in γ-glutamyl 
transpeptidase and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) along 
with mild elevations in aminotransferases (ALT and 
AST). Immunoglobulins, particularly IgM, are typically 
increased. Hyperbilirubinemia usually is seen once cir-
rhosis has developed. Thrombocytopenia, leukopenia, 
and anemia may be seen in patients with portal hyperten-
sion and hypersplenism. Liver biopsy shows characteristic 
features as described above and should be evident to any 
experienced hepatopathologist. Up to 10% of patients 
with characteristic PBC will have features of AIH as 
well and are defined as having “overlap” syndrome. 
These patients are treated as PBC patients and may prog-
ress to cirrhosis with the same frequency as typical PBC 
patients.
Diagnosis
PBC should be considered in patients with chronic 
cholestatic liver enzyme abnormalities. It is most often 
seen in middle-aged women. AMA testing may be 
negative, and it should be remembered that as many as 
10% of patients with PBC may be AMA-negative. Liver 
biopsy is most important in this setting of AMA-negative 
PBC. In patients who are AMA-negative with choles-
tatic liver enzymes, PSC should be ruled out by way of 
cholangiography.
Treatment	
Primary Biliary Cirrhosis
Treatment of the typical manifestations of cirrhosis are 
no different for PBC than for other forms of cirrhosis. 
UDCA has been shown to improve both biochemical 
and histologic features of the disease. Improvement 
is greatest when therapy is initiated early; the likeli-
hood of significant improvement with UDCA is low in 
patients with PBC who present with manifestations of 
cirrhosis. UDCA is given in doses of 13–15 mg/kg per 
day; the medication is usually well-tolerated, although 
some patients have worsening pruritus with initiation 
of  therapy. A small proportion of patients may have 
diarrhea or headache as a side effect of the drug. UDCA 
has been shown to slow the rate of progression of PBC, 
but it does not reverse or cure the disease. Patients with 
PBC require long-term follow-up by a physician expe-
rienced with the disease. Certain patients may need to 
be considered for liver transplantation should their liver 
disease decompensate.
The main symptoms of PBC are fatigue and pruritus, 
and symptom management is important. Several thera-
pies have been tried for treatment of fatigue, but none 
of them have been successful; frequent naps should 
be encouraged. Pruritus is treated with antihistamines, 
­narcotic receptor antagonists (naltrexone), and rifampin. 
Cholestyramine, a bile salt–sequestering agent, has 
been helpful in some patients but is somewhat tedious 
and difficult to take. Plasmapheresis has been used  
rarely in patients with severe intractable pruritus. There 
is an increased incidence of osteopenia and osteoporosis­ 
in patients with cholestatic liver disease, and bone 
density testing should be performed. Treatment with 
a bisphosphonate should be instituted when bone 
­disease is identified.
Primary Sclerosing Cholangitis
As in PBC, the cause of PSC remains unknown. PSC 
is a chronic cholestatic syndrome that is character-
ized by diffuse inflammation and fibrosis involving the 
entire biliary tree, resulting in chronic cholestasis. This 
pathologic process ultimately results in obliteration of 
both the intra- and extrahepatic biliary tree, leading to 
­biliary cirrhosis, portal hypertension, and liver failure. 
The cause of PSC remains unknown despite extensive 
investigation into various mechanisms related to bacte-
rial and viral infections, toxins, genetic predisposition, 
and immunologic mechanisms, all of which have been 
postulated to contribute to the pathogenesis and pro-
gression of this syndrome.
Pathologic changes that can occur in PSC show bile 
duct proliferation as well as ductopenia and fibrous 
cholangitis (pericholangitis). Often, liver biopsy changes 
in PSC are not pathognomonic, and establishing the 
diagnosis of PSC must involve imaging of the biliary 
tree. Periductal fibrosis is occasionally seen on biopsy 
specimens and can be quite helpful in making the diag-
nosis. As the disease progresses, biliary cirrhosis is the 
final, end-stage manifestation of PSC.
 
CHAPTER 42
Cirrhosis and Its Complications
435
Clinical features
The usual clinical features of PSC are those found in 
cholestatic liver disease, with fatigue, pruritus, steator-
rhea, deficiencies of fat-soluble vitamins, and the associ-
ated consequences. As in PBC, the fatigue is profound 
and nonspecific. Pruritus can often be debilitating and 
is related to the cholestasis. The severity of pruritus does 
not correlate with the severity of the disease. Metabolic 
bone disease, as seen in PBC, can occur with PSC and 
should be treated (see above).
Laboratory findings
Patients with PSC typically are identified in the course 
of an evaluation of abnormal liver enzymes. Most 
patients have at least a twofold increase in ALP and 
may have elevated aminotransferases as well. Albumin 
levels may be decreased, and prothrombin times are 
prolonged in a substantial proportion of patients at the 
time of diagnosis. Some degree of correction of a pro-
longed prothrombin time may occur with parenteral 
vitamin K. A small subset of patients have aminotrans-
ferase elevations greater than five times the upper limit 
of normal and may have features of AIH on biopsy. 
These individuals are thought to have an overlap syn-
drome between PSC and AIH. Autoantibodies are fre-
quently positive in patients with the overlap syndrome 
but are typically negative in patients who only have 
PSC. One autoantibody, the perinuclear antineutrophil 
cytoplasmic antibody (p-ANCA), is positive in about 
65% of patients with PSC. Over 50% of patients with 
PSC also have ulcerative colitis (UC); accordingly, once 
a diagnosis of PSC is established, colonoscopy should be 
performed to look for evidence of UC.
Diagnosis
The definitive diagnosis of PSC requires cholangio-
graphic imaging. Over the last several years, MRI with 
magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) 
has been used as the imaging technique of choice for 
initial evaluation. Once patients are screened in this 
manner, some investigators feel that endoscopic retro-
grade cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) should also 
be performed to be certain whether or not a dominant 
stricture is present. Typical cholangiographic findings 
in PSC are multifocal stricturing and beading involv-
ing both the intrahepatic and extrahepatic biliary tree. 
However, though involvement may be of the intrahe-
patic bile ducts alone or of the extrahepatic bile ducts 
alone, more commonly, both are involved. These stric-
tures are typically short and with intervening segments 
of normal or slightly dilated bile ducts that are distrib-
uted diffusely, producing the classic beaded appear-
ance. The gallbladder and cystic duct can be involved 
in up to 15% of cases. Patients with high-grade, diffuse 
stricturing of the intrahepatic bile ducts have an over-
all poor prognosis. Gradually, biliary cirrhosis develops, 
and patients will progress to decompensated liver disease 
with all the manifestations of ascites, esophageal variceal 
hemorrhage, and encephalopathy.
Treatment	
Primary Sclerosing Cholangitis
There is no specific proven treatment for PSC, although 
studies are currently ongoing using high-dose (20 mg/kg  
per day) UDCA to determine its benefit. Endoscopic 
dilatation of dominant strictures can be helpful, but the 
ultimate treatment is liver transplantation. A dreaded 
complication of PSC is the development of cholangio-
carcinoma, which is a relative contraindication to liver 
transplantation. Symptoms of pruritus are common, and 
the approach is as mentioned previously for this prob-
lem in patients with PBC (see above).
Cardiac Cirrhosis
Definition
Patients with long-standing right-sided congestive heart 
failure may develop chronic liver injury and cardiac 
­cirrhosis. This is an increasingly uncommon, if not rare, 
cause of chronic liver disease given the advances made 
in the care of patients with heart failure.
Etiology and pathology
In the case of long-term right-sided heart failure, there 
is an elevated venous pressure transmitted via the infe-
rior vena cava and hepatic veins to the sinusoids of the 
liver, which become dilated and engorged with blood. 
The liver becomes enlarged and swollen, and with 
long-term passive congestion and relative ischemia 
due to poor circulation, centrilobular hepatocytes can 
become necrotic, leading to pericentral fibrosis. This 
fibrotic pattern can extend to the periphery of the lob-
ule outward until a unique pattern of fibrosis causing 
cirrhosis can occur.
Clinical features
Patients typically have signs of congestive heart fail-
ure and will manifest an enlarged firm liver on physical­ 
examination. ALP levels are characteristically ele-
vated, and aminotransferases may be normal or slightly 
increased with AST usually higher than ALT. It is 
unlikely that patients will develop variceal hemorrhage 
or encephalopathy.
SECTION VI
Disorders of the Liver and Biliary Tree
436
Diagnosis
The diagnosis is usually made in someone with clear-
cut cardiac disease who has an elevated ALP and an 
enlarged liver. Liver biopsy shows a pattern of fibro-
sis that can be recognized by an experienced hepato-
pathologist. Differentiation from Budd-Chiari syndrome 
(BCS) can be made by seeing extravasation of red blood 
cells in BCS, but not in cardiac hepatopathy. Venooc-
clusive disease can also affect hepatic outflow and has 
characteristic features on liver biopsy. Venoocclusive 
disease can be seen under the circumstances of condi-
tioning for bone marrow transplant with radiation and 
chemotherapy; it can also be seen with the ingestion of 
certain herbal teas as well as pyrrolizidine alkaloids. This 
is typically seen in Caribbean countries and rarely in the 
United States. Treatment is based on management of 
the underlying cardiac disease.
Other Types of Cirrhosis
There are several other less-common causes of chronic 
liver disease that can progress to cirrhosis. These include 
inherited metabolic liver diseases such as hemochroma-
tosis, Wilson’s disease, α1 antitrypsin (α1AT) deficiency, 
and cystic fibrosis. For all of these disorders, the mani-
festations of cirrhosis are similar, with some minor vari-
ations, to those seen in other patients with other causes 
of cirrhosis.
Hemochromatosis is an inherited disorder of iron 
metabolism that results in a progressive increase in 
hepatic iron deposition, which, over time, can lead to 
a portal-based fibrosis progressing to cirrhosis, liver fail-
ure, and hepatocellular cancer. While the frequency of 
hemochromatosis is relatively common, with genetic 
susceptibility occurring in 1 in 250 individuals, the fre-
quency of end-stage manifestations due to the disease 
is relatively low, and fewer than 5% of those patients 
who are genotypically susceptible will go on to develop 
severe liver disease from hemochromatosis. Diagnosis 
is made with serum iron studies showing an elevated 
transferrin saturation and an elevated ferritin level, along 
with abnormalities identified by HFE mutation analysis. 
Treatment is straightforward, with regular therapeutic 
phlebotomy.
Wilson’s disease is an inherited disorder of copper 
homeostasis with failure to excrete excess amounts of 
copper, leading to an accumulation in the liver. This 
disorder is relatively uncommon, affecting 1 in 30,000 
individuals. Wilson’s disease typically affects adolescents 
and young adults. Prompt diagnosis before end-stage 
manifestations become irreversible can lead to signifi-
cant clinical improvement. Diagnosis requires determi-
nation of ceruloplasmin levels, which are low; 24-hour 
urine copper levels, which are elevated; typical physical 
Table 42-2 
Complications of Cirrhosis
Portal hypertension
Gastroesophageal varices
Portal hypertensive gastropathy
Splenomegaly, hypersplenism
Ascites
Spontaneous bacterial 
­peritonitis
Hepatorenal syndrome
Type 1
Type 2
Hepatic encephalopathy
Hepatopulmonary syndrome
Portopulmonary hypertension
Malnutrition
Coagulopathy
Factor deficiency
Fibrinolysis
Thrombocytopenia
Bone disease
Osteopenia
Osteoporosis
Osteomalacia
Hematologic 
­abnormalities
Anemia
Hemolysis
Thrombocytopenia
Neutropenia
examination findings, including Kayser-Fleischer cor-
neal rings, and characteristic liver biopsy findings. 
Treatment consists of copper-chelating medications.
α1AT deficiency results from an inherited disorder that 
causes abnormal folding of the α1AT protein, resulting 
in failure of secretion of that protein from the liver. It is 
unknown how the retained protein leads to liver disease. 
Patients with α1AT deficiency at greatest risk for devel-
oping chronic liver disease have the ZZ phenotype, but 
only about 10–20% of such individuals will develop 
chronic liver disease. Diagnosis is made by determin-
ing α1AT levels and phenotype. Characteristic periodic 
acid–Schiff (PAS)-positive, diastase-resistant globules 
are seen on liver biopsy. The only effective treatment is 
liver transplantation, which is curative.
Cystic fibrosis is an uncommon inherited disorder 
affecting Caucasians of Northern European descent. 
A biliary-type cirrhosis can occur, and some patients 
derive benefit from the chronic use of UDCA.
Major Complications 
of Cirrhosis
The clinical course of patients with advanced cirrhosis 
is often complicated by a number of important sequelae 
that can occur regardless of the underlying cause of the 
liver disease. These include portal hypertension and its 
consequences of gastroesophageal variceal hemorrhage, 
splenomegaly, ascites, hepatic encephalopathy, sponta-
neous bacterial peritonitis (SBP), hepatorenal syndrome, 
and hepatocellular carcinoma (Table 42-2).
Portal Hypertension
Portal hypertension is defined as the elevation of the 
hepatic venous pressure gradient (HVPG) to >5 mmHg. 
Portal hypertension is caused by a combination of 
 
CHAPTER 42
Cirrhosis and Its Complications
437
two simultaneously occurring hemodynamic processes: 
(1) increased intrahepatic resistance to the passage of 
blood flow through the liver due to cirrhosis and regen-
erative nodules, and (2) increased splanchnic blood flow 
secondary to vasodilation within the splanchnic vascular 
bed. Portal hypertension is directly responsible for the 
two major complications of cirrhosis: variceal hemor-
rhage and ascites. Variceal hemorrhage is an immediate 
life-threatening problem with a 20–30% mortality rate 
associated with each episode of bleeding. The portal 
venous system normally drains blood from the ­stomach, 
intestines, spleen, pancreas, and gallbladder, and the 
portal vein is formed by the confluence of the superior 
mesenteric and splenic veins. Deoxygenated blood from 
the small bowel drains into the superior mesenteric 
vein along with blood from the head of the pancreas, 
the ascending colon, and part of the transverse colon. 
Conversely, the splenic vein drains the spleen and the 
pancreas and is joined by the inferior mesenteric vein, 
which brings blood from the transverse and descend-
ing colon as well as from the superior two-thirds of the 
rectum. Thus, the portal vein normally receives blood 
from almost the entire GI tract.
The causes of portal hypertension are usually sub-
categorized as prehepatic, intrahepatic, and posthepatic 
(Table 42-3). Prehepatic causes of portal hypertension 
are those affecting the portal venous system before it 
enters the liver; they include portal vein thrombosis and 
splenic vein thrombosis. Posthepatic causes encompass 
those affecting the hepatic veins and venous drainage 
to the heart; they include BCS, venoocclusive disease, 
and chronic right-sided cardiac congestion. Intrahepatic 
Table 42-3 
Classification of Portal Hypertension
Prehepatic
Portal vein thrombosis
Splenic vein thrombosis
Massive splenomegaly (Banti’s syndrome)
Hepatic
Presinusoidal
Schistosomiasis
Congenital hepatic fibrosis
Sinusoidal
Cirrhosis—many causes
Alcoholic hepatitis
Postsinusoidal
Hepatic sinusoidal obstruction (venoocclusive 
­syndrome)
Posthepatic
Budd-Chiari syndrome
Inferior vena caval webs
Cardiac causes
Restrictive cardiomyopathy
Constrictive pericarditis
Severe congestive heart failure
causes account for over 95% of cases of portal hyperten-
sion and are represented by the major forms of cirrhosis. 
Intrahepatic causes of portal hypertension can be further 
subdivided into presinusoidal, sinusoidal, and postsinu-
soidal causes. Postsinusoidal causes include venoocclusive 
disease, while presinusoidal causes include congenital­ 
hepatic fibrosis and schistosomiasis. Sinusoidal causes are 
related to cirrhosis from various causes.
Cirrhosis is the most common cause of portal hyper-
tension in the United States, and clinically significant 
portal hypertension is present in >60% of patients with 
cirrhosis. Portal vein obstruction may be idiopathic or 
can occur in association with cirrhosis or with infection, 
pancreatitis, or abdominal trauma.
Coagulation disorders that can lead to the develop-
ment of portal vein thrombosis include polycythemia 
vera; essential thrombocytosis; deficiencies in protein 
C, protein S, antithrombin 3, and factor V Leiden; 
and abnormalities in the gene-regulating prothrom-
bin ­production. Some patients may have a subclinical 
myeloproliferative disorder.
Clinical features
The three primary complications of portal hyperten-
sion are gastroesophageal varices with hemorrhage, asci-
tes, and hypersplenism. Thus, patients may present with 
upper GI bleeding, which, on endoscopy, is found to 
be due to esophageal or gastric varices, with the devel-
opment of ascites along with peripheral edema, or with 
an enlarged spleen with associated reduction in platelets 
and white blood cells on routine laboratory testing.
Esophageal varices
Over the last decade, it has become common practice 
to screen known cirrhotics with endoscopy to look for 
esophageal varices. Such screening studies have shown 
that approximately one-third of patients with histologi-
cally confirmed cirrhosis have varices. Approximately 
5–15% of cirrhotics per year develop varices, and it is 
estimated that the majority of patients with cirrhosis will 
develop varices over their lifetimes. Furthermore, it is 
anticipated that roughly one-third of patients with vari-
ces will develop bleeding. Several factors predict the risk 
of bleeding, including the severity of cirrhosis (Child’s 
class, MELD score); the height of wedged-hepatic vein 
pressure; the size of the varix; the location of the varix; 
and certain endoscopic stigmata, including red wale signs, 
hematocystic spots, diffuse erythema, bluish color, cherry 
red spots, or white-nipple spots. Patients with tense asci-
tes are also at increased risk for bleeding from varices.
Diagnosis
In patients with cirrhosis who are being followed 
chronically, the development of portal hypertension is 
SECTION VI
Disorders of the Liver and Biliary Tree
438
usually revealed by the presence of thrombocytopenia; 
the appearance of an enlarged spleen; or the develop-
ment of ascites, encephalopathy, and/or esophageal 
varices with or without bleeding. In previously undi-
agnosed patients, any of these features should prompt 
further evaluation to determine the presence of portal 
hypertension and liver disease. Varices should be iden-
tified by endoscopy. Abdominal imaging, either by 
CT or MRI, can be helpful in demonstrating a nodu-
lar liver and in finding changes of portal hypertension 
with intraabdominal collateral circulation. If necessary, 
interventional radiologic procedures can be performed 
to determine wedged and free hepatic vein pressures 
that will allow for the calculation of a wedged-to-free 
gradient, which is equivalent to the portal pressure. The 
average normal wedged-to-free gradient is 5 mmHg, 
and patients with a gradient >12 mmHg are at risk for 
variceal hemorrhage.
Treatment	
Variceal Hemorrhage
Treatment for variceal hemorrhage as a complica-
tion of portal hypertension is divided into two main  
categories: (1) primary prophylaxis and (2) preven-
tion of ­re-bleeding once there has been an initial  
variceal hemorrhage. Primary prophylaxis requires 
routine screening by endoscopy of all patients with 
cirrhosis.­ Once varices that are at increased risk for 
bleeding are identified, primary prophylaxis can be 
achieved either through nonselective beta blockade or 
by variceal band ligation. Numerous placebo-controlled 
clinical trials of either propranolol or nadolol have been 
reported in the literature. The most rigorous studies 
were those that only included patients with significantly 
enlarged varices or with hepatic vein pressure gradients 
>12 mmHg. Patients treated with beta blockers have a 
lower risk of variceal hemorrhage than those treated 
with placebo over 1 and 2 years of follow-up. There is 
also a decrease in mortality related to variceal hemor-
rhage. Unfortunately, overall survival was improved 
in only one study. Further studies have demonstrated 
that the degree of reduction of portal pressure is a 
­significant feature to determine success of therapy. 
Therefore, it has been suggested that repeat measure-
ments of hepatic vein pressure gradients may be used 
to guide pharmacologic therapy; however, this may be 
cost-prohibitive. Several studies have evaluated variceal 
band ligation and variceal sclerotherapy as methods for 
providing primary prophylaxis.
Endoscopic variceal ligation (EVL) has achieved a 
level of success and comfort with most gastroenterolo-
gists who see patients with these complications of por-
tal hypertension. Thus, in patients with cirrhosis who are 
screened for portal hypertension and are found to have 
large varices, it is recommended that they receive either 
beta blockade or primary prophylaxis with EVL.
The approach to patients once they have had a vari-
ceal bleed is first to treat the acute bleed, which can be 
life-threatening, and then to prevent further bleeding. 
Prevention of further bleeding is usually accomplished 
with repeated variceal band ligation until varices are 
obliterated. Treatment of acute bleeding requires both 
fluid and blood-product replacement as well as preven-
tion of subsequent bleeding with EVL.
The medical management of acute variceal hemor-
rhage includes the use of vasoconstricting agents, usu-
ally somatostatin or Octreotide. Vasopressin was used 
in the past but is no longer commonly used. Balloon 
tamponade (Sengstaken-Blakemore tube or Minnesota 
tube) can be used in patients who cannot get endo-
scopic therapy immediately or who need stabilization 
prior to endoscopic therapy. Control of bleeding can be  
achieved in the vast majority of cases; however, bleed-
ing recurs in the majority of patients if definitive endo-
scopic therapy has not been instituted. Octreotide, a 
direct splanchnic vasoconstrictor, is given at dosages of 
50–100 μg/h by continuous infusion. Endoscopic inter-
vention is employed as first-line treatment to ­control 
bleeding acutely. Some endoscopists will use variceal 
injection therapy (sclerotherapy) as initial therapy, 
particularly when bleeding is vigorous. Variceal band 
ligation is used to control acute bleeding in over 90% 
of cases and should be repeated until obliteration of 
all varices is accomplished. When esophageal varices 
extend into the proximal stomach, band ligation is less 
successful. In these situations, when bleeding continues 
from gastric varices, consideration for transjugular intra-
hepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS) should be made. 
This technique creates a portosystemic shunt by a per-
cutaneous approach using an expandable metal stent, 
which is advanced under angiographic guidance to the 
hepatic veins and then through the substance of the 
liver to create a direct portocaval shunt. This offers an 
alternative to surgery for acute decompression of portal 
hypertension. Encephalopathy can occur in as many as 
20% of patients after TIPS and is particularly problem-
atic in elderly patients and in those patients with pre-
existing encephalopathy. TIPS should be reserved for 
those individuals who fail endoscopic or medical man-
agement or who are poor surgical risks. TIPS can some-
times be used as a bridge to transplantation. Surgical 
esophageal transsection is a procedure that is rarely 
used and generally is associated with a poor outcome.
Prevention of Recurrent Bleeding  
(Fig. 42-3) Once patients have had an acute bleed and 
have been managed successfully, attention should 
be paid to preventing recurrent bleeding. This usually 
requires repeated variceal band ligation until varices are 
 
CHAPTER 42
Cirrhosis and Its Complications
439
MANAGEMENT OF RECURRENT
VARICEAL HEMORRHAGE
Recurrent acute bleeding
Endoscopic therapy
+/–
Pharmacologic therapy
Control of bleeding
Compensated cirrhosis
Child’s class A
Surgical shunt
vs TIPS
Liver transplantation
Decompensated cirrhosis
Child’s class B or C
Transplant evaluation
Endoscopic therapy or
beta blockers
Consider TIPS
Liver transplantation
Figure 42-3 
Management of recurrent variceal hemorrhage. This 
­algorithm describes an approach to management of patients 
who have recurrent bleeding from esophageal varices. Initial 
therapy is generally with endoscopic therapy often supple-
mented by pharmacologic therapy. With control of bleeding, 
a decision needs to be made as to whether patients should 
go on to a surgical shunt or TIPS (if they are Child’s class A) 
and be considered for transplant, or if they should have TIPS 
and be considered for transplant (if they are Child’s class B 
or C). TIPS, transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt.
obliterated. Beta blockade may be of adjunctive benefit 
in patients who are having recurrent variceal band liga-
tion; however, once varices have been obliterated, the 
need for beta blockade is lessened. Despite successful 
variceal obliteration, many patients will still have por-
tal hypertensive gastropathy from which bleeding can 
occur. Nonselective beta blockade may be helpful to 
prevent further bleeding from portal hypertensive gas-
tropathy once varices have been obliterated.
Portosystemic shunt surgery is less commonly 
­performed with the advent of TIPS; nonetheless, this 
procedure should be considered for patients with good 
hepatic synthetic function who could benefit by having 
portal decompressive surgery.
Splenomegaly and Hypersplenism
Congestive splenomegaly is common in patients with 
portal hypertension. Clinical features include the presence 
of an enlarged spleen on physical examination and the 
development of thrombocytopenia and leukopenia­ in 
patients who have cirrhosis. Some patients will have 
fairly significant left-sided and left upper quadrant 
abdominal pain related to an enlarged and engorged 
spleen. Splenomegaly itself usually requires no specific 
treatment, although splenectomy can be successfully 
performed under very special circumstances.
Hypersplenism with the development of thrombocy-
topenia is a common feature of patients with cirrhosis 
and is usually the first indication of portal hypertension.
Ascites
Definition
Ascites is the accumulation of fluid within the perito-
neal cavity. Overwhelmingly, the most common cause 
of ascites is portal hypertension related to cirrhosis; 
however, clinicians should remember that malignant or 
infectious causes of ascites can be present as well, and 
careful differentiation of these other causes are obvi-
ously important for patient care.
Pathogenesis
The presence of portal hypertension contributes to the 
development of ascites in patients who have ­cirrhosis 
(Fig. 42-4). There is an increase in intrahepatic 
­resistance, causing increased portal pressure, but there 
DEVELOPMENT OF ASCITES IN CIRRHOSIS
Cirrhosis
Portal hypertension
Splanchnic vasodilation
↑ Splanchnic pressure
Arterial underfilling
Formation of ascites
Lymph formation
Activation of 
vasoconstrictors and
antinatriuretic factors*
Sodium retention
Plasma volume
expansion
Figure 42-4 
Development of ascites in cirrhosis. This flow diagram illus-
trates the importance of portal hypertension with splanchnic 
vasodilation in the development of ascites. *Antinatriuretic 
factors include the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system and 
the sympathetic nervous system.
SECTION VI
Disorders of the Liver and Biliary Tree
440
is also vasodilation of the splanchnic arterial system, 
which, in turn, results in an increase in portal venous 
inflow. Both of these abnormalities result in increased 
production of splanchnic lymph. Vasodilating fac-
tors such as nitric oxide are responsible for the vaso-
dilatory effect. These hemodynamic changes result in 
sodium retention by causing activation of the renin-
angiotensin-aldosterone system with the development 
of hyperaldosteronism. The renal effects of increased 
aldosterone leading to sodium retention also contrib-
ute to the development of ascites. Sodium retention 
causes fluid accumulation and expansion of the extra-
cellular fluid volume, which results in the formation 
of peripheral edema and ascites. Sodium retention is 
the consequence of a homeostatic response caused 
by underfilling of the arterial circulation secondary 
to arterial vasodilation in the splanchnic vascular bed. 
Because the retained fluid is constantly leaking out of 
the intravascular compartment into the peritoneal cav-
ity, the sensation of vascular filling is not achieved, and 
the process continues. Hypoalbuminemia and reduced 
plasma oncotic pressure also contribute to the loss of 
fluid from the vascular compartment into the peritoneal 
cavity. Hypoalbuminemia is due to decreased synthetic 
function in a cirrhotic liver.
Clinical features
Patients typically note an increase in abdominal girth 
that is often accompanied by the development of 
peripheral edema. The development of ascites is often 
insidious, and it is surprising that some patients wait so 
long and become so distended before seeking medical 
attention. Patients usually have at least 1–2 L of fluid 
in the abdomen before they are aware that there is an 
increase. If ascitic fluid is massive, respiratory function 
can be compromised, and patients will complain of 
shortness of breath. Hepatic hydrothorax may also occur 
in this setting, contributing to respiratory ­symptoms. 
Patients with massive ascites are often malnourished 
and have muscle wasting and excessive fatigue and 
weakness.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis of ascites is by physical examination and is 
often aided by abdominal imaging. Patients will have 
bulging flanks, may have a fluid wave, or may have 
the presence of shifting dullness. This is determined by 
­taking patients from a supine position to lying on either 
their left or right side and noting the movement of the 
dullness to percussion. Subtle amounts of ascites can be 
detected by ultrasound or CT scanning. Hepatic hydro-
thorax is more common on the right side and implicates 
a rent in the diaphragm with free flow of ascitic fluid 
into the thoracic cavity.
When patients present with ascites for the first time, 
it is recommended that a diagnostic paracentesis be per-
formed to characterize the fluid. This should include 
the determination of total protein and albumin con-
tent, blood cell counts with differential, and cultures. In 
the appropriate setting, amylase may be measured and 
cytology performed. In patients with cirrhosis, the pro-
tein concentration of the ascitic fluid is quite low, with 
the majority of patients having an ascitic fluid protein 
concentration <1 g/dL. The development of the serum 
ascites-to-albumin gradient (SAAG) has replaced the 
description of exudative or transudative fluid. When 
the gradient between the serum albumin level and the 
ascitic fluid albumin level is >1.1 g/dL, the cause of the 
ascites is most likely due to portal hypertension; this is 
usually in the setting of cirrhosis. When the gradient 
is <1.1 g/dL, infectious or malignant causes of asci-
tes should be considered. When levels of ascitic fluid 
proteins are very low, patients are at increased risk for 
developing SBP. A high level of red blood cells in the 
ascitic fluid signifies a traumatic tap or perhaps a hepa-
tocellular cancer or a ruptured omental varix. When 
the absolute level of polymorphonuclear leukocytes is 
>250/μL, the question of ascitic fluid infection should 
be strongly considered. Ascitic fluid cultures should be 
obtained using bedside inoculation of culture media.
Treatment	
Ascites
Patients with small amounts of ascites can usually be 
managed with dietary sodium restriction alone. Most 
average diets in the United States contain 6 to 8 g of 
sodium per day, and if patients eat at restaurants or 
fast-food outlets, the amount of sodium in their diet can 
exceed this amount. Thus, it is often extremely difficult 
to get patients to change their dietary habits to ingest 
<2 g of sodium per day, which is the recommended 
amount. Patients are frequently surprised to realize 
how much sodium is in the standard U.S. diet; thus, 
it is important to make educational pamphlets avail-
able to the patient. Often, a simple recommendation 
is to eat fresh or frozen foods, avoiding canned or pro-
cessed foods, which are usually preserved with sodium. 
When a moderate amount of ascites is present, diuretic 
therapy is usually necessary. Traditionally, spironolac-
tone at 100–200 mg/d as a single dose is started, and 
furosemide may be added at 40–80 mg/d, particularly 
in patients who have peripheral edema. In patients who 
have never received diuretics before, the failure of the 
above-mentioned dosages suggests that they are not 
being compliant with a low-sodium diet. If compliance 
is confirmed and ascitic fluid is not being mobilized, 
spironolactone can be increased to 400–600 mg/d and 
furosemide increased to 120–160 mg/d. If ascites is 
 
CHAPTER 42
Cirrhosis and Its Complications
441
still present with these dosages of diuretics in patients 
who are compliant with a low-sodium diet, then they 
are defined as having refractory ascites, and alternative 
treatment modalities including repeated large-volume 
paracentesis, or a TIPS procedure should be considered 
(Fig. 42-5). Recent studies have shown that TIPS, while 
managing the ascites, does not improve survival in 
these patients. Unfortunately, TIPS is often associated 
with an increased frequency of hepatic encephalopa-
thy and must be considered carefully on a case-by-case 
basis. The prognosis for patients with cirrhosis with asci-
tes is poor, and some studies have shown that <50% of 
patients survive 2 years after the onset of ascites. Thus, 
there should be consideration for liver transplantation 
in patients with the onset of ascites.
Spontaneous Bacterial Peritonitis
SBP is a common and severe complication of ascites 
characterized by spontaneous infection of the ascitic 
fluid without an intraabdominal source. In patients 
with cirrhosis and ascites severe enough for hospitaliza-
tion, SBP can occur in up to 30% of individuals and can 
have a 25% in-hospital mortality rate. Bacterial translo-
cation is the presumed mechanism for development of 
SBP, with gut flora traversing the intestine into mesen-
teric lymph nodes, leading to bacteremia and seeding 
of the ascitic fluid. The most common organisms are 
Escherichia coli and other gut bacteria; however, gram-
positive bacteria, including Streptococcus viridans, Staph-
ylococcus aureus, and Enterococcus sp., can also be found. 
TREATMENT OF REFRACTORY ASCITES
Refractory ascites
Large volume paracentesis (LVP) + albumin
Dietary sodium restriction + diuretics
Ascites reaccumulation
Consider TIPS
Continue LVP with 
albumin as needed
Consider liver 
transplantation
Figure 42-5 
Treatment of refractory ascites. In patients who develop 
azotemia in the course of receiving diuretics in the man-
agement of their ascites, some will require repeated large-­
volume paracentesis (LVP), some may be considered for 
transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS), and 
some would be good candidates for liver transplantation. 
These decisions are all individualized.
If more than two organisms are identified, secondary 
bacterial peritonitis due to a perforated viscus should 
be considered. The diagnosis of SBP is made when the 
fluid sample has an absolute neutrophil count >250/μL. 
Bedside cultures should be obtained when ascitic fluid 
is tapped. Patients with ascites may present with fever, 
altered mental status, elevated white blood cell count, 
and abdominal pain or discomfort, or they may present 
without any of these features. Therefore, it is necessary 
to have a high degree of clinical suspicion, and perito-
neal taps are important for making the diagnosis. Treat-
ment is with a second-generation cephalosporin, with 
cefotaxime being the most commonly used antibiotic. 
In patients with variceal hemorrhage, the frequency of 
SBP is significantly increased, and prophylaxis against 
SBP is recommended when a patient presents with 
upper GI bleeding. Furthermore, in patients who have 
had an episode(s) of SBP and recovered, once-weekly 
administration of antibiotics is used as prophylaxis for 
recurrent SBP.
Hepatorenal Syndrome
The hepatorenal syndrome (HRS) is a form of func-
tional renal failure without renal pathology that occurs 
in about 10% of patients with advanced cirrhosis or 
acute liver failure. There are marked disturbances in 
the arterial renal circulation in patients with HRS; 
these include an increase in vascular resistance accom-
panied by a reduction in systemic vascular resistance. 
The reason for renal vasoconstriction is most likely 
multifactorial and is poorly understood. The diagno-
sis is made usually in the presence of a large amount 
of ascites in patients who have a stepwise progres-
sive increase in creatinine. Type 1 HRS is character-
ized by a progressive impairment in renal function and 
a ­significant reduction in creatinine clearance within 
1–2 weeks of presentation. Type 2 HRS is character-
ized by a reduction in glomerular filtration rate with 
an elevation of serum creatinine level, but it is fairly 
stable and is associated with a better outcome than that 
of Type 1 HRS.
HRS is often seen in patients with refractory asci-
tes and requires exclusion of other causes of acute renal 
failure. Treatment has, unfortunately, been difficult, 
and in the past, dopamine or prostaglandin analogues 
were used as renal vasodilating medications. Carefully 
performed studies have failed to show clear-cut benefit 
from these therapeutic approaches. Currently, patients 
are treated with midodrine, an α-agonist, along with 
octreotide and intravenous albumin. The best therapy 
for HRS is liver transplantation; recovery of renal func-
tion is typical in this setting. In patients with either type 
1 or type 2 HRS, the prognosis is poor unless transplant 
can be achieved within a short period of time.
SECTION VI
Disorders of the Liver and Biliary Tree
442
Hepatic Encephalopathy
Portosystemic encephalopathy is a serious complica-
tion of chronic liver disease and is broadly defined as 
an alteration in mental status and cognitive function 
occurring in the presence of liver failure. In acute liver 
injury with fulminant hepatic failure, the development 
of encephalopathy is a requirement for a diagnosis of 
fulminant failure. Encephalopathy is much more com-
monly seen in patients with chronic liver disease. Gut-
derived neurotoxins that are not removed by the liver 
because of vascular shunting and decreased hepatic 
mass get to the brain and cause the symptoms that we 
know of as hepatic encephalopathy. Ammonia levels 
are typically elevated in patients with hepatic encepha-
lopathy, but the correlation between severity of liver 
disease and height of ammonia levels is often poor, and 
most hepatologists do not rely on ammonia levels to 
make a diagnosis. Other compounds and metabolites 
that may contribute to the development of encepha-
lopathy include certain false neurotransmitters and 
mercaptans.
Clinical features
In acute liver failure, changes in mental status can occur 
within weeks to months. Brain edema can be seen in 
these patients, with severe encephalopathy associated 
with swelling of the gray matter. Cerebral herniation 
is a feared complication of brain edema in acute liver 
failure, and treatment is meant to decrease edema with 
mannitol and judicious use of intravenous fluids.
In patients with cirrhosis, encephalopathy is often 
found as a result of certain precipitating events such as 
hypokalemia, infection, an increased dietary protein 
load, or electrolyte disturbances. Patients may be con-
fused or exhibit a change in personality. They may 
actually be quite violent and difficult to manage; alter-
natively, patients may be very sleepy and difficult to 
rouse. Because precipitating events are so commonly 
found, they should be sought carefully. If patients have 
ascites, this should be tapped to rule out infection. Evi-
dence of GI bleeding should be sought, and patients 
should be appropriately hydrated. Electrolytes should be 
measured and abnormalities corrected. In patients pre-
senting with encephalopathy, asterixis is often present.­ 
Asterixis can be elicited by having patients extend their 
arms and bend their wrists back. In this maneuver, 
patients who are encephalopathic have a “liver flap”—
i.e., a sudden forward movement of the wrist. This 
requires patients to be able to cooperate with the exam-
iner and obviously cannot be elicited in patients who 
are severely encephalopathic or in hepatic coma.
The diagnosis of hepatic encephalopathy is clinical 
and requires an experienced clinician to recognize and 
put together all of the various features. Often when 
patients have encephalopathy for the first time, they are 
unaware of what is transpiring, but once they have been 
through the experience for the first time, they can iden-
tify when this is developing in subsequent situations and 
can often self-medicate to impair the development or 
worsening of encephalopathy.
Treatment	
Hepatic Encephalopathy
Treatment is multifactorial and includes management of 
the above-mentioned precipitating factors. Sometimes 
hydration and correction of electrolyte imbalance is all 
that is necessary. In the past, restriction of dietary protein 
was considered for patients with encephalopathy; how-
ever, the negative impact of that maneuver on overall 
nutrition is thought to outweigh the benefit when treat-
ing encephalopathy, and it is thus discouraged. There 
may be some benefit to replacing animal-based protein 
with vegetable-based protein in some patients with 
encephalopathy that is difficult to manage. The mainstay 
of treatment for encephalopathy, in addition to correct-
ing precipitating factors, is to use lactulose, a nonabsorb-
able disaccharide, which results in colonic acidification. 
Catharsis ensues, contributing to the elimination of 
nitrogenous products in the gut that are responsible 
for the development of encephalopathy. The goal of 
lactulose therapy is to promote 2–3 soft stools per day. 
Patients are asked to titrate their amount of ingested lact-
ulose to achieve the desired effect. Poorly absorbed anti-
biotics are often used as adjunctive therapies for patients 
who have had a difficult time with lactulose. The alternat-
ing administration of neomycin and metronidazole has 
commonly been employed to reduce the individual side 
effects of each: neomycin for renal insufficiency and oto-
toxicity and metronidazole for peripheral neuropathy. 
More recently, rifaximin at 550 mg twice daily has been 
very effective in treating encephalopathy without the 
known side effects of neomycin or metronidazole. Zinc 
supplementation is sometimes helpful in patients with 
encephalopathy and is relatively harmless. The develop-
ment of encephalopathy in patients with chronic liver dis-
ease is a poor prognostic sign, but this complication can 
be managed in the vast majority of patients.
Malnutrition in Cirrhosis
Because the liver is principally involved in the regula-
tion of protein and energy metabolism in the body, it is 
not surprising that patients with advanced liver disease 
are commonly malnourished. Once patients become 
cirrhotic, they are more catabolic, and muscle protein 
is metabolized. There are multiple factors that con-
tribute to the malnutrition of cirrhosis, including poor 
dietary intake, alterations in gut nutrient absorption, and 
 
CHAPTER 42
Cirrhosis and Its Complications
443
alterations in protein metabolism. Dietary supplementa-
tion for patients with cirrhosis is helpful in preventing 
patients from becoming catabolic.
Abnormalities in Coagulation
Coagulopathy is almost universal in patients with 
cirrhosis.­ There is decreased synthesis of clotting factors 
and impaired clearance of anticoagulants. In addition, 
patients may have thrombocytopenia from hypersplenism 
due to portal hypertension. Vitamin K–dependent clot-
ting factors are Factors II, VII, IX, and X. Vitamin K 
requires biliary excretion for its subsequent absorption; 
thus, in patients with chronic cholestatic ­syndromes, 
vitamin K absorption is frequently diminished. Intra-
venous or intramuscular vitamin K can quickly cor-
rect this abnormality. More commonly, the synthesis 
of ­vitamin K–dependent clotting factors is diminished 
because of a decrease in hepatic mass, and, under these 
circumstances, administration of parenteral vitamin K 
does not improve the clotting factors or the prothrom-
bin time. Platelet function is often abnormal in patients 
with chronic liver disease, in addition to decreases in 
platelet levels due to hypersplenism.
Bone Disease in Cirrhosis
Osteoporosis is common in patients with chronic 
­cholestatic liver disease because of malabsorption of 
vitamin D and decreased calcium ingestion. The rate of 
bone resorption exceeds that of new bone formation in 
patients with cirrhosis resulting in bone loss. Dual x-ray 
absorptiometry (DEXA) is a useful method for determin-
ing osteoporosis or osteopenia in patients with chronic 
liver disease. When a DEXA scan shows decreased bone 
mass, treatment should be administered with bisphospho-
nates that are effective at inhibiting resorption of bone 
and efficacious in the treatment of osteoporosis.
Hematologic Abnormalities 
in Cirrhosis
Numerous hematologic manifestations of cirrhosis are 
present, including anemia from a variety of causes 
including hypersplenism, hemolysis, iron deficiency, and 
perhaps folate deficiency from malnutrition. Macrocy-
tosis is a common abnormality in red blood cell mor-
phology seen in patients with chronic liver disease, and 
­neutropenia may be seen as a result of hypersplenism.
 Jules L. Dienstag 
I  Atul K. Bhan 
444
 Although clinical and laboratory features yield clues to 
the extent of inﬂ ammatory processes (disease grade), the 
degree of scarring and architectural distortion (disease 
stage), and the nature of the disease process, the liver 
biopsy is felt to represent the gold standard for assess-
ing the degree of liver injury and ﬁ brosis. Examination 
of liver histology provides not only a basis for quantita-
tive scoring of disease activity and progression but also 
a wealth of qualitative information that can direct and 
inform diagnosis and management. 
 A normal liver lobule consists of portal (zone 1),  lobular 
(midzonal or zone 2), and central (zone 3) zones. The por-
tal tract contains the hepatic artery (HA) and portal vein 
(PV), which represent the dual vascular supply to the 
liver, as well as the bile duct (BD). The lobular area con-
tains cords of liver cells surrounded by vascular sinusoids, 
and the central zone consists of the central vein (CV), the 
 terminal branch of the hepatic vein (see ﬁ gure below). 
 ATLAS OF LIVER BIOPSIES 
 CHAPTER 43 
CV
PV
HA
BD
Liver cells
Sinusoids
Portal tract
 Included in this atlas of liver biopsies are examples 
of common morphologic features of acute and chronic 
liver disorders, some involving the lobular areas (e.g., the 
lobular inﬂ ammatory changes of acute hepatitis, apop-
totic hepatocyte degeneration in acute and chronic hep-
atitis, virus antigen localization in hepatocyte cytoplasm 
and/or nuclei, viral inclusion bodies, copper or iron 
deposition, other inclusion bodies), and others involving 
the portal tracts (e.g., the portal mononuclear inﬁ ltrate 
that expands and spills over beyond the border of peri-
portal hepatocytes in chronic hepatitis C, autoimmune 
hepatitis, and liver allograft rejection) or centrizonal 
areas (e.g., acute acetaminophen hepatotoxicity). Other 
histologic features of importance include hepatic steato-
sis (observed in alcoholic liver injury, in nonalcoholic 
fatty liver disorders, in metabolic disorders— including 
mitochondrial injury—and in patients with chronic 
viral hepatitis); injury of bile ducts in the portal tract, 
an important diagnostic hallmark of primary biliary cir-
rhosis, primary sclerosing cholangitis, as well as of liver 
allograft rejection; cholestasis in intrahepatic or extrahe-
patic biliary obstruction or in inﬁ ltrative disorders; duct-
ular proliferation in the setting of marked hepatocellular 
necrosis; plasma cell inﬁ ltration common in autoimmune 
hepatitis; portal inﬂ ammation affecting portal veins 
(“endothelialitis”) in liver allograft rejection; and mild-
to-severe ﬁ brosis, in varying distribution and pattern, as a 
consequence of liver injury common to many disorders. 
(All magniﬁ cations reﬂ ect the objective lens used.) 
 FIGURE 43-1 
Acute hepatitis with lobular infl ammation and hepatocellular 
ballooning (H&E, 10×). 

CHAPTER 43
Atlas of Liver Biopsies
445
FIGURE 43-5 
Chronic hepatitis C with portal inflammation and interface 
hepatitis (erosion of the limiting plate of periportal hepato­
cytes by infiltrating mononuclear cells) (H&E, 20×).
FIGURE 43-2 
Acute hepatitis, higher magnification, showing lobular 
inflammation, hepatocellular ballooning, and acidophilic 
­bodies (arrows) (H&E, 20×).
FIGURE 43-3 
Chronic hepatitis C with portal lymphoid infiltrate and 
­lymphoid follicle containing germinal center (H&E, 10×).
FIGURE 43-4 
Chronic hepatitis C with portal and lobular inflammation 
and steatosis (H&E, 10×).
FIGURE 43-6 
Lobular inflammation with acidophilic body (apoptotic 
body) surrounded by lymphoid cells (H&E, 40×).
FIGURE 43-7 
Chronic hepatitis B with hepatocellular cytoplasmic staining 
for hepatitis B surface antigen (immunoperoxidase, 20×).
SECTION VI
Disorders of the Liver and Biliary Tree
446
FIGURE 43-8 
Chronic hepatitis B with hepatocellular nuclear staining for 
hepatitis B core antigen (immunoperoxidase, 20×).
FIGURE 43-11 
Primary biliary cirrhosis with degenerating bile duct epithelium 
(“florid ductular lesion”) (arrow) surrounded by epithelioid 
granulomatous reaction and lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate 
(H&E, 40×).
FIGURE 43-9 
Autoimmune hepatitis with portal and lobular inflammation, 
interface hepatitis, and cholestasis (H&E, 10×).
FIGURE 43-12
Chronic hepatitis C with bridging fibrosis (arrow) (Masson 
trichrome, 10×).
FIGURE 43-10
Autoimmune hepatitis, higher magnification, showing dense 
plasma cell infiltrate in the portal and periportal regions 
(H&E, 40×).
FIGURE 43-13
Cirrhosis with architectural alteration resulting from 
fibrosis and nodular hepatocellular regeneration (Masson 
­trichrome, 2×).
 
CHAPTER 43
Atlas of Liver Biopsies
447
FIGURE 43-14 
Acute cellular rejection of orthotopic liver allograft dem­
onstrating a mixed inflammatory cell infiltrate (lymphoid cells, 
eosinophils, neutrophils) of the portal tract as well as endothe­
lialitis of the portal vein (arrow) and bile duct injury (H&E, 10×).
FIGURE 43-15 
Liver allograft with cytomegalovirus infection showing 
hepatocytes with nuclear inclusions (arrows) surrounded by a 
neutrophilic and lymphoid infiltrate (H&E, 10×).
FIGURE 43-16 
Combined acetaminophen hepatotoxicity and alcoholic liver 
injury with extensive centrilobular areas of necrosis (H&E, 4×).
FIGURE 43-17
Combined acetaminophen hepatotoxicity and alcoholic 
liver injury at higher magnification showing necrotic centri­
lobular area with Mallory bodies (H&E 20×).
FIGURE 43-18 
`1 antitrypsin deficiency with cytoplasmic periodic acid–
Schiff (PAS)-positive, diastase-resistant globules in many 
hepatocytes, predominantly at the periphery of a cirrhotic 
nodule (PAS, 20×).
FIGURE 43-19
`1 antitrypsin deficiency with higher magnification of PAS-
positive, diastase-resistant globules (PAS, 40×).
SECTION VI
Disorders of the Liver and Biliary Tree
448
FIGURE 43-20 
Cirrhosis secondary to hemochromatosis with hepato­
cellular carcinoma; brown hemosiderin pigment (iron) is 
present in the cirrhotic liver, while the hepatocellular carci­
noma nodules are hemosiderin-free (H&E, 4×).
FIGURE 43-21 
Cirrhosis secondary to hemochromatosis with hepato­
cellular carcinoma at higher magnification, demonstrat­
ing nodules of large malignant cells with highly disorganized 
architecture (H&E, 10×).
FIGURE 43-22 
Hemochromatosis with iron stain demonstrating extensive 
iron deposition and characteristic pattern of pericanalicular 
distribution of iron (iron stain, 10×).
FIGURE 43-23
Primary sclerosing cholangitis showing cirrhosis and peri­
ductular fibrosis (Masson trichrome, 4×).
FIGURE 43-24 
Primary sclerosing cholangitis showing the extrahepatic bile 
duct (in a liver explant obtained at the time of hepatectomy 
for orthotopic liver transplantation) with marked mural chronic 
inflammation and fibrosis as well as peribiliary glands (H&E, 2×).
FIGURE 43-25 
Primary sclerosing cholangitis showing peripheral cho­
lestasis (green) and cytoplasmic red granular staining of 
hepatocytes for copper (rhodanine copper stain, 20×).
 
CHAPTER 43
Atlas of Liver Biopsies
449
FIGURE 43-26 
Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) showing steatosis, 
ballooned hepatocytes, and Mallory bodies with surrounding 
polymorphonuclear leukocytes (arrow) (H&E, 20×).
FIGURE 43-27 
Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) showing steatosis 
with perisinusoidal and pericellular fibrosis (H&E, 20×).
FIGURE 43-28
Acute hepatitis with submassive hepatic necrosis with 
marked parenchymal collapse, remnant islands of surviving 
hepatocytes, and a marked ductular reaction (H&E, 10×).
FIGURE 43-29 
Wilson’s disease showing cirrhosis, extensive collapse, and 
ductular reaction in a teenager with an acute presentation 
(H&E, 4×).
SECTION VI
Disorders of the Liver and Biliary Tree
450
FIGURE 43-30
Wilson’s disease showing extensive hepatocyte cytoplasmic red granular ­staining for copper in a cirrhotic nodule (rhodanine 
copper stain, 20×).
 Bruce R. Bacon 
451
 There are a number of disorders of the liver that fi t 
within the categories of genetic, metabolic, and infi ltra-
tive disorders. Inherited disorders include hemochroma-
tosis, Wilson’s disease, α 1 antitrypsin (α 1 AT) defi ciency, 
and cystic fi brosis (CF). Hemochromatosis is the most 
common inherited disorder affecting Caucasian popula-
tions, with the genetic susceptibility for the disease being 
identifi ed in 1 in 250 individuals. Over the past 15 years, 
it has become increasingly apparent that  nonalcoholic 
fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is the most common cause 
of elevated liver enzymes found in the U.S. population. 
With the obesity epidemic in the United States, it is esti-
mated that 20% of the population may have abnormal 
liver enzymes on the basis of NAFLD and 3% may have 
nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH). Infi ltrative disor-
ders of the liver are relatively rare. 
 GenetiC liver Diseases 
 Hereditary hemochromatosis 
 Hereditary hemochromatosis (HH) is a common  inherited 
disorder of iron metabolism  ( Chap. 357 ) . Our knowledge 
of the disease and its phenotypic expression has changed 
since 1996, when the gene for HH, called  HFE , was 
identifi ed, allowing for genetic testing for the two major 
mutations (C282Y and H63D) that are responsible for 
 HFE -related HH. Subsequently, several additional genes/
proteins involved in the regulation of iron homeostasis 
have been identifi ed, contributing to a better understand-
ing of cellular iron uptake and release and the charac-
terization of additional causes of inherited iron overload 
 ( Table 44-1 ) . 
 Most patients with HH are asymptomatic; how-
ever, when patients present with symptoms, they are 
frequently nonspecifi c and include weakness, fatigue, 
lethargy, and weight loss. Specifi c, organ-related symp-
toms include abdominal pain, arthralgias, and symptoms 
 GENETIC, METABOLIC, AND INFILTRATIVE 
DISEASES AFFECTING THE LIVER 
 CHAPTER 44 
Table 44-1 
 ClassifiCation of iron overloaD sYnDroMes 
Hereditary Hemochromatosis (HH)
HFE -related (type 1) 
 C282Y/C282Y 
 C282Y/H63D 
 Other  HFE mutations 
 Non- HFE -related 
 Juvenile HH 
 HJV—hemojuvelin (type 2a) 
 HAMP—hepcidin (type 2b) 
 TfR2-related HH (type 3) 
 Ferroportin-related HH (type 4) 
 African iron overload 
secondary iron overload 
 Iron-loading anemias 
 Parenteral iron overload 
 Chronic liver disease 
Miscellaneous 
 Neonatal iron overload 
 Aceruloplasminemia 
 Congenital atransferrinemia 
 Abbreviations : HJV, hemojuvelin; HAMP, hepcidin; TfR2, transferrin 
receptor 2. 
and signs of chronic liver disease. Increasingly, most 
patients are now identifi ed before they have symp-
toms, either through family studies or from the per-
formance of screening iron studies. Several prospective 
population studies have shown that C282Y homozygos-
ity is found in about 1 in 250 individuals of Northern 
European descent, with the heterozygote frequency 
seen in approximately 1 in 10 individuals. It is impor-
tant to consider HH in patients who present with the 
symptoms and signs known to occur in established HH. 
When confronted with abnormal serum iron studies, 
452
SECTION VI
Disorders of the Liver and Biliary Tree
clinicians should not wait for typical symptoms or find-
ings of HH to appear before considering the diagnosis. 
However, once the diagnosis of HH is considered, either 
by an evaluation of abnormal screening iron studies, in 
the context of family studies, in a patient with an abnor-
mal genetic test, or in the evaluation of a patient with 
any of the typical symptoms or clinical findings, defini-
tive diagnosis is relatively straightforward. Transferrin­ 
saturation [serum iron divided by total iron-binding 
capacity (TIBC) or transferrin, times 100%] and ferritin 
levels should be obtained. Both of these will be elevated 
in a symptomatic patient. It must be remembered that 
ferritin is an acute-phase reactant and can be elevated in 
a number of other inflammatory disorders, such as rheu-
matoid arthritis, or in various neoplastic diseases, such 
as lymphoma or other cancers. Also, serum ferritin is 
elevated in a majority of patients with NASH, in the 
absence of iron overload.
At present, if patients have an elevated transferrin 
saturation or ferritin level, genetic testing should be 
performed; if they are a C282Y homozygote or a com-
pound heterozygote (C282Y/H63D), the diagnosis 
is confirmed. If the ferritin is >1000 μg/L, the patient 
should be considered for liver biopsy because there is 
an increased frequency of advanced fibrosis in these 
­individuals. If liver biopsy is performed, iron deposition 
is found in a periportal distribution with a periportal 
to pericentral gradient; iron is found predominantly in 
parenchymal cells, and Kupffer cells are spared.
Treatment	
 Hereditary Hemochromatosis
Treatment of HH is relatively straightforward with weekly 
phlebotomy aimed to reduce iron stores, recognizing 
that each unit of blood contains 200 to 250 mg of iron. If 
patients are diagnosed and treated before the develop-
ment of hepatic fibrosis, all complications of the disease 
can be avoided. Maintenance phlebotomy is required in 
most patients and usually can be achieved with 1 unit of 
blood removed every 2–3 months. Family studies should 
be performed with transferrin saturation, ferritin, and 
genetic testing offered to all first-degree relatives.
Wilson’s disease
Wilson’s disease is an inherited disorder of copper 
homeostasis first described in 1912 (Chap. 360). The 
Wilson’s disease gene was discovered in 1993, with 
the identification of ATP7B. This P-type ATPase is 
involved in copper transport and is necessary for the 
export of copper from the hepatocyte. Thus, in patients 
with mutations in ATP7B, copper is retained in the 
liver, leading to increased copper storage and ultimately 
liver disease as a result.
The clinical presentation of Wilson’s disease is vari-
able and includes chronic hepatitis, hepatic steatosis, and 
cirrhosis in adolescents and young adults. Neurologic 
manifestations indicate that liver disease is present and 
include speech disorders and various movement disorders. 
Diagnosis includes the demonstration of a reduced ceru-
loplasmin level, increased urinary excretion of copper, 
the presence of Kayser-Fleischer rings in the corneas of 
the eyes, and an elevated hepatic copper level, in the 
appropriate clinical setting. The genetic diagnosis of 
Wilson’s disease is difficult because >200 mutations in 
ATP7B have been described with different degrees of 
frequency and penetration in certain populations.
Treatment	
 Wilson’s Disease
Treatment consists of copper-chelating medications 
such as d-penicillamine and trientine. A role for zinc 
acetate has also been established. Medical treatment is 
lifelong, and severe relapses leading to liver failure and 
death can occur with cessation of therapy. Liver trans-
plantation is curative with respect to the underlying 
metabolic defect and restores the normal phenotype 
with respect to copper homeostasis.
α1 Antitrypsin deficiency
Alpha-1-antitrypsin (AAT) deficiency was first described 
in the late 1960s in patients with severe pulmonary dis-
ease. AAT is a 52 kD glycoprotein produced in hepato-
cytes, phagocytes, and epithelial cells in the lungs, which 
inhibits serine proteases, primarily neutrophil elastase. 
In AAT deficiency, increased amounts of neutrophil 
elastase can result in progressive lung injury from deg-
radation of elastin leading to premature emphysema. In 
the 1970s, AAT deficiency was discovered as a cause of 
neonatal liver disease, so-called “neonatal hepatitis.” It 
is now known to be a cause of liver disease in infancy, 
early childhood, adolescence, and in adults.
In AAT deficiency, variants in the proteinase inhibi-
tor (Pi) gene located on chromosome 14, alters AAT 
structure interfering with hepatocellular export. Aggre-
gated, deformed polymers of AAT accumulate in the 
hepatocyte endoplasmic reticulum. There are over 75 
different AAT variants. Conventional nomenclature 
identifies normal variants as PiMM; these individu-
als have normal blood levels of AAT. The most com-
mon abnormal variants are called S and Z. Individuals 
homozygous for the Z mutation (PiZZ) have low levels 
of AAT (about 15% of normal) and these patients are 
susceptible to liver and/or lung disease, yet only a pro-
portion (about 25%) of PiZZ patients develop disease 
manifestations. Null variants have undetectable levels of 
AAT and are susceptible to premature lung disease.
 
CHAPTER 44
Genetic, Metabolic, and Infiltrative Diseases Affecting the Liver
453
AAT deficiency has been identified in all popu-
lations; however, the disorder is most common in 
patients of Northern European and Iberian descent. 
The disorder affects about 1 in 1500 to 2000 individ-
uals in North America. The natural history of AAT 
deficiency is quite variable because many individuals 
with the PiZZ variant never develop disease, whereas 
others can develop childhood cirrhosis leading to liver 
transplantation.
In adults, the diagnosis often comes in the course of 
evaluation of patients with abnormal liver test abnor-
malities or in a work-up for cirrhosis. A hint to diagno-
sis may be coexistent lung disease at a relatively young 
age or a family history of liver and/or lung disease. 
Patients may have symptoms of pulmonary disease with 
cough and dyspnea. Liver disease may be asymptomatic 
other than fatigue, or patients may present with compli-
cations of decompensated liver disease.
Diagnosis of AAT deficiency is confirmed by blood 
tests showing reduced levels of serum AAT, accompa-
nied by Pi determinations. Most patients with liver dis-
ease have either PiZZ or PiSZ; occasionally, patients 
with PiMZ have reduced levels of AAT, but they usually 
do not have a low enough level to cause disease. Liver 
biopsy is often performed to determine stage of hepatic 
fibrosis and shows characteristic PAS-positive, diastase-
resistant globules in the periphery of the hepatic lobule.
Treatment	
α1 Antitrypsin Deficiency
Treatment of AAT deficiency is usually nonspecific 
and supportive. For patients with liver involvement, 
other sources of liver injury, such as alcohol, should 
be avoided. Evidence for other liver diseases (e.g., 
viral ­hepatitis B and C, hemochromatosis, NAFLD, etc.) 
should be sought and treated if possible. Smoking can 
worsen lung disease progression in AAT and should be 
discontinued. Patients with lung disease may be eligible 
to receive infusions of AT, which has been shown to halt 
further damage to the lungs. If liver disease becomes 
decompensated, transplantation should be pursued 
and is curative. Following transplant, patients express 
the Pi phenotype of the donor. Finally, risk of hepatocel-
lular carcinoma is significantly increased in patients with 
cirrhosis due to AAT deficiency.
Cystic fibrosis
CF should also be considered as an inherited form of 
chronic liver disease, although the principal manifesta-
tions of CF include chronic lung disease and pancreatic 
insufficiency (Chap. 259). A small percentage of patients 
with CF who survive to adulthood have a form of ­biliary 
cirrhosis characterized by cholestatic liver enzyme 
Table 44-2 
Causes of Macrovesicular Steatosis
Insulin resistance, hyperinsulinemia
Centripetal obesity
Type 2 diabetes
Medications
Glucocorticoids
Estrogens
Tamoxifen
Amiodarone
Nutritional
Starvation
Protein deficiency (Kwashiorkor)
Choline deficiency
Liver disease
Wilson disease
Chronic hepatitis C—genotype 3
Indian childhood cirrhosis
Jejunoileal bypass
abnormalities and the development of chronic liver 
disease. Ursodeoxycholic acid is occasionally helpful 
in improving liver test abnormalities and in reducing 
symptoms. The disease is slowly progressive.
Metabolic Liver Diseases
Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease
NAFLD was first described in the 1950s when fatty 
liver was characterized in a group of obese patients. 
In 1980, Ludwig and colleagues at the Mayo Clinic 
described 20 obese, diabetic, nonalcoholic patients who 
had similar findings on liver biopsy to patients with 
alcoholic liver disease, and the term nonalcoholic ste-
atohepatitis was introduced. The prevalence of NAFLD 
in the United States and Europe ranges from 14–20%. 
This increased prevalence relates directly to the ­obesity 
epidemic seen in these populations. In the United 
States, NASH is thought to occur in ∼3% of the gen-
eral population, with fibrosis due to NASH being seen 
in >40% of obese patients. The spectrum of NAFLD 
includes simple hepatic steatosis, which, over time, can 
progress to NASH, with the subsequent development of 
fibrosis and cirrhosis. Causes of macrovesicular steatosis 
are listed in Table 44-2. It is now known that many 
patients with hitherto identified “cryptogenic” cirrhosis 
in fact have liver disease on the basis of NASH, with 
the resolution of the steatosis once patients become 
­catabolic due to cirrhosis.
Most patients who come to medical attention with 
NAFLD are identified as a result of incidentally dis-
covered elevated liver enzymes (ALT, AST). When 
patients are symptomatic, symptoms include fatigue 
or a vague right upper quadrant discomfort. ALT is 
454
SECTION VI
Disorders of the Liver and Biliary Tree
generally higher than AST, and aminotransferases are 
only mildly (1.5–2 times the upper limit of normal) 
elevated. Recent studies have shown that many patients 
can have advanced fibrosis with NASH and even 
­cirrhosis due to NASH with normal liver enzymes, 
indicating that the prevalence of the disease is likely to 
be even greater than was previously suspected. NASH is 
frequently seen in conjunction with other components 
of the metabolic syndrome (hypertension, diabetes mel-
litus, elevated lipids, and obesity), with NAFLD being 
considered the hepatic manifestation of this syndrome 
(Chap. 242). Insulin resistance is the underlying link 
between these various disorders and numerous studies 
have shown that virtually all patients with NASH have 
insulin resistance. Abnormal ferritin values are seen in 
∼50% of patients with NASH, and an elevated ferritin 
level may be a marker of insulin resistance in NASH.
The diagnosis of NAFLD requires a careful history 
to determine the amount of alcohol used. Most inves-
tigators in the field of fatty liver disease require that 
<20 g/d of alcohol be consumed to exclude alcoholic 
liver disease. Laboratory testing for other liver diseases 
such as hepatitis B and C, iron studies, ceruloplasmin, 
α-1 antitrypsin levels, and autoimmune serologies should 
also be determined. Imaging studies can show character-
istic features of a fatty liver, but the ultimate diagnosis 
of either hepatic steatosis or NASH requires liver biopsy. 
Liver biopsy shows characteristic macrovesicular steato-
sis with occasional microvesicular fat being identified. 
A mixed inflammatory infiltrate is found in a lobular 
distribution. The histologic features of NASH are very 
similar to those seen in alcoholic liver disease; Mallory’s 
hyaline can be seen in both disorders, although the num-
ber of hepatocytes containing Mallory’s hyaline and the 
size of the deposits are frequently greater in alcoholic 
liver disease than in NASH. The fibrosis that occurs in 
NASH has a characteristic perivenular and perisinusoidal 
distribution. Most cross-sectional studies show that up to 
30–40% of NASH patients can develop advanced fibrosis, 
with cirrhosis being identified in 10–15% of individuals 
in series. Increasingly, patients are being identified with 
cryptogenic cirrhosis who have most likely had NASH 
for decades. These patients can develop liver failure 
and require liver transplantation, and some patients can 
progress to the development of hepatocellular ­cancer. 
Often, when cirrhotic, these patients will not have 
steatosis­ on biopsy, but following transplant, NAFLD 
will frequently recur.
Treatment	
 Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver Disease
The mainstay of treatment of fatty liver disease is weight 
loss and exercise, which is often difficult to achieve in 
this population. As an aid to weight loss, orlistat, which is  
a reversible inhibitor of gastric and pancreatic lipase, has 
been shown to result in a small decrease in body weight 
and is usually fairly well tolerated. This medication is 
now available over-the-counter. Bariatric surgery has 
been used and shows striking success, but is obviously 
a fairly drastic maneuver for induction of weight loss. 
Recent studies have focused on the presence of insulin 
resistance at the center of the pathophysiologic mecha-
nisms of NAFLD. The thiazolidinedione medications are 
PPAR gamma inhibitors, which improve insulin sensitivity 
within the adipocyte and skeletal muscle by upregulating 
specific protein kinases involved in decreasing fatty acid 
synthesis. Two drugs—pioglitizone and rosiglitizone— 
are currently available and are being evaluated as 
potential therapeutic options in the treatment of NASH. 
Antioxidants have also been used, and a recent large 
multicenter study has shown benefit from vitamin E 
­supplementation. Treatment of hyperlipidemia with 
statin-type agents has shown improvement in liver 
enzymes, but they have not been assessed for effects 
on histology. Ursodeoxycholic acid has been used and 
improves liver enzymes in patients with many liver dis-
eases, but it has not been definitively helpful for fatty liver 
disease. At present, efforts should be directed to encour-
aging patients with NAFLD to lose weight and exercise.
Lipid storage diseases
There are a number of rare lipid storage diseases that 
involve the liver, including the inherited disorders of 
Gaucher’s and Niemann-Pick disease (Chap. 362). Other 
rare disorders include abetalipoproteinemia, Tangier dis-
ease, Fabray’s disease, and types I and V hyperlipopro-
teinemia. Hepatomegaly is present due to increased fat 
deposition and increased glycogen found in the liver.
Porphyrias
The porphyrias are a group of metabolic disorders in 
which there are defects in the biosynthesis of heme 
necessary for incorporation into numerous hemopro-
teins such as hemoglobin, myoglobin, catalase, and the 
cytochromes (Chap. 358). Porphyrias can present as 
either acute or chronic diseases, with the acute disor-
der causing recurring bouts of abdominal pain, and the 
chronic disorders characterized by painful skin lesions. 
Porphyria cutanea tarda (PCT) is the most commonly 
encountered porphyria. Patients present with character-
istic vesicular lesions on sun-exposed areas of the skin, 
principally the dorsum of the hands, the tips of the ears, 
or the cheeks. About 40% of patients with PCT have 
mutations in the gene for hemochromatosis (HFE), 
and ∼50% have hepatitis C; thus, iron studies and HFE 
mutation analysis as well as hepatitis C testing should 
be  considered in all patients who present with PCT. 
 
CHAPTER 44
Genetic, Metabolic, and Infiltrative Diseases Affecting the Liver
455
PCT is also associated with excess alcohol use and some 
medications, most notably estrogens.
Treatment	
 Porphyrias
The mainstay of treatment of PCT is iron reduction by 
therapeutic phlebotomy, which is successful in reversing 
the skin lesions in the majority of patients. If hepatitis C 
is present, this should be treated as well. Acute intermit-
tent porphyria presents with abdominal pain, with the 
diagnosis made by avoidance of certain precipitating 
factors such as starvation or certain diets. Intravenous 
heme as hematin has been used for treatment.
Infiltrative Disorders
Amyloidosis
Amyloidosis is a metabolic storage disease that results 
from deposition of insoluble proteins that are aberrantly 
folded and assembled and then deposited in a variety of 
tissues (Chap. 111). Amyloidosis is divided into two types, 
­primary and secondary, based on the broad concepts of 
association with myeloma (primary) or chronic inflam-
matory illnesses (secondary). The disease is generally 
­considered rare, although, in certain disease states or in cer-
tain populations, it can be more common. For example, 
when associated with familial Mediterranean fever, it is 
seen in high frequency in Sephardic Jews and Armenians 
living in Armenia and less frequently in Ashkenazi Jews, 
Turks, and Arabs. Amyloidosis frequently affects patients 
suffering from tuberculosis and leprosy and can be seen in 
upwards of 10–15% of patients with ankylosing spondylitis,­ 
rheumatoid arthritis, or Crohn’s disease. In one surgi-
cal pathology series, amyloid was found in <1% of cases. 
The liver is commonly involved in cases of systemic 
amyloidosis, but it is frequently inapparent clinically and 
only documented at autopsy. Pathologic findings in the 
liver include positive staining with the Congo red histo­
chemical stain where there is an apple-green birefrin-
gence noted under polarizing light.
Granulomas
Granulomas are frequently found in the liver when 
patients are being evaluated for cholestatic liver 
enzyme abnormalities. Granulomas can be seen in 
primary biliary cirrhosis, but there are other char-
acteristic clinical (e.g., pruritus, fatigue) and labora-
tory findings (cholestatic liver tests, antimitochondrial 
antibody) that allow for a definitive diagnosis of that 
disorder. ­Granulomatous infiltration can also be seen 
as the principal hepatic manifestation of sarcoidosis, 
and this is the most common presentation of hepatic 
granulomas (Chap. 329). The vast majority of these 
patients do not require any specific treatment other 
than what would normally be used for treatment of 
their sarcoidosis. A small subset, however, can develop 
a particularly bothersome desmoplastic reaction with a 
significant increase in fibrosis, which can progress to 
cirrhosis and liver failure. These patients may require 
treatment with immunosuppressive therapy and may 
require liver transplantation. In patients who have 
granulomas in the liver not associated with sarcoidosis, 
treatment is rarely needed.
Diagnosis requires liver biopsy, and it is important to 
establish a diagnosis so that a cause for the elevated liver 
enzymes is carefully identified. Some medications can 
cause granulomatous infiltration of the liver, the most 
notable of which is allopurinol.
Lymphoma
Involvement of the liver with lymphoma can sometimes 
be with bulky mass lesions but can also be as a difficult-
to-diagnose infiltrative disorder that does not show any 
characteristic findings on abdominal imaging studies­ 
(Chap. 110). Patients may present with severe liver 
­disease, jaundice, hypoalbuminemia, mild to moder-
ately elevated aminotransferases, and an elevated alkaline 
phosphatase.
A liver biopsy is required for diagnosis and should be 
considered when routine blood testing does not lead to 
a diagnosis of the liver dysfunction.
 Norton J. Greenberger 
I  Gustav Paumgartner 
456
 DISEASES OF THE GALLBLADDER AND 
BILE DUCTS 
 chaPter 45 
 PhYsioloGY of bile ProDuctioN 
aND floW 
 Bile secreTion And composiTion 
 Bile formed in the hepatic lobules is secreted into a 
complex network of canaliculi, small bile ductules, and 
larger bile ducts that run with lymphatics and branches 
of the portal vein and hepatic artery in portal tracts situ-
ated between hepatic lobules. These interlobular bile 
ducts coalesce to form larger septal bile ducts that join 
to form the right and left hepatic ducts, which in turn, 
unite to form the common hepatic duct. The common 
hepatic duct is joined by the cystic duct of the gallblad-
der to form the common bile duct (CBD), which enters 
the duodenum (often after joining the main pancreatic 
duct) through the ampulla of Vater. 
 Hepatic bile is an isotonic fl uid with an electrolyte 
composition resembling blood plasma. The electro-
lyte composition of gallbladder bile differs from that 
of hepatic bile because most of the inorganic anions, 
chloride and bicarbonate, have been removed by re-
absorption across the gallbladder epithelium. As a result 
of water reabsorption, total solute concentration of bile 
increases from 3–4 g/dL in hepatic bile to 10–15 g/dL 
in gallbladder bile. 
 Major solute components of bile by moles per-
cent include bile acids (80%), lecithin and traces of 
other phospholipids (16%), and unesterifi ed cholesterol 
(4.0%). In the lithogenic state, the cholesterol value can 
be as high as 8–10%. Other constituents include conju-
gated bilirubin; proteins (all immunoglobulins, albumin, 
metabolites of hormones, and other proteins metabo-
lized in the liver); electrolytes; mucus; and, often, drugs 
and their metabolites. 
 The total daily basal secretion of hepatic bile is 
∼500–600 mL. Many substances taken up or synthesized 
by the hepatocyte are secreted into the bile canaliculi. 
The canalicular membrane forms microvilli and is asso-
ciated with microfi laments of actin, microtubules, and 
other contractile elements. Prior to their secretion into 
the bile, many substances are taken up into the hepa-
tocyte, while others, such as phospholipids, a portion 
of primary bile acids, and some cholesterol are synthe-
sized de novo in the hepatocyte. Three mechanisms are 
important in regulating bile fl ow: (1) active transport 
of bile acids from hepatocytes into the bile canaliculi, 
(2) active transport of other organic anions, and 
(3) cholangiocellular secretion. The last is a secretin-
mediated and cyclic AMP–dependent mechanism that 
results in the secretion of a sodium- and bicarbonate-
rich fl uid into the bile ducts. 
 Active vectorial secretion of biliary constituents 
from the portal blood into the bile canaliculi is driven 
by a set of polarized transport systems at the basolateral 
(sinusoidal) and the canalicular apical plasma membrane 
domains of the hepatocyte. Two sinusoidal bile salt 
uptake systems have been cloned in humans, the Na + /
taurocholate cotransporter (NTCP, SLC10A1) and the 
organic anion–transporting proteins (OATPs), which 
also transport a large variety of non-bile salt organic 
anions. Several ATP-dependent canalicular transport 
systems, “export pumps,” (ATP-binding cassette trans-
port proteins, also known as ABC transporters) have 
been identifi ed, the most important of which are: the 
bile salt export pump (BSEP, ABCB11); the anionic 
conjugate export pump (MRP2, ABCC2), which 
mediates the canalicular excretion of various amphi-
philic conjugates formed by phase II conjugation (e.g., 
bilirubin mono- and diglucuronides and drugs); the 
multidrug export pump (MDR1, ABCB1) for hydro-
phobic cationic compounds; and the phospholipid 
export pump (MDR3, ABCB4). Two hemitransport-
ers ABCG5/G8, functioning as a couple, constitute 
 
CHAPTER 45
Diseases of the Gallbladder and Bile Ducts 
457
the canalicular cholesterol and phytosterol transporter. 
F1C1 (ATP8B1) is an aminophospholipid transferase 
(“flippase”) essential for maintaining the lipid asymme-
try of the canalicular membrane. The canalicular mem-
brane also contains ATP-independent transport systems 
such as the Cl/HCO3 anion exchanger isoform 2 (AE2, 
SLC4A2) for canalicular bicarbonate secretion. For most 
of these transporters, genetic defects have been identi-
fied that are associated with various forms of cholesta-
sis or defects of biliary excretion. F1C1 is defective 
in progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis type 1 
(PFIC1) and benign recurrent intrahepatic cholesta-
sis type 1 (BRIC1) and results in ablation of all other 
ATP-dependent transporter functions. BSEP is defective 
in PFIC2 and BRIC2. Mutations of MRP2 (ABCC2) 
cause the Dubin-Johnson syndrome, an inherited form 
of conjugated hyperbilirubinemia (Chap. 303). A defec-
tive MDR3 (ABCB4) results in PFIC3. ABCG5/G8, 
the canalicular half transporters for cholesterol and other 
neutral sterols, are defective in sitosterolemia. The cys-
tic fibrosis transmembrane regulator (CFTR, ABCC7) 
located on bile duct epithelial cells but not on canalic-
ular membranes is defective in cystic fibrosis, which is 
associated with impaired cholangiocellular pH regulation 
during ductular bile formation and chronic cholestatic 
liver disease, occasionally resulting in biliary cirrhosis.
The Bile Acids
The primary bile acids, cholic acid and chenodeoxycho-
lic acid (CDCA), are synthesized from cholesterol in the 
liver, conjugated with glycine or taurine, and secreted 
into the bile. Secondary bile acids, including deoxycho-
late and lithocholate, are formed in the colon as bac-
terial metabolites of the primary bile acids. However, 
lithocholic acid is much less efficiently absorbed from 
the colon than deoxycholic acid. Another secondary 
bile acid, found in low concentration, is ursodeoxycho-
lic acid (UDCA), a stereoisomer of CDCA. In healthy 
subjects, the ratio of glycine to taurine conjugates in 
bile is ∼3:1.
Bile acids are detergent-like molecules that in aque-
ous solutions and above a critical concentration of about 
2 mM form molecular aggregates called micelles. Choles-
terol alone is sparingly soluble in aqueous environments, 
and its solubility in bile depends on both the total lipid 
concentration and the relative molar percentages of bile 
acids and lecithin. Normal ratios of these constituents 
favor the formation of solubilizing mixed micelles, while 
abnormal ratios promote the precipitation of cholesterol 
crystals in bile via an intermediate liquid crystal phase.
In addition to facilitating the biliary excretion of 
cholesterol, bile acids facilitate the normal intestinal 
absorption of dietary fats, mainly cholesterol and fat-
soluble vitamins, via a micellar transport mechanism 
(Chap. 294). Bile acids also serve as a major physiologic 
driving force for hepatic bile flow and aid in water and 
electrolyte transport in the small bowel and colon.
Enterohepatic Circulation
Bile acids are efficiently conserved under normal condi-
tions. Unconjugated, and to a lesser degree also conju-
gated, bile acids are absorbed by passive diffusion along 
the entire gut. Quantitatively much more important 
for bile salt recirculation, however, is the active transport 
mechanism for conjugated bile acids in the distal ileum 
(Chap. 294). The reabsorbed bile acids enter the por-
tal bloodstream and are taken up rapidly by hepatocytes, 
reconjugated, and resecreted into bile (enterohepatic 
circulation).
The normal bile acid pool size is approximately 2–4 g. 
During digestion of a meal, the bile acid pool under-
goes at least one or more enterohepatic cycles, depend-
ing on the size and composition of the meal. Normally, 
the bile acid pool circulates ∼5–10 times daily. Intestinal 
absorption of the pool is about 95% efficient; therefore, 
fecal loss of bile acids is in the range of 0.2–0.4 g/d. 
In the steady state, this fecal loss is compensated by an 
equal daily synthesis of bile acids by the liver, and, thus, 
the size of the bile acid pool is maintained. Bile acids 
returning to the liver suppress de novo hepatic synthe-
sis of primary bile acids from cholesterol by inhibiting 
the rate-limiting enzyme cholesterol 7-hydroxylase. 
While the loss of bile salts in stool is usually matched by 
increased hepatic synthesis, the maximum rate of syn-
thesis is ∼5 g/d, which may be insufficient to replete the 
bile acid pool size when there is pronounced impair-
ment of intestinal bile salt reabsorption.
The expression of ABC transporters in the entero-
hepatic circulation and of the rate-limiting enzymes 
of bile acid and cholesterol synthesis are regulated in a 
coordinated fashion by nuclear receptors, which are 
ligand-activated transcription factors. The hepatic bile 
salt export pump (BSEP, ABCB11) is upregulated by the 
farnesoid X receptor (FXR), a bile acid sensor that also 
represses bile acid synthesis. The expression of the cho-
lesterol transporter, ABCG5/G8, is upregulated by the 
liver X receptor (LXR), which is an oxysterol sensor.
Gallbladder and Sphincteric 
Functions
In the fasting state, the sphincter of Oddi offers a high-
pressure zone of resistance to bile flow from the CBD 
into the duodenum. This tonic contraction serves to 
(1) prevent reflux of duodenal contents into the pancre-
atic and bile ducts and (2) promote filling of the gall-
bladder. The major factor controlling the evacuation of 
the gallbladder is the peptide hormone cholecystokinin 
SECTION VI
Disorders of the Liver and Biliary Tree
458
Figure 45-1 
Scheme showing pathogenesis of cholesterol gallstone 
formation. Conditions or factors that increase the ratio of 
cholesterol to bile acids and phospholipids (lecithin) favor 
gallstone formation. ABCB4, ATPbinding cassette trans-
porter; ABCG5/8, ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporter 
G5/G8; CYP7A1, cytochrome P-450 7A1; MDR3, multidrug 
resistance protein 3, also called phospholipid export pump.
ABCG5/G8
Cholesterol
Normal bile acids
Normal lecithin
CYP7A1
MDR3 (ABCB4)
Normal cholesterol
Bile acids
Normal lecithin
Normal cholesterol
Normal bile acids
Lecithin
Promote nucleation
Mucous glycoproteins
Heat-labile proteins
Inhibit nucleation
Apolipoproteins
Lecithin vesicles
Gallstone
IV. Microstone
III. Nucleation
II. Supersaturation
I.
(CCK), which is released from the duodenal mucosa in 
response to the ingestion of fats and amino acids. CCK 
produces (1) powerful contraction of the gallbladder, 
(2) decreased resistance of the sphincter of Oddi, and 
(3) enhanced flow of biliary contents into the duodenum.
Hepatic bile is “concentrated” within the gallbladder 
by energy-dependent transmucosal absorption of water 
and electrolytes. Almost the entire bile acid pool may 
be sequestered in the gallbladder following an overnight 
fast for delivery into the duodenum with the first meal 
of the day. The normal capacity of the gallbladder is 
∼30 mL of bile.
Diseases of the Gallbladder
Congenital Anomalies
Anomalies of the biliary tract are not uncommon and 
include abnormalities in number, size, and shape (e.g., 
agenesis of the gallbladder, duplications, rudimentary or 
oversized “giant” gallbladders, and diverticula). Phrygian cap 
is a clinically innocuous entity in which a partial or com-
plete septum (or fold) separates the fundus from the body. 
Anomalies of position or suspension are not uncommon 
and include left-sided gallbladder, intrahepatic gallbladder, 
retrodisplacement of the gallbladder, and “floating” gall-
bladder. The latter condition predisposes to acute torsion, 
volvulus, or herniation of the gallbladder.
Gallstones
Epidemiology and pathogenesis
Gallstones are quite prevalent in most western countries. 
In the United States, the third National Health and 
Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES III) has 
revealed an overall prevalence of gallstones of 7.9% in 
men and 16.6% in women. The prevalence was high in 
Mexican Americans (8.9% in men, 26.7% in women), 
intermediate for non-Hispanic whites (8.6% in men, 
16.6% in women), and low for African Americans (5.3% 
in men, 13.9% in women).
Gallstones are formed because of abnormal bile 
composition. They are divided into two major types: 
cholesterol stones account for more than 80% of the 
total, with pigment stones comprising less than 20%. 
Cholesterol gallstones usually contain >50% cholesterol 
monohydrate plus an admixture of calcium salts, bile pig-
ments, and proteins. Pigment stones are composed pri-
marily of calcium bilirubinate; they contain <20% cho-
lesterol and are classified into “black” and “brown” types, 
the latter forming secondary to chronic biliary infection.
Cholesterol stones and biliary sludge
Cholesterol is essentially water insoluble and requires 
aqueous dispersion into either micelles or vesicles, both 
of which require the presence of a second lipid to solu-
bilize the cholesterol. Cholesterol and phospholipids 
are secreted into bile as unilamellar bilayered vesicles, 
which are converted into mixed micelles consisting of 
bile acids, phospholipids, and cholesterol by the action 
of bile acids. If there is an excess of cholesterol in 
relation to phospholipids and bile acids, unstable, cho-
lesterol-rich vesicles remain, which aggregate into large 
multilamellar vesicles from which cholesterol crystals 
precipitate (Fig. 45-1).
There are several important mechanisms in the for-
mation of lithogenic (stone-forming) bile. The most 
important is increased biliary secretion of cholesterol. 
This may occur in association with obesity, the meta-
bolic syndrome, high-caloric and cholesterol-rich diets, 
or drugs (e.g., clofibrate) and may result from increased 
 
CHAPTER 45
Diseases of the Gallbladder and Bile Ducts 
459
activity of hydroxymethylglutaryl-coenzyme A (HMG-
CoA) reductase, the rate-limiting enzyme of hepatic 
cholesterol synthesis, and increased hepatic uptake of 
cholesterol from blood. In patients with gallstones, 
dietary cholesterol increases biliary cholesterol secretion. 
This does not occur in non-gallstone patients on high-
cholesterol diets. In addition to environmental factors 
such as high-caloric and cholesterol-rich diets, genetic 
factors play an important role in gallstone disease. A 
large study of symptomatic gallstones in Swedish twins 
provided strong evidence for a role of genetic factors 
in gallstone pathogenesis. Genetic factors accounted for 
25%, shared environmental factors for 13%, and indi-
vidual environmental factors for 62% of the phenotypic 
variation among monozygotic twins. A single nucleo-
tide polymorphism of the gene encoding the hepatic 
cholesterol transporter ABCG5/G8 has been found in 
21% of patients with gallstones, but only in 9% of the 
general population. It is thought to cause a gain of 
function of the cholesterol transporter and to contrib-
ute to cholesterol hypersecretion. A high prevalence of 
gallstones is found among first-degree relatives of gall-
stone carriers and in certain ethnic populations such as 
American Indians as well as Chilean Indians and Chilean 
Hispanics. A common genetic trait has been identified 
for some of these populations by mitochondrial DNA 
analysis. In some patients, impaired hepatic conversion 
of cholesterol to bile acids may also occur, resulting in 
an increase of the lithogenic cholesterol/bile acid ratio. 
Although most cholesterol stones have a polygenic basis, 
there are rare monogenic (mendelian) causes. Recently, 
a mutation in the CYP7A1 gene has been described 
that results in a deficiency of the enzyme cholesterol 
7-hydroxylase, which catalyzes the initial step in cho-
lesterol catabolism and bile acid synthesis. The homo-
zygous state is associated with hypercholesterolemia and 
gallstones. Because the phenotype is expressed in the 
heterozygote state, mutations in the CYP7A1 gene may 
contribute to the susceptibility to cholesterol gallstone 
disease in the population. Mutations in the MDR3 
(ABCB4) gene, which encodes the phospholipid export 
pump in the canalicular membrane of the hepatocyte, 
may cause defective phospholipid secretion into bile, 
resulting in cholesterol supersaturation of bile and for-
mation of cholesterol gallstones in the gallbladder and 
in the bile ducts. Thus, an excess of biliary cholesterol 
in relation to bile acids and phospholipids is primarily 
due to hypersecretion of cholesterol, but hyposecretion 
of bile acids or phospholipids may contribute. An addi-
tional disturbance of bile acid metabolism that is likely 
to contribute to supersaturation of bile with choles-
terol is enhanced conversion of cholic acid to deoxy-
cholic acid, with replacement of the cholic acid pool 
by an expanded deoxycholic acid pool. It may result 
from enhanced dehydroxylation of cholic acid and 
increased absorption of newly formed deoxycholic acid. 
An increased deoxycholate secretion is associated with 
hypersecretion of cholesterol into bile.
While supersaturation of bile with cholesterol is an 
important prerequisite for gallstone formation, it is gen-
erally not sufficient by itself to produce cholesterol pre-
cipitation in vivo. Most individuals with supersaturated 
bile do not develop stones because the time required for 
cholesterol crystals to nucleate and grow is longer than 
the time bile spends in the gallbladder.
An important mechanism is nucleation of cholesterol 
monohydrate crystals, which is greatly accelerated in 
human lithogenic bile. Accelerated nucleation of cho-
lesterol monohydrate in bile may be due to either an 
excess of pronucleating factors or a deficiency of antinucleating 
factors. Mucin and certain non-mucin glycoproteins, 
principally immunoglobulins, appear to be pronucleat-
ing factors, while apolipoproteins A-I and A-II and 
other glycoproteins appear to be antinucleating factors. 
Cholesterol monohydrate crystal nucleation and crys-
tal growth probably occur within the mucin gel layer. 
Vesicle fusion leads to liquid crystals, which, in turn, 
nucleate into solid cholesterol monohydrate crys-
tals. Continued growth of the crystals occurs by direct 
nucleation of cholesterol molecules from supersaturated 
unilamellar or multilamellar biliary vesicles.
A third important mechanism in cholesterol gall-
stone formation is gallbladder hypomotility. If the gallblad-
der emptied all supersaturated or crystal-containing bile 
completely, stones would not be able to grow. A high 
percentage of patients with gallstones exhibit abnormali-
ties of gallbladder emptying. Ultrasonographic studies 
show that gallstone patients display an increased gall-
bladder volume during fasting and also after a test meal 
(residual volume) and that fractional emptying after gall-
bladder stimulation is decreased.
Biliary sludge is a thick, mucous material that, upon 
microscopic examination, reveals lecithin-cholesterol 
liquid crystals, cholesterol monohydrate crystals, cal-
cium bilirubinate, and mucin gels. Biliary sludge typi-
cally forms a crescent-like layer in the most dependent 
portion of the gallbladder and is recognized by char-
acteristic echoes on ultrasonography (see below). The 
presence of biliary sludge implies two abnormalities: 
(1) the normal balance between gallbladder mucin 
secretion and elimination has become deranged and 
(2) nucleation of biliary solutes has occurred. That bili-
ary sludge may be a precursor form of gallstone dis-
ease is evident from several observations. In one study, 
96 patients with gallbladder sludge were followed pro-
spectively by serial ultrasound studies. In 18%, biliary 
sludge disappeared and did not recur for at least 2 years. 
In 60%, biliary sludge disappeared and reappeared; in 
14%, gallstones (8% asymptomatic, 6% symptomatic) 
developed; and in 6%, severe biliary pain with or with-
out acute pancreatitis occurred. In 12 patients, chole-
cystectomies were performed, 6 for gallstone-associated 
SECTION VI
Disorders of the Liver and Biliary Tree
460
biliary pain and 3 in symptomatic patients with sludge 
but without gallstones who had prior attacks of pancre-
atitis; the latter did not recur after cholecystectomy. It 
should be emphasized that biliary sludge can develop 
with disorders that cause gallbladder hypomotility; i.e., 
surgery, burns, total parenteral nutrition, pregnancy, 
and oral contraceptives—all of which are associated 
with gallstone formation. However, the presence of 
biliary sludge implies supersaturation of bile with either 
cholesterol or calcium bilirubinate.
Two other conditions are associated with cholesterol-
stone or biliary-sludge formation: pregnancy and rapid 
weight reduction through a very low-calorie diet. There 
appear to be two key changes during pregnancy that con-
tribute to a “cholelithogenic state”: (1) a marked increase 
in cholesterol saturation of bile during the third trimes-
ter and (2) sluggish gallbladder contraction in response 
to a standard meal, resulting in impaired gallbladder 
emptying. That these changes are related to pregnancy 
per se is supported by several studies that show reversal 
of these abnormalities quite rapidly after delivery. Dur-
ing pregnancy, gallbladder sludge develops in 20–30% 
of women and gallstones in 5–12%. Although biliary 
sludge is a common finding during pregnancy, it is usu-
ally asymptomatic and often resolves spontaneously after 
delivery. Gallstones, which are less common than sludge 
and frequently associated with biliary colic, may also dis-
appear after delivery because of spontaneous dissolution 
related to bile becoming unsaturated with cholesterol 
postpartum.
Approximately 10–20% of persons with rapid weight 
reduction achieved through very low calorie dieting 
develop gallstones. In a study involving 600 patients 
who completed a 16-week, 520-kcal/d diet, UDCA in 
a dosage of 600 mg/d proved highly effective in pre-
venting gallstone formation; gallstones developed in 
only 3% of UDCA recipients, compared to 28% of 
placebo-treated patients.
To summarize, cholesterol gallstone disease occurs 
because of several defects, which include (1) bile super-
saturation with cholesterol, (2) nucleation of cholesterol 
monohydrate with subsequent crystal retention and 
stone growth, and (3) abnormal gallbladder motor func-
tion with delayed emptying and stasis. Other important 
factors known to predispose to cholesterol-stone forma-
tion are summarized in Table 45-1.
Pigment stones
Black pigment stones are composed of either pure 
calcium bilirubinate or polymer-like complexes with 
calcium and mucin glycoproteins. They are more com-
mon in patients who have chronic hemolytic states 
(with increased conjugated bilirubin in bile), liver 
cirrhosis, Gilbert’s syndrome, or cystic fibrosis. Gall-
bladder stones in patients with ileal diseases, ileal resec-
tion, or ileal bypass generally are also black pigment 
Table 45-1
Predisposing Factors for Cholesterol and 
Pigment Gallstone Formation
Cholesterol Stones
  1.  Demographic/genetic factors: Prevalence highest in 
North American Indians, Chilean Indians, and Chilean 
Hispanics, greater in Northern Europe and North  
America than in Asia, lowest in Japan; familial disposi-
tion; hereditary aspects
  2.  Obesity, metabolic syndrome: Normal bile acid pool 
and secretion but increased biliary secretion of  
cholesterol
  3.  Weight loss: Mobilization of tissue cholesterol leads to 
increased biliary cholesterol secretion while enterohe-
patic circulation of bile acids is decreased
  4.  Female sex hormones
a.  Estrogens stimulate hepatic lipoprotein receptors, 
increase uptake of dietary cholesterol, and increase 
biliary cholesterol secretion
b.  Natural estrogens, other estrogens, and oral  
contraceptives lead to decreased bile salt secretion 
and decreased conversion of cholesterol to  
cholesteryl esters
  5.  Increasing age: Increased biliary secretion of  
cholesterol, decreased size of bile acid pool,  
decreased secretion of bile salts
  6.  Gallbladder hypomotility leading to stasis and  
formation of sludge
a.  Prolonged parenteral nutrition
b.  Fasting
c.  Pregnancy
d.  Drugs such as octreotide
  7.  Clofibrate therapy: Increased biliary secretion of  
cholesterol
  8.  Decreased bile acid secretion
a.  Primary biliary cirrhosis
b.  Genetic defect of the CYP7A1 gene
  9.  Decreased phospholipid secretion: Genetic defect of 
the MDR3 gene
10.  Miscellaneous
a.  High-calorie, high-fat diet
b.  Spinal cord injury
Pigment Stones
1.  Demographic/genetic factors: Asia, rural setting
2.  Chronic hemolysis
3.  Alcoholic cirrhosis
4.  Pernicious anemia
5.  Cystic fibrosis
6.  Chronic biliary tract infection, parasite infections
7.  Increasing age
8.  Ileal disease, ileal resection or bypass
stones. Enterohepatic recycling of bilirubin in ileal dis-
ease states contributes to their pathogenesis. Brown pig-
ment stones are composed of calcium salts of unconju-
gated bilirubin with varying amounts of cholesterol and 
protein. They are caused by the presence of increased 
amounts of unconjugated, insoluble bilirubin in bile 
that precipitates to form stones. Deconjugation of an 
 
CHAPTER 45
Diseases of the Gallbladder and Bile Ducts 
461
Table 45-2 
Diagnostic Evaluation of the Gallbladder
Diagnostic Advantages
Diagnostic Limitations
Comment
Gallbladder Ultrasound
Rapid
Accurate identification of gallstones (>95%)
Simultaneous scanning of GB, liver, bile ducts,  
pancreas
“Real-time” scanning allows assessment of GB  
volume, contractility
Not limited by jaundice, pregnancy
May detect very small stones
Bowel gas
Massive obesity
Ascites
Procedure of choice for detection  
of stones
Plain Abdominal x-ray
Low cost
Readily available
Relatively low yield
? Contraindicated in pregnancy
Pathognomonic findings in: calcified 
gallstones
  Limey bile, porcelain GB
  Emphysematous cholecystitis
  Gallstone ileus
Radioisotope Scans (HIDA, DIDA, etc.)
Accurate identification of cystic duct obstruction
Simultaneous assessment of bile ducts
? Contraindicated in pregnancy
Serum bilirubin >103–205 μmol/L 
(6–12 mg/dL)
Cholecystogram of low  
resolution
Indicated for confirmation of  
suspected acute cholecystitis; less 
sensitive and less specific in chronic 
cholecystitis; useful in diagnosis of 
acalculous cholecystopathy, espe-
cially if given with CCK to assess 
gallbladder emptying
Abbreviations: CCK, cholecystokinin; GB, gallbladder; GBUS, gallbladder ultrasound.
excess of soluble bilirubin mono- and diglucuronides 
may be mediated by endogenous β-glucuronidase but 
may also occur by spontaneous hydrolysis. Sometimes, 
the enzyme is also produced when bile is chronically 
infected by bacteria, and such stones are brown. Pig-
ment stone formation is especially prominent in Asians 
and is often associated with infections in the gallbladder 
and biliary tree (Table 45-1).
Diagnosis
Procedures of potential use in the diagnosis of choleli-
thiasis and other diseases of the gallbladder are detailed 
in Table 45-2. Ultrasonography of the gallbladder 
is very accurate in the identification of cholelithiasis 
and has replaced oral cholecystography (Fig. 45-2A). 
Stones as small as 1.5 mm in diameter may be confi-
dently identified provided that firm criteria are used 
[e.g., acoustic “shadowing” of opacities that are within 
the gallbladder lumen and that change with the patient’s 
position (by gravity)]. In major medical centers, the 
false-negative and false-positive rates for ultrasound in 
gallstone patients are ∼2–4%. Biliary sludge is material 
of low echogenic activity that typically forms a layer in 
the most dependent position of the gallbladder. This 
layer shifts with postural changes but fails to produce 
acoustic shadowing; these two characteristics distinguish 
sludges from gallstones. Ultrasound can also be used to 
assess the emptying function of the gallbladder.
The plain abdominal film may detect gallstones con-
taining sufficient calcium to be radiopaque (10–15% of 
cholesterol and ∼50% of pigment stones). Plain radiog-
raphy may also be of use in the diagnosis of emphyse-
matous cholecystitis, porcelain gallbladder, limey bile, 
and gallstone ileus.
Oral cholecystography (OCG) has historically been a 
useful procedure for the diagnosis of gallstones but has 
been replaced by ultrasound and is regarded as obsolete. 
It may be used to assess the patency of the cystic duct 
and gallbladder emptying function. Further, OCG can 
also delineate the size and number of gallstones and 
determine whether they are calcified.
Radiopharmaceuticals such as 99mTc-labeled N-sub-
stituted iminodiacetic acids (HIDA, DIDA, DISIDA, 
etc.) are rapidly extracted from the blood and are 
excreted into the biliary tree in high concentration even 
in the presence of mild to moderate serum bilirubin ele-
vations. Failure to image the gallbladder in the presence 
of biliary ductal visualization may indicate cystic duct 
obstruction, acute or chronic cholecystitis, or surgical 
absence of the organ. Such scans have some application 
in the diagnosis of acute cholecystitis.
SECTION VI
Disorders of the Liver and Biliary Tree
462
Figure 45-2 
Examples of ultrasound and radiologic studies of the 
biliary tract. A. An ultrasound study showing a distended 
gallbladder containing a single large stone (arrow), which 
casts an acoustic shadow. B. Endoscopic retrograde chol-
angiopancreatogram (ERCP) showing normal biliary tract 
anatomy. In addition to the endoscope and large vertical 
gallbladder filled with contrast dye, the common hepatic 
duct (CHD), common bile duct (CBD), and pancreatic duct 
(PD) are shown. The arrow points to the ampulla of Vater. 
C. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiogram (ERC) showing 
choledocholithiasis. The biliary tract is dilatated and con-
tains multiple radiolucent calculi. D. ERCP showing scleros-
ing cholangitis. The common bile duct shows areas that are 
strictured and narrowed.
Symptoms of gallstone disease
Gallstones usually produce symptoms by causing inflam-
mation or obstruction following their migration into 
the cystic duct or CBD. The most specific and charac-
teristic symptom of gallstone disease is biliary colic that 
is a constant and often long-lasting pain (see below). 
Obstruction of the cystic duct or CBD by a stone pro-
duces increased intraluminal pressure and distention of 
the viscus that cannot be relieved by repetitive biliary 
contractions. The resultant visceral pain is characteristi-
cally a severe, steady ache or fullness in the epigastrium 
or right upper quadrant (RUQ) of the abdomen with 
frequent radiation to the interscapular area, right scapula, 
or shoulder.
Biliary colic begins quite suddenly and may per-
sist with severe intensity for 15 min to 5 h, subsiding 
gradually or rapidly. It is steady rather than intermit-
tent as would be suggested by the word colic, which 
must be regarded as a misnomer, although it is in wide-
spread use. An episode of biliary pain persisting beyond 
5 h should raise the suspicion of acute cholecystitis (see 
below). Nausea and vomiting frequently accompany 
episodes of biliary pain. An elevated level of serum bili-
rubin and/or alkaline phosphatase suggests a common 
duct stone. Fever or chills (rigors) with biliary pain usu-
ally imply a complication, i.e., cholecystitis, pancreatitis, 
or cholangitis. Complaints of vague epigastric fullness, 
dyspepsia, eructation, or flatulence, especially following 
a fatty meal, should not be confused with biliary pain. 
Such symptoms are frequently elicited from patients 
with or without gallstone disease but are not specific for 
biliary calculi. Biliary colic may be precipitated by eat-
ing a fatty meal, by consumption of a large meal follow-
ing a period of prolonged fasting, or by eating a normal 
meal; it is frequently nocturnal, occurring within a few 
hours of retiring.
Natural history
Gallstone disease discovered in an asymptomatic patient 
or in a patient whose symptoms are not referable to 
cholelithiasis is a common clinical problem. The natu-
ral history of “silent,” or asymptomatic, gallstones has 
occasioned much debate. A study of predominantly 
male silent gallstone patients suggests that the cumula-
tive risk for the development of symptoms or complica-
tions is relatively low—10% at 5 years, 15% at 10 years, 
and 18% at 15 years. Patients remaining asymptom-
atic for 15 years were found to be unlikely to develop 
symptoms during further follow-up, and most patients 
who did develop complications from their gallstones 
experienced prior warning symptoms. Similar conclu-
sions apply to diabetic patients with silent gallstones. 
Decision analysis has suggested that (1) the cumulative 
risk of death due to gallstone disease while on expectant 
management is small, and (2) prophylactic cholecystec-
tomy is not warranted.
 
CHAPTER 45
Diseases of the Gallbladder and Bile Ducts 
463
Complications requiring cholecystectomy are much 
more common in gallstone patients who have devel-
oped symptoms of biliary pain. Patients found to have 
gallstones at a young age are more likely to develop 
symptoms from cholelithiasis than are patients >60 years 
at the time of initial diagnosis. Patients with diabetes 
mellitus and gallstones may be somewhat more sus-
ceptible to septic complications, but the magnitude of 
risk of septic biliary complications in diabetic patients is 
incompletely defined.
Treatment	
Gallstones
Surgical Therapy  In asymptomatic gallstone 
patients, the risk of developing symptoms or complica-
tions requiring surgery is quite small (in the range of 
1–2% per year). Thus, a recommendation for cholecys-
tectomy in a patient with gallstones should probably 
be based on assessment of three factors: (1) the pres-
ence of symptoms that are frequent enough or severe 
enough to interfere with the patient’s general routine; 
(2) the presence of a prior complication of gallstone  
disease, i.e., history of acute cholecystitis, pancreatitis, 
gallstone fistula, etc.; or (3) the presence of an underly-
ing condition predisposing the patient to increased risk 
of gallstone complications (e.g., calcified or porcelain 
gallbladder and/or a previous attack of acute cholecys-
titis regardless of current symptomatic status). Patients 
with very large gallstones (>3 cm in diameter) and 
patients having gallstones in a congenitally anomalous 
gallbladder might also be considered for prophylactic 
cholecystectomy. Although young age is a worrisome 
factor in asymptomatic gallstone patients, few authori-
ties would now recommend routine cholecystectomy 
in all young patients with silent stones. Laparoscopic 
cholecystectomy is a minimal-access approach for the 
removal of the gallbladder together with its stones. Its 
advantages include a markedly shortened hospital stay, 
minimal disability, as well as decreased cost, and it is the 
procedure of choice for most patients referred for elec-
tive cholecystectomy.
From several studies involving >4000 patients under-
going laparoscopic cholecystectomy, the following 
key points emerge: (1) complications develop in ∼4% 
of patients, (2) conversion to laparotomy occurs in 5%,  
(3) the death rate is remarkably low (i.e., <0.1%), and 
(4) bile duct injuries are unusual (i.e., 0.2–0.5%) but more 
frequent than with open cholecystectomy. These data 
indicate why laparoscopic cholecystectomy has become 
the “gold standard” for treating symptomatic cholelithiasis.
Medical 
Therapy—Gallstone 
Dis- 
solution  Ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA) decreases 
cholesterol saturation of bile and also appears to produce 
a lamellar liquid crystalline phase in bile that allows a  
dispersion of cholesterol from stones by physical- 
chemical means. UDCA may also retard cholesterol 
crystal nucleation. In carefully selected patients with 
a functioning gallbladder and with radiolucent stones  
<10 mm in diameter, complete dissolution can be 
achieved in ∼50% of patients within 6 months to 2 years. 
For good results within a reasonable time period, this 
therapy should be limited to radiolucent stones smaller 
than 5 mm in diameter. The dose of UDCA should be 
10–15 mg/kg per day. Stones larger than 15 mm in 
size rarely dissolve. Pigment stones are not responsive 
to UDCA therapy. The highest success rate (i.e., >70%) 
occurs in patients with small (<5 mm) floating radiolu-
cent gallstones. Probably ≤10% of patients with symp-
tomatic cholelithiasis are candidates for such treatment. 
However, in addition to the vexing problem of recur-
rent stones (30–50% over 3–5 years of follow-up), there 
is also the factor of taking an expensive drug for up to  
2 years. The advantages and success of laparoscopic  
cholecystectomy have largely reduced the role of gallstone 
dissolution to patients who wish to avoid or are not candi-
dates for elective cholecystectomy. However, patients with 
cholesterol gallstone disease who develop recurrent cho-
ledocholithiasis after cholecystectomy should be on long-
term treatment with ursodeoxycholic acid.
Acute and Chronic Cholecystitis
Acute cholecystitis
Acute inflammation of the gallbladder wall usually 
follows obstruction of the cystic duct by a stone. Inflam-
matory response can be evoked by three factors: (1) 
mechanical inflammation produced by increased intralu-
minal pressure and distention with resulting ischemia of 
the gallbladder mucosa and wall, (2) chemical inflammation 
caused by the release of lysolecithin (due to the action 
of phospholipase on lecithin in bile) and other local tis-
sue factors, and (3) bacterial inflammation, which may play 
a role in 50–85% of patients with acute cholecystitis. 
The organisms most frequently isolated by culture of 
gallbladder bile in these patients include Escherichia coli, 
Klebsiella spp., Streptococcus spp., and Clostridium spp.
Acute cholecystitis often begins as an attack of biliary 
pain that progressively worsens. Approximately 60–70% 
of patients report having experienced prior attacks that 
resolved spontaneously. As the episode progresses, 
however, the pain of acute cholecystitis becomes more 
generalized in the right upper abdomen. As with bili-
ary colic, the pain of cholecystitis may radiate to the 
interscapular area, right scapula, or shoulder. Peritoneal 
signs of inflammation such as increased pain with jarring 
or on deep respiration may be apparent. The patient 
is anorectic and often nauseated. Vomiting is rela-
tively common and may produce symptoms and signs 
SECTION VI
Disorders of the Liver and Biliary Tree
464
of vascular and extracellular volume depletion. Jaundice 
is unusual early in the course of acute cholecystitis but 
may occur when edematous inflammatory changes 
involve the bile ducts and surrounding lymph nodes.
A low-grade fever is characteristically present, but 
shaking chills or rigors are not uncommon. The RUQ 
of the abdomen is almost invariably tender to palpation. 
An enlarged, tense gallbladder is palpable in 25–50% 
of patients. Deep inspiration or cough during subcos-
tal palpation of the RUQ usually produces increased 
pain and inspiratory arrest (Murphy’s sign). Local-
ized rebound tenderness in the RUQ is common, as 
are abdominal distention and hypoactive bowel sounds 
from paralytic ileus, but generalized peritoneal signs and 
abdominal rigidity are usually lacking, in the absence of 
perforation.
The diagnosis of acute cholecystitis is usually made 
on the basis of a characteristic history and physical 
examination. The triad of sudden onset of RUQ ten-
derness, fever, and leukocytosis is highly suggestive. 
Typically, leukocytosis in the range of 10,000–15,000 
cells per microliter with a left shift on differential 
count is found. The serum bilirubin is mildly elevated 
[<85.5 μmol/L (5 mg/dL)] in fewer than half of 
patients, while about one-fourth have modest eleva-
tions in serum aminotransferases (usually less than a 
fivefold elevation). Ultrasound will demonstrate calculi 
in 90–95% of cases and is useful for detection of signs 
of gallbladder inflammation including thickening of the 
wall, pericholecystic fluid, and dilation of the bile duct. 
The radionuclide (e.g., HIDA) biliary scan may be con-
firmatory if bile duct imaging is seen without visualiza-
tion of the gallbladder.
Approximately 75% of patients treated medically have 
remission of acute symptoms within 2–7 days following 
hospitalization. In 25%, however, a complication of acute 
cholecystitis will occur despite conservative treatment (see 
below). In this setting, prompt surgical intervention is 
required. Of the 75% of patients with acute cholecys-
titis who undergo remission of symptoms, ∼25% will 
experience a recurrence of cholecystitis within 1 year, 
and 60% will have at least one recurrent bout within 
6 years. In view of the natural history of the disease, 
acute cholecystitis is best treated by early surgery when-
ever possible.
Mirizzi’s syndrome is a rare complication in which a 
gallstone becomes impacted in the cystic duct or neck of 
the gallbladder causing compression of the CBD, result-
ing in CBD obstruction and jaundice. Ultrasound shows 
gallstone(s) lying outside the hepatic duct. Endoscopic ret-
rograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) (Fig. 45-2B) 
or percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography (PTC) or 
magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) 
will usually demonstrate the characteristic extrinsic 
compression of the CBD. Surgery consists of removing 
the cystic duct, diseased gallbladder, and the impacted 
stone. The preoperative diagnosis of Mirizzi’s syndrome 
is important to avoid CBD injury.
Acalculous cholecystitis
In 5–10% of patients with acute cholecystitis, calculi 
obstructing the cystic duct are not found at surgery. In 
>50% of such cases, an underlying explanation for acal-
culous inflammation is not found. An increased risk for 
the development of acalculous cholecystitis is especially 
associated with serious trauma or burns, with the postpar-
tum period following prolonged labor, and with ortho-
pedic and other nonbiliary major surgical operations 
in the postoperative period. It may possibly complicate 
periods of prolonged parenteral hyperalimentation. For 
some of these cases, biliary sludge in the cystic duct may 
be responsible. Other precipitating factors include vas-
culitis, obstructing adenocarcinoma of the gallbladder, 
diabetes mellitus, torsion of the gallbladder, “unusual” 
bacterial infections of the gallbladder (e.g., Leptospira, 
Streptococcus, Salmonella, or Vibrio cholerae), and parasitic 
infestation of the gallbladder. Acalculous cholecystitis 
may also be seen with a variety of other systemic disease 
processes (sarcoidosis, cardiovascular disease, tuberculo-
sis, syphilis, actinomycosis, etc.).
Although the clinical manifestations of acalculous cho-
lecystitis are indistinguishable from those of calculous 
cholecystitis, the setting of acute gallbladder inflamma-
tion complicating severe underlying illness is characteristic 
of acalculous disease. Ultrasound, CT, or radionuclide 
examinations demonstrating a large, tense, static gall-
bladder without stones and with evidence of poor emp-
tying over a prolonged period may be diagnostically 
useful in some cases. The complication rate for acalcu-
lous cholecystitis exceeds that for calculous cholecystitis. 
Successful management of acute acalculous cholecystitis 
appears to depend primarily on early diagnosis and sur-
gical intervention, with meticulous attention to postop-
erative care.
Acalculous cholecystopathy
Disordered motility of the gallbladder can produce 
recurrent biliary pain in patients without gallstones. Infu-
sion of an octapeptide of CCK can be used to measure 
the gallbladder ejection fraction during cholescintig-
raphy. The surgical findings have included abnormali-
ties such as chronic cholecystitis, gallbladder muscle 
hypertrophy, and/or a markedly narrowed cystic duct. 
Some of these patients may well have had antecedent 
gallbladder disease. The following criteria can be used 
to identify patients with acalculous cholecystopathy: 
(1) recurrent episodes of typical RUQ pain character-
istic of biliary tract pain, (2) abnormal CCK cholescin-
tigraphy demonstrating a gallbladder ejection fraction of 
<40%, and (3) infusion of CCK reproduces the patient’s 
pain. An additional clue would be the identification of 
a large gallbladder on ultrasound examination. Finally, 
it should be noted that sphincter of Oddi dysfunction 
 
CHAPTER 45
Diseases of the Gallbladder and Bile Ducts 
465
can also give rise to recurrent RUQ pain and CCK- 
scintigraphic abnormalities.
Emphysematous cholecystitis
So-called emphysematous cholecystitis is thought to 
begin with acute cholecystitis (calculous or acalculous) 
followed by ischemia or gangrene of the gallbladder 
wall and infection by gas-producing organisms. Bacteria 
most frequently cultured in this setting include anaer-
obes, such as C. welchii or C. perfringens, and aerobes, 
such as E. coli. This condition occurs most frequently in 
elderly men and in patients with diabetes mellitus. The 
clinical manifestations are essentially indistinguishable 
from those of nongaseous cholecystitis. The diagnosis 
is usually made on plain abdominal film by finding gas 
within the gallbladder lumen, dissecting within the gall-
bladder wall to form a gaseous ring, or in the pericho-
lecystic tissues. The morbidity and mortality rates with 
emphysematous cholecystitis are considerable. Prompt 
surgical intervention coupled with appropriate antibiotics 
is mandatory.
Chronic cholecystitis
Chronic inflammation of the gallbladder wall is almost 
always associated with the presence of gallstones and is 
thought to result from repeated bouts of subacute or 
acute cholecystitis or from persistent mechanical irri-
tation of the gallbladder wall by gallstones. The pres-
ence of bacteria in the bile occurs in >25% of patients 
with chronic cholecystitis. The presence of infected bile 
in a patient with chronic cholecystitis undergoing elec-
tive cholecystectomy probably adds little to the opera-
tive risk. Chronic cholecystitis may be asymptomatic for 
years, may progress to symptomatic gallbladder disease 
or to acute cholecystitis, or may present with complica-
tions (see below).
Complications of cholecystitis
Empyema and hydrops
Empyema of the gallbladder usually results from pro-
gression of acute cholecystitis with persistent cystic duct 
obstruction to superinfection of the stagnant bile with 
a pus-forming bacterial organism. The clinical picture 
resembles that of cholangitis with high fever; severe 
RUQ pain; marked leukocytosis; and often, prostration. 
Empyema of the gallbladder carries a high risk of gram-
negative sepsis and/or perforation. Emergency surgical 
intervention with proper antibiotic coverage is required 
as soon as the diagnosis is suspected.
Hydrops or mucocele of the gallbladder may also 
result from prolonged obstruction of the cystic duct, 
usually by a large solitary calculus. In this instance, 
the obstructed gallbladder lumen is progressively dis-
tended, over a period of time, by mucus (mucocele) or 
by a clear transudate (hydrops) produced by mucosal 
epithelial cells. A visible, easily palpable, nontender 
mass sometimes extending from the RUQ into the 
right iliac fossa may be found on physical examination. 
The patient with hydrops of the gallbladder frequently 
remains asymptomatic, although chronic RUQ pain 
may also occur. Cholecystectomy is indicated, because 
empyema, perforation, or gangrene may complicate the 
condition.
Gangrene and perforation
Gangrene of the gallbladder results from ischemia of the 
wall and patchy or complete tissue necrosis. Underly-
ing conditions often include marked distention of the 
gallbladder, vasculitis, diabetes mellitus, empyema, or tor-
sion resulting in arterial occlusion. Gangrene usually pre-
disposes to perforation of the gallbladder, but perforation 
may also occur in chronic cholecystitis without premoni-
tory warning symptoms. Localized perforations are usually 
contained by the omentum or by adhesions produced 
by recurrent inflammation of the gallbladder. Bacte-
rial superinfection of the walled-off gallbladder con-
tents results in abscess formation. Most patients are 
best treated with cholecystectomy, but some seriously 
ill patients may be managed with cholecystostomy and 
drainage of the abscess. Free perforation is less common 
but is associated with a mortality rate of ∼30%. Such 
patients may experience a sudden transient relief of 
RUQ pain as the distended gallbladder decompresses; 
this is followed by signs of generalized peritonitis.
Fistula formation and gallstone ileus
Fistulization into an adjacent organ adherent to the gall-
bladder wall may result from inflammation and adhe-
sion formation. Fistulas into the duodenum are most 
common, followed in frequency by those involving 
the hepatic flexure of the colon, stomach or jejunum, 
abdominal wall, and renal pelvis. Clinically “silent” 
biliary-enteric fistulas occurring as a complication of 
acute cholecystitis have been found in up to 5% of 
patients undergoing cholecystectomy. Asymptomatic 
cholecystoenteric fistulas may sometimes be diagnosed 
by finding gas in the biliary tree on plain abdominal 
films. Barium contrast studies or endoscopy of the upper 
gastrointestinal tract or colon may demonstrate the fis-
tula. Treatment in the symptomatic patient usually con-
sists of cholecystectomy, CBD exploration, and closure 
of the fistulous tract.
Gallstone ileus refers to mechanical intestinal obstruc-
tion resulting from the passage of a large gallstone into 
the bowel lumen. The stone customarily enters the 
duodenum through a cholecystoenteric fistula at that 
level. The site of obstruction by the impacted gallstone 
is usually at the ileocecal valve, provided that the more 
proximal small bowel is of normal caliber. The major-
ity of patients do not give a history of either prior bili-
ary tract symptoms or complaints suggestive of acute 
cholecystitis or fistulization. Large stones, >2.5 cm in 
SECTION VI
Disorders of the Liver and Biliary Tree
466
diameter, are thought to predispose to fistula forma-
tion by gradual erosion through the gallbladder fundus. 
Diagnostic confirmation may occasionally be found on 
the plain abdominal film (e.g., small-intestinal obstruc-
tion with gas in the biliary tree and a calcified, ectopic 
gallstone) or following an upper gastrointestinal series 
(cholecystoduodenal fistula with small-bowel obstruc-
tion at the ileocecal valve). Laparotomy with stone 
extraction (or propulsion into the colon) remains the 
procedure of choice to relieve obstruction. Evacuation 
of large stones within the gallbladder should also be 
performed. In general, the gallbladder and its attach-
ment to the intestines should be left alone.
Limey (milk of calcium) bile and  
porcelain gallbladder
Calcium salts in the lumen of the gallbladder in suffi-
cient concentration may produce calcium precipitation 
and diffuse, hazy opacification of bile or a layering effect 
on plain abdominal roentgenography. This so-called 
limey bile, or milk of calcium bile, is usually clinically 
innocuous, but cholecystectomy is recommended, espe-
cially when it occurs in a hydropic gallbladder. In the 
entity called porcelain gallbladder, calcium salt deposition 
within the wall of a chronically inflamed gallbladder 
may be detected on the plain abdominal film. Cho-
lecystectomy is advised in all patients with porcelain 
gallbladder because in a high percentage of cases this 
finding appears to be associated with the development 
of carcinoma of the gallbladder.
Treatment	
Acute Cholecystitis
Medical Therapy  Although surgical interven-
tion remains the mainstay of therapy for acute chole-
cystitis and its complications, a period of in-hospital 
stabilization may be required before cholecystectomy. 
Oral intake is eliminated, nasogastric suction may be 
indicated, and extracellular volume depletion and elec-
trolyte abnormalities are repaired. Meperidine or non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are usually 
employed for analgesia because they may produce 
less spasm of the sphincter of Oddi than drugs such as 
morphine. Intravenous antibiotic therapy is usually indi-
cated in patients with severe acute cholecystitis, even 
though bacterial superinfection of bile may not have 
occurred in the early stages of the inflammatory pro-
cess. Antibiotic therapy is guided by the most common 
organisms likely to be present, which are E. coli, Klebsi-
ella spp., and Streptococcus spp. Effective antibiotics 
include ureidopenicillins such as piperacillin or mezlo-
cillin, ampicillin sulbactam, ciprofloxacin, moxifloxa-
cin, and third-generation cephalosporins. Anaerobic 
coverage by a drug such as metronidazole should be 
added if gangrenous or emphysematous cholecystitis is  
suspected. Imipenem/meropenem represent potent 
parenteral antibiotics that cover the whole spectrum 
of bacteria causing ascending cholangitis. They should, 
however, be reserved for the most severe, life-threatening 
infections when other regimens have failed (Chap. 149). 
Postoperative 
complications 
of 
wound 
infection, 
abscess formation, or sepsis are reduced in antibiotic-
treated patients.
Surgical 
Therapy  The optimal timing of 
surgical intervention in patients with acute cholecys-
titis depends on stabilization of the patient. The clear 
trend is toward earlier surgery, and this is due in part  
to requirements for shorter hospital stays. Urgent  
(emergency) cholecystectomy or cholecystostomy is 
probably appropriate in most patients in whom a com-
plication of acute cholecystitis such as empyema, emphy-
sematous cholecystitis, or perforation is suspected or 
confirmed. Patients with uncomplicated acute cholecys-
titis should undergo early elective laparoscopic chole-
cystectomy, ideally within 72 hours after diagnosis. The 
complication rate is not increased in patients undergoing 
early as opposed to delayed (>6 weeks after diagnosis) 
cholecystectomy. Delayed surgical intervention is prob-
ably best reserved for (1) patients in whom the overall 
medical condition imposes an unacceptable risk for early 
surgery and (2) patients in whom the diagnosis of acute 
cholecystitis is in doubt. Early cholecystectomy (within 
72 hours) is the treatment of choice for most patients 
with acute cholecystitis. Mortality figures for emergency 
cholecystectomy in most centers approach 3%, while 
the mortality risk for early elective cholecystectomy is 
∼0.5% in patients under age 60. Of course, the opera-
tive risks increase with age-related diseases of other 
organ systems and with the presence of long- or short-
term complications of gallbladder disease. Seriously ill or 
debilitated patients with cholecystitis may be managed 
with cholecystostomy and tube drainage of the gallblad-
der. Elective cholecystectomy may then be done at a  
later date.
Postcholecystectomy complications
Early complications following cholecystectomy include 
atelectasis and other pulmonary disorders, abscess for-
mation (often subphrenic), external or internal hem-
orrhage, biliary-enteric fistula, and bile leaks. Jaundice 
may indicate absorption of bile from an intraabdomi-
nal collection following a biliary leak or mechanical 
obstruction of the CBD by retained calculi, intraductal 
blood clots, or extrinsic compression.
Overall, cholecystectomy is a very successful opera-
tion that provides total or near-total relief of preopera-
tive symptoms in 75–90% of patients. The most common 
cause of persistent postcholecystectomy symptoms 
 
CHAPTER 45
Diseases of the Gallbladder and Bile Ducts 
467
is an overlooked symptomatic nonbiliary disorder 
(e.g., reflux esophagitis, peptic ulceration, pancreati-
tis, or—most often—irritable bowel syndrome). In a 
small percentage of patients, however, a disorder of the 
extrahepatic bile ducts may result in persistent symp-
tomatology. These so-called postcholecystectomy syn-
dromes may be due to (1) biliary strictures, (2) retained 
biliary calculi, (3) cystic duct stump syndrome, (4) ste-
nosis or dyskinesia of the sphincter of Oddi, or (5) bile 
salt–induced diarrhea or gastritis.
Cystic duct stump syndrome
In the absence of cholangiographically demonstrable 
retained stones, symptoms resembling biliary pain or 
cholecystitis in the postcholecystectomy patient have 
frequently been attributed to disease in a long (>1 cm) 
cystic duct remnant (cystic duct stump syndrome). 
Careful analysis, however, reveals that postcholecys-
tectomy complaints are attributable to other causes in 
almost all patients in whom the symptom complex was 
originally thought to result from the existence of a long 
cystic duct stump. Accordingly, considerable care should 
be taken to investigate the possible role of other factors 
in the production of postcholecystectomy symptoms 
before attributing them to cystic duct stump syndrome.
Papillary dysfunction, papillary stenosis, spasm 
of the sphincter of Oddi, and biliary dyskinesia
Symptoms of biliary colic accompanied by signs of 
recurrent, intermittent biliary obstruction may be pro-
duced by papillary stenosis, papillary dysfunction, spasm 
of the sphincter of Oddi, and biliary dyskinesia. Papil-
lary stenosis is thought to result from acute or chronic 
inflammation of the papilla of Vater or from glandular 
hyperplasia of the papillary segment. Five criteria have 
been used to define papillary stenosis: (1) upper abdom-
inal pain, usually RUQ or epigastric; (2) abnormal 
liver tests; (3) dilatation of the common bile duct upon 
ERCP examination; (4) delayed (>45 min) drainage of 
contrast material from the duct; and (5) increased basal 
pressure of the sphincter of Oddi, a finding that may be 
of only minor significance. An alternative to ERCP is 
magnetic resonance cholangiography (MRC) if ERCP 
and/or biliary manometry are either unavailable or not 
feasible. In patients with papillary stenosis, quantitative 
hepatobiliary scintigraphy has revealed delayed transit 
from the common bile duct to the bowel, ductal dilata-
tion, and abnormal time-activity dynamics. This tech-
nique can also be used before and after sphincterotomy 
to document improvement in biliary emptying. Treat-
ment consists of endoscopic or surgical sphincteroplasty 
to ensure wide patency of the distal portions of both 
the bile and pancreatic ducts. The greater the number 
of the preceding criteria present, the greater the likeli-
hood that a patient does have a degree of papillary ste-
nosis sufficient to justify correction. The factors usually 
considered as indications for sphincterotomy include 
(1) prolonged duration of symptoms, (2) lack of 
response to symptomatic treatment, (3) presence of 
severe disability, and (4) the patient’s choice of sphinc-
terotomy over surgery (given a clear understanding on 
his or her part of the risks involved in both procedures).
Criteria for diagnosing dyskinesia of the sphincter of 
Oddi are even more controversial than those for papil-
lary stenosis. Proposed mechanisms include spasm of the 
sphincter, denervation sensitivity resulting in hyperto-
nicity, and abnormalities of the sequencing or frequency 
rates of sphincteric-contraction waves. When thorough 
evaluation has failed to demonstrate another cause for 
the pain, and when cholangiographic and manometric 
criteria suggest a diagnosis of biliary dyskinesia, medi-
cal treatment with nitrites or anticholinergics to attempt 
pharmacologic relaxation of the sphincter has been 
proposed. Endoscopic biliary sphincterotomy (EBS) or 
surgical sphincteroplasty may be indicated in patients 
who fail to respond to a 2- to 3-month trial of medical 
therapy, especially if basal sphincter of Oddi pressures 
are elevated. EBS has become the procedure of choice 
for removing bile duct stones and for other biliary and 
pancreatic problems.
Bile salt–induced diarrhea and gastritis
Postcholecystectomy patients may develop symptoms 
of dyspepsia, which have been attributed to duodeno-
gastric reflux of bile. However, firm data linking these 
symptoms to bile gastritis after surgical removal of the 
gallbladder are lacking. Cholecystectomy induces per-
sistent changes in gut transit, and these changes effect 
a noticeable modification of bowel habits. Cholecystec-
tomy shortens gut transit time by accelerating passage of 
the fecal bolus through the colon with marked accel-
eration in the right colon, thus causing an increase in 
colonic bile acid output and a shift in bile acid com-
position toward the more diarrheagenic secondary bile 
acids. Diarrhea that is severe enough, i.e., three or more 
watery movements per day, can be classified as post-
cholecystectomy diarrhea, and this occurs in 5–10% of 
patients undergoing elective cholecystectomy. Treat-
ment with bile acid–sequestering agents such as chole-
styramine or colestipol is often effective in ameliorating 
troublesome diarrhea.
The Hyperplastic Cholecystoses
The term hyperplastic cholecystoses is used to denote a 
group of disorders of the gallbladder characterized by 
excessive proliferation of normal tissue components.
Adenomyomatosis is characterized by a benign prolif-
eration of gallbladder surface epithelium with glandlike 
formations, extramural sinuses, transverse strictures, 
and/or fundal nodule (“adenoma” or “adenomyoma”) 
formation.
SECTION VI
Disorders of the Liver and Biliary Tree
468
Cholesterolosis is characterized by abnormal deposi-
tion of lipid, especially cholesteryl esters within macro-
phages in the lamina propria of the gallbladder wall. In 
its diffuse form (“strawberry gallbladder”), the gallblad-
der mucosa is brick red and speckled with bright yel-
low flecks of lipid. The localized form shows solitary or 
multiple “cholesterol polyps” studding the gallbladder 
wall. Cholesterol stones of the gallbladder are found in 
nearly half the cases. Cholecystectomy is indicated in 
both adenomyomatosis and cholesterolosis when symp-
tomatic or when cholelithiasis is present.
The prevalence of gallbladder polyps in the adult 
population is ∼5%, with a marked male predominance. 
Few significant changes have been found over a 5-year 
period in asymptomatic patients with gallbladder polyps 
<10 mm in diameter. Cholecystectomy is recommended 
in symptomatic patients, as well as in asymptomatic 
patients >50 years of age, or in those whose polyps are 
>10 mm in diameter or associated with gallstones or 
polyp growth on serial ultrasonography.
Diseases of the Bile Ducts
Congenital Anomalies
Biliary atresia and hypoplasia
Atretic and hypoplastic lesions of the extrahepatic and 
large intrahepatic bile ducts are the most common bili-
ary anomalies of clinical relevance encountered in 
infancy. The clinical picture is one of severe obstruc-
tive jaundice during the first month of life, with pale 
stools. When biliary atresia is suspected on the basis of 
clinical, laboratory, and imaging findings the diagnosis is 
confirmed by surgical exploration and operative cholan-
giography. Approximately 10% of cases of biliary atresia 
are treatable with roux-en-Y choledochojejunostomy, 
with the Kasai procedure (hepatic portoenterostomy) 
being attempted in the remainder in an effort to restore 
some bile flow. Most patients, even those having suc-
cessful biliary-enteric anastomoses, eventually develop 
chronic cholangitis, extensive hepatic fibrosis, and por-
tal hypertension.
Choledochal cysts
Cystic dilatation may involve the free portion of the 
CBD, i.e., choledochal cyst, or may present as diver-
ticulum formation in the intraduodenal segment. In 
the latter situation, chronic reflux of pancreatic juice 
into the biliary tree can produce inflammation and ste-
nosis of the extrahepatic bile ducts leading to cholan-
gitis or biliary obstruction. Because the process may be 
gradual, ∼50% of patients present with onset of symp-
toms after age 10. The diagnosis may be made by 
ultrasound, abdominal CT, MRC, or cholangiography. 
Only one-third of patients show the classic triad of 
abdominal pain, jaundice, and an abdominal mass. 
Ultrasonographic detection of a cyst separate from the 
gallbladder should suggest the diagnosis of choledochal 
cyst, which can be confirmed by demonstrating the 
entrance of extrahepatic bile ducts into the cyst. Surgi-
cal treatment involves excision of the “cyst” and biliary-
enteric anastomosis. Patients with choledochal cysts 
are at increased risk for the subsequent development of 
cholangiocarcinoma.
Congenital biliary ectasia
Dilatation of intrahepatic bile ducts may involve either 
the major intrahepatic radicles (Caroli’s disease), the 
inter- and intralobular ducts (congenital hepatic fibro-
sis), or both. In Caroli’s disease, clinical manifestations 
include recurrent cholangitis, abscess formation in and 
around the affected ducts, and, often, gallstone for-
mation within portions of ectatic intrahepatic biliary 
radicles. Ultrasound, MRC, and CT are of great diag-
nostic value in demonstrating cystic dilatation of the 
intrahepatic bile ducts. Treatment with ongoing antibi-
otic therapy is usually undertaken in an effort to limit 
the frequency and severity of recurrent bouts of chol-
angitis. Progression to secondary biliary cirrhosis with 
portal hypertension, extrahepatic biliary obstruction, 
cholangiocarcinoma, or recurrent episodes of sepsis with 
hepatic abscess formation is common.
Choledocholithiasis
Pathophysiology and clinical manifestations
Passage of gallstones into the CBD occurs in ∼10–15% 
of patients with cholelithiasis. The incidence of com-
mon duct stones increases with increasing age of the 
patient, so that up to 25% of elderly patients may have 
calculi in the common duct at the time of cholecystec-
tomy. Undetected duct stones are left behind in ∼1–5% 
of cholecystectomy patients. The overwhelming major-
ity of bile duct stones are cholesterol stones formed 
in the gallbladder, which then migrate into the extra-
hepatic biliary tree through the cystic duct. Primary 
calculi arising de novo in the ducts are usually pigment 
stones developing in patients with (1) hepatobiliary 
parasitism or chronic, recurrent cholangitis; (2) con-
genital anomalies of the bile ducts (especially Caroli’s 
disease); (3) dilated, sclerosed, or strictured ducts; or 
(4) an MDR3 (ABCB4) gene defect leading to impaired 
biliary phospholipids secretion (low phospholipid– 
associated cholelithiasis). Common duct stones may 
remain asymptomatic for years, may pass spontaneously 
into the duodenum, or (most often) may present with 
biliary colic or a complication.
 
CHAPTER 45
Diseases of the Gallbladder and Bile Ducts 
469
Complications
Cholangitis
Cholangitis may be acute or chronic, and symptoms 
result from inflammation, which usually is caused by 
at least partial obstruction to the flow of bile. Bacte-
ria are present on bile culture in ∼75% of patients with 
acute cholangitis early in the symptomatic course. The 
characteristic presentation of acute cholangitis involves 
biliary pain, jaundice, and spiking fevers with chills 
(Charcot’s triad). Blood cultures are frequently positive, 
and leukocytosis is typical. Nonsuppurative acute cholangi-
tis is most common and may respond relatively rapidly 
to supportive measures and to treatment with antibiot-
ics. In suppurative acute cholangitis, however, the presence 
of pus under pressure in a completely obstructed duc-
tal system leads to symptoms of severe toxicity—mental 
confusion, bacteremia, and septic shock. Response to 
antibiotics alone in this setting is relatively poor, mul-
tiple hepatic abscesses are often present, and the mortal-
ity rate approaches 100% unless prompt endoscopic or 
surgical relief of the obstruction and drainage of infected 
bile are carried out. Endoscopic management of bacte-
rial cholangitis is as effective as surgical intervention. 
ERCP with endoscopic sphincterotomy is safe and the 
preferred initial procedure for both establishing a defini-
tive diagnosis and providing effective therapy.
Obstructive jaundice
Gradual obstruction of the CBD over a period of weeks 
or months usually leads to initial manifestations of 
jaundice or pruritus without associated symptoms of 
biliary colic or cholangitis. Painless jaundice may occur 
in patients with choledocholithiasis, but is much more 
characteristic of biliary obstruction secondary to malig-
nancy of the head of the pancreas, bile ducts, or ampulla 
of Vater.
In patients whose obstruction is secondary to choled-
ocholithiasis, associated chronic calculous cholecystitis is 
very common, and the gallbladder in this setting may be 
relatively indistensible. The absence of a palpable gall-
bladder in most patients with biliary obstruction from 
duct stones is the basis for Courvoisier’s law, i.e., that 
the presence of a palpably enlarged gallbladder suggests 
that the biliary obstruction is secondary to an underly-
ing malignancy rather than to calculous disease. Biliary 
obstruction causes progressive dilatation of the intrahe-
patic bile ducts as intrabiliary pressures rise. Hepatic bile 
flow is suppressed, and reabsorption and regurgitation 
of conjugated bilirubin into the bloodstream lead to 
jaundice accompanied by dark urine (bilirubinuria) and 
light-colored (acholic) stools.
CBD stones should be suspected in any patient 
with cholecystitis whose serum bilirubin level is >85.5 
μmol/L (5 mg/dL). The maximum bilirubin level is 
seldom >256.5 μmol/L (15.0 mg/dL) in patients with 
choledocholithiasis unless concomitant hepatic disease 
or another factor leading to marked hyperbilirubinemia 
exists. Serum bilirubin levels ≥342.0 μmol/L (20 mg/
dL) should suggest the possibility of neoplastic obstruc-
tion. The serum alkaline phosphatase level is almost 
always elevated in biliary obstruction. A rise in alkaline 
phosphatase often precedes clinical jaundice and may 
be the only abnormality in routine liver function tests. 
There may be a two- to tenfold elevation of serum 
aminotransferases, especially in association with acute 
obstruction. Following relief of the obstructing process, 
serum aminotransferase elevations usually return rap-
idly to normal, while the serum bilirubin level may take 
1–2 weeks to return to normal. The alkaline phos-
phatase level usually falls slowly, lagging behind the 
decrease in serum bilirubin.
Pancreatitis
The most common associated entity discovered in 
patients with nonalcoholic acute pancreatitis is bili-
ary tract disease. Biochemical evidence of pancreatic 
inflammation complicates acute cholecystitis in 15% of 
cases and choledocholithiasis in >30%, and the common 
factor appears to be the passage of gallstones through the 
common duct. Coexisting pancreatitis should be sus-
pected in patients with symptoms of cholecystitis who 
develop (1) back pain or pain to the left of the abdomi-
nal midline, (2) prolonged vomiting with paralytic ileus, 
or (3) a pleural effusion, especially on the left side. Sur-
gical treatment of gallstone disease is usually associated 
with resolution of the pancreatitis.
Secondary biliary cirrhosis
Secondary biliary cirrhosis may complicate prolonged or 
intermittent duct obstruction with or without recurrent 
cholangitis. Although this complication may be seen in 
patients with choledocholithiasis, it is more common 
in cases of prolonged obstruction from stricture or 
neoplasm. Once established, secondary biliary cirrhosis 
may be progressive even after correction of the obstruct-
ing process, and increasingly severe hepatic cirrhosis 
may lead to portal hypertension or to hepatic failure and 
death. Prolonged biliary obstruction may also be associ-
ated with clinically relevant deficiencies of the fat-solu-
ble vitamins A, D, E, and K.
Diagnosis and treatment
The diagnosis of choledocholithiasis is usually made 
by cholangiography (Table 45-3), either preopera-
tively by endoscopic retrograde cholangiogram (ERC) 
(Fig. 45-2C) or MRCP or intraoperatively at the time 
of cholecystectomy. As many as 15% of patients under-
going cholecystectomy will prove to have CBD stones. 
When CBD stones are suspected prior to laparoscopic 
cholecystectomy, preoperative ERCP with endo-
scopic papillotomy and stone extraction is the preferred 
SECTION VI
Disorders of the Liver and Biliary Tree
470
Table 45-3 
Diagnostic Evaluation of the Bile Ducts
Diagnostic Advantages
Diagnostic 
Limitations
Contraindications
Complications
Comment
Hepatobiliary Ultrasound
Rapid
Simultaneous scanning of GB, liver, 
bile ducts, pancreas
Accurate identification of dilated bile 
ducts
Not limited by jaundice, pregnancy
Guidance for fine-needle biopsy
Bowel gas
Massive obesity
Ascites
Barium
Partial bile duct 
obstruction
Poor visualization 
of distal CBD
None
None
Initial procedure of 
choice in investigat-
ing possible biliary 
tract obstruction
Computed Tomography
Simultaneous scanning of GB, liver, 
bile ducts, pancreas
Accurate identification of dilated bile 
ducts, masses
Not limited by jaundice, gas, obesity, 
ascites
High-resolution image
Guidance for fine-needle biopsy
Extreme cachexia
Movement artifact
Ileus
Partial bile duct 
obstruction
Pregnancy
Reaction to  
iodinated  
contrast,  
if used
Indicated for evalu-
ation of hepatic or 
pancreatic masses
Procedure of choice in 
investigating  
possible biliary 
obstruction if diag-
nostic limitations 
prevent HBUS
Magnetic Resonance Cholangiopancreatography
Useful modality for visualizing  
pancreatic and biliary ducts
Has excellent sensitivity for bile duct 
dilatation, biliary stricture, and  
intraductal abnormalities
Can identify pancreatic duct dilatation 
or stricture, pancreatic duct stenosis, 
and pancreas divisum
Cannot offer ther-
apeutic  
intervention
High cost
Claustrophobia
Certain metals (iron)
None
Endoscopic Retrograde Cholangiopancreatography
Simultaneous pancreatography
Best visualization of distal biliary tract
Bile or pancreatic cytology
Endoscopic sphincterotomy and 
stone removal
Biliary manometry
Gastroduodenal 
obstruction
? Roux-en-Y 
biliary-enteric 
anastomosis
Pregnancy
? Acute pancreatitis
? Severe cardiopul-
monary disease
Pancreatitis
Cholangitis,  
sepsis
Infected pancre-
atic pseudocyst
Perforation (rare)
Hypoxemia,  
aspiration
Cholangiogram of 
choice in:
Absence of dilated 
ducts
? Pancreatic, ampul-
lary or gastroduode-
nal disease
Prior biliary surgery
Endoscopic  
sphincterotomy a 
treatment possibility
Percutaneous Transhepatic Cholangiogram
Extremely successful when bile ducts 
dilated
Best visualization of proximal biliary 
tract
Bile cytology/culture
Percutaneous transhepatic drainage
Nondilated or 
sclerosed ducts
Pregnancy
Uncorrectable  
coagulopathy
Massive ascites
? Hepatic abscess
Bleeding
Hemobilia
Bile peritonitis
Bacteremia,  
sepsis
Indicated when ERCP 
is contraindicated or 
failed
Endoscopic Ultrasound
Most sensitive method to detect 
ampullary stones
Abbreviations: CBD, common bile duct; ERCP, endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography; GB, gallbladder; HBUS, hepatobiliary 
ultrasound.
 
CHAPTER 45
Diseases of the Gallbladder and Bile Ducts 
471
approach. It not only provides stone clearance but also 
defines the anatomy of the biliary tree in relationship to the 
cystic duct. CBD stones should be suspected in gallstone 
patients who have any of the following risk factors: (1) a 
history of jaundice or pancreatitis, (2) abnormal tests of 
liver function, and (3) ultrasonographic or MRCP evi-
dence of a dilated CBD or stones in the duct. Alterna-
tively, if intraoperative cholangiography reveals retained 
stones, postoperative ERCP can be carried out. The 
need for preoperative ERCP is expected to decrease 
further as laparoscopic techniques for bile duct explora-
tion improve.
The widespread use of laparoscopic cholecystectomy 
and ERCP has decreased the incidence of complicated 
biliary tract disease and the need for choledocholithot-
omy and T-tube drainage of the bile ducts. EBS fol-
lowed by spontaneous passage or stone extraction is the 
treatment of choice in the management of patients with 
common duct stones, especially in elderly or poor-risk 
patients.
Trauma, Strictures, and Hemobilia
Most benign strictures of the extrahepatic bile ducts 
result from surgical trauma and occur in about 1 in 
500 cholecystectomies. Strictures may present with bile 
leak or abscess formation in the immediate postopera-
tive period or with biliary obstruction or cholangitis as 
long as 2 years or more following the inciting trauma. 
The diagnosis is established by percutaneous or endo-
scopic cholangiography. Endoscopic brushing of bili-
ary strictures may be helpful in establishing the nature 
of the lesion and is more accurate than bile cytology 
alone. When positive exfoliative cytology is obtained, 
the diagnosis of a neoplastic stricture is established. This 
procedure is especially important in patients with pri-
mary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) who are predisposed 
to the development of cholangiocarcinomas. Success-
ful operative correction of non-PSC bile duct strictures 
by a skillful surgeon with duct-to-bowel anastomosis is 
usually possible, although mortality rates from surgical 
complications, recurrent cholangitis, or secondary bili-
ary cirrhosis are high.
Hemobilia may follow traumatic or operative injury 
to the liver or bile ducts, intraductal rupture of a hepatic 
abscess or aneurysm of the hepatic artery, biliary or 
hepatic tumor hemorrhage, or mechanical complica-
tions of choledocholithiasis or hepatobiliary parasitism. 
Diagnostic procedures such as liver biopsy, PTC, and 
transhepatic biliary drainage catheter placement may 
also be complicated by hemobilia. Patients often present 
with a classic triad of biliary pain, obstructive jaundice, 
and melena or occult blood in the stools. The diagno-
sis is sometimes made by cholangiographic evidence of 
blood clot in the biliary tree, but selective angiographic 
verification may be required. Although minor episodes 
of hemobilia may resolve without operative interven-
tion, surgical ligation of the bleeding vessel is frequently 
required.
Extrinsic Compression of  
the Bile Ducts
Partial or complete biliary obstruction may be pro-
duced by extrinsic compression of the ducts. The most 
common cause of this form of obstructive jaundice is 
carcinoma of the head of the pancreas. Biliary obstruc-
tion may also occur as a complication of either acute 
or chronic pancreatitis or involvement of lymph nodes 
in the porta hepatis by lymphoma or metastatic carci-
noma. The latter should be distinguished from cholesta-
sis resulting from massive replacement of the liver by 
tumor.
Hepatobiliary Parasitism
Infestation of the biliary tract by adult helminths or 
their ova may produce a chronic, recurrent pyogenic 
cholangitis with or without multiple hepatic abscesses, 
ductal stones, or biliary obstruction. This condi-
tion is relatively rare but does occur in inhabitants of 
southern China and elsewhere in Southeast Asia. The 
organisms most commonly involved are trematodes or 
flukes, including Clonorchis sinensis, Opisthorchis viver-
rini or O. felineus, and Fasciola hepatica. The biliary tract 
also may be involved by intraductal migration of adult 
Ascaris lumbricoides from the duodenum or by intrabili-
ary rupture of hydatid cysts of the liver produced by 
Echinococcus spp. The diagnosis is made by cholangiog-
raphy and the presence of characteristic ova on stool 
examination. When obstruction is present, the treat-
ment of choice is laparotomy under antibiotic cov-
erage, with common duct exploration and a biliary 
drainage procedure.
Sclerosing Cholangitis
Primary or idiopathic sclerosing cholangitis is charac-
terized by a progressive, inflammatory, sclerosing, and 
obliterative process affecting the extrahepatic and/or 
the intrahepatic bile ducts. The disorder occurs up to 
75% in association with inflammatory bowel disease, 
especially ulcerative colitis. It may also be associated 
with autoimmune pancreatitis; multifocal fibrosclerosis 
syndromes such as retroperitoneal, mediastinal, and/or 
periureteral fibrosis; Riedel’s struma; or pseudotumor of 
the orbit.
Immunoglobulin G4–associated cholangitis is a 
recently described biliary disease of unknown etiology 
that presents with biochemical and cholangiographic 
features indistinguishable from PSC, is often associated 
SECTION VI
Disorders of the Liver and Biliary Tree
472
with autoimmune pancreatitis and other fibrosing con-
ditions, and is characterized by elevated serum IgG4 
and infiltration of IgG4-positive plasma cells in bile 
ducts and liver tissue. In contrast to PSC, it is not asso-
ciated with inflammatory bowel disease and should be 
suspected if associated with increased serum IgG4 and 
unexplained pancreatic disease. Glucocorticoids are 
regarded as the initial treatment of choice. Relapse is 
common after steroid withdrawal especially with proxi-
mal strictures. Long-term treatment with glucocorti-
coids and/or azathioprine may be needed after relapse 
or for inadequate response (Chap. 313).
Patients with primary sclerosing cholangitis often pres-
ent with signs and symptoms of chronic or intermittent 
biliary obstruction: RUQ abdominal pain, pruritus, jaun-
dice, or acute cholangitis. Late in the course, complete 
biliary obstruction, secondary biliary cirrhosis, hepatic 
failure, or portal hypertension with bleeding varices 
may occur. The diagnosis is usually established by find-
ing multifocal, diffusely distributed strictures with inter-
vening segments of normal or dilated ducts, producing 
a beaded appearance on cholangiography (Fig. 45-2D). 
The cholangiographic techniques of choice in suspected 
cases are MRCP and ERCP. When a diagnosis of scle-
rosing cholangitis has been established, a search for 
associated diseases, especially for chronic inflammatory 
bowel disease, should be carried out.
A recent study describes the natural history and out-
come for 305 patients of Swedish descent with primary 
sclerosing cholangitis; 134 (44%) of the patients were 
asymptomatic at the time of diagnosis and, not surpris-
ingly, had a significantly higher survival rate. The inde-
pendent predictors of a bad prognosis were age, serum 
bilirubin concentration, and liver histologic changes. 
Cholangiocarcinoma was found in 24 patients (8%). 
Inflammatory bowel disease was closely associated with 
primary sclerosing cholangitis and had a prevalence of 
81% in this study population.
Small duct PSC is defined by the presence of chronic 
cholestasis and hepatic histology consistent with PSC 
but with normal findings on cholangiography. Small 
duct PSC is found in ∼5% of patients with PSC and 
may represent an earlier stage of PSC associated with 
a significantly better long-term prognosis. However, 
such patients may progress to classic PSC and/or end-
stage liver disease with consequent necessity of liver 
transplantation.
In patients with AIDS, cholangiopancreatography 
may demonstrate a broad range of biliary tract changes 
as well as pancreatic duct obstruction and occasionally 
pancreatitis (Chap. 189). Further, biliary tract lesions in 
AIDS include infection and cholangiopancreatographic 
changes similar to those of PSC. Changes noted include: 
(1) diffuse involvement of intrahepatic bile ducts alone, 
(2) involvement of both intra- and extrahepatic bile 
ducts, (3) ampullary stenosis, (4) stricture of the intrapan-
creatic portion of the common bile duct, and (5) pancre-
atic duct involvement. Associated infectious organisms 
include Cryptosporidium, Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare, 
cytomegalovirus, Microsporidia, and Isospora. In addition, 
acalculous cholecystitis occurs in up to 10% of patients. 
ERCP sphincterotomy, while not without risk, pro-
vides significant pain reduction in patients with AIDS- 
associated papillary stenosis. Secondary sclerosing cholan-
gitis may occur as a long-term complication of choledo-
cholithiasis, cholangiocarcinoma, operative or traumatic 
biliary injury, or contiguous inflammatory processes.
Treatment	
Sclerosing Cholangitis
Therapy with cholestyramine may help control symp-
toms of pruritus, and antibiotics are useful when chol-
angitis complicates the clinical picture. Vitamin D and 
calcium supplementation may help prevent the loss 
of bone mass frequently seen in patients with chronic 
cholestasis. Glucocorticoids, methotrexate, and cyclo-
sporine have not been shown to be efficacious in PSC. 
UDCA in high dosage (20 mg/kg) improves serum  
liver tests, but an effect on survival has not been  
documented. In cases where high-grade biliary obstruc-
tion (dominant strictures) has occurred, balloon dila-
tation or stenting may be appropriate. Only rarely is  
surgical intervention indicated. Efforts at biliary-enteric 
anastomosis or stent placement may, however, be com-
plicated by recurrent cholangitis and further progres-
sion of the stenosing process. The prognosis is unfavor-
able, with a median survival of 9 to 12 years following 
the diagnosis, regardless of therapy. Four variables (age, 
serum bilirubin level, histologic stage, and splenomeg-
aly) predict survival in patients with PSC and serve as 
the basis for a risk score. PSC is one of the most com-
mon indications for liver transplantation.
This page intentionally left blank 
Liver  
Transplantation
SECTION VII
This page intentionally left blank 
 Jules L. Dienstag  I   raymond T. Chung 
476
 Liver transplantation—the replacement of the native, 
diseased liver by a normal organ (allograft)—has 
matured from an experimental procedure reserved 
for desperately ill patients to an accepted, lifesav-
ing operation applied more optimally in the natural 
history of end-stage liver disease. The preferred 
and technically most advanced approach is  orthotopic 
transplantation , in which the native organ is removed 
and the donor organ is inserted in the same anatomic 
location. Pioneered in the 1960s by Thomas Starzl at 
the University of Colorado and, later, at the University 
of Pittsburgh and by Roy Calne in Cambridge, 
England, liver transplantation is now performed 
routinely worldwide. Success measured as 1-year 
survival has improved from ∼30% in the 1970s to 
∼90% today. These improved prospects for prolonged 
survival, dating back to the early 1980s, resulted from 
refi nements in operative technique, improvements 
in organ procurement and preservation, advances 
in immunosuppressive therapy, and, perhaps most 
infl uentially, more enlightened patient selection and 
timing. Despite the perioperative morbidity and mor-
tality, the technical and management challenges of 
the procedure, and its costs, liver transplantation has 
become the approach of choice for selected patients 
whose chronic or acute liver disease is progressive, 
life-threatening, and unresponsive to medical therapy. 
Based on the current level of success, the number of 
liver transplants has continued to grow each year; in 
2009, 6320 patients received liver allografts in the 
United States. Still, the demand for new livers con-
tinues to outpace availability; as of mid-2010, 16,785 
patients in the United States were on a waiting list 
for a donor liver. In response to this drastic shortage 
of donor organs, many transplantation centers supple-
ment cadaver-organ liver transplantation with living-
donor transplantation. 
 LIVER TRANSPLANTATION 
 ChaPter 46 
 indiCations 
 Potential candidates for liver transplantation are children 
and adults who, in the absence of contraindications 
(discussed later), suffer from severe, irreversible liver disease 
for which alternative medical or surgical treatments have 
been exhausted or are unavailable.  Timing of the operation 
is of critical importance . Indeed, improved timing and 
better patient selection are felt to have contributed more 
to the increased success of liver transplantation in the 
1980s and beyond than all the impressive technical and 
immunologic advances combined. Although the dis-
ease should be advanced, and although opportunities 
for spontaneous or medically induced stabilization or 
recovery should be allowed, the procedure should be 
done suffi ciently early to give the surgical procedure a 
fair chance for success. Ideally, transplantation should be 
considered in patients with end-stage liver disease who 
are experiencing or have experienced a life-threatening 
complication of hepatic decompensation or whose quality 
of life has deteriorated to unacceptable levels. Although 
patients with well-compensated cirrhosis can survive for 
many years, many patients with quasi-stable chronic 
liver disease have much more advanced disease than 
may be apparent. As discussed later, the better the status 
of the patient prior to transplantation, the higher will be 
the anticipated success rate of transplantation. The deci-
sion about  when to transplant is complex and requires the 
combined judgment of an experienced team of hepatolo-
gists, transplant surgeons, anesthesiologists, and specialists 
in support services, not to mention the well-informed 
consent of the patient and the patient’s family. 
 TraNSplaNTaTION IN ChIldrEN 
 Indications for transplantation in children are listed 
in  Table 46-1 . The most common is  biliary atresia . 
 
CHAPTER 46
Liver Transplantation
477
Inherited or genetic disorders of metabolism associated with 
liver failure constitute another major indication for 
transplantation in children and adolescents. In Crigler-
Najjar disease type I and in certain hereditary disorders 
of the urea cycle and of amino acid or lactate-­pyruvate 
metabolism, transplantation may be the only way 
to prevent impending deterioration of central ner-
vous system function, despite the fact that the native 
liver is structurally normal. Combined heart and liver 
transplantation has yielded dramatic improvement in 
cardiac function and in cholesterol levels in children 
with homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia; com-
bined liver and kidney transplantation has been suc-
cessful in patients with primary hyperoxaluria type I. In 
hemophiliacs with transfusion-associated hepatitis and 
liver failure, liver transplantation has been associated 
with recovery of normal Factor VIII synthesis.
Transplantation in Adults
Liver transplantation is indicated for end-stage cirrhosis 
of all causes (Table 46-1). In sclerosing cholangitis and 
Caroli’s disease (multiple cystic dilatations of the intra-
hepatic biliary tree), recurrent infections and sepsis 
associated with inflammatory and fibrotic obstruction of 
the biliary tree may be an indication for transplantation. 
Because prior biliary surgery complicates and is a rela-
tive contraindication for liver transplantation, surgical 
diversion of the biliary tree has been all but abandoned 
for patients with sclerosing cholangitis. In patients who 
undergo transplantation for hepatic vein thrombosis (Budd-
Chiari syndrome), postoperative anticoagulation is essen-
tial; underlying myeloproliferative disorders may have 
to be treated but are not a contraindication to liver 
transplantation. If a donor organ can be located quickly, 
before life-threatening complications—including cere-
bral edema—set in, patients with acute liver failure are 
candidates for liver transplantation. Routine candi-
dates for liver transplantation are patients with alcoholic 
cirrhosis, chronic viral hepatitis, and primary hepatocellular 
malignancies. Although all three of these categories are 
considered to be high risk, liver transplantation can be 
offered to carefully selected patients. Currently, chronic 
hepatitis C and alcoholic liver disease are the most 
common indications for liver transplantation, account-
ing for over 40% of all adult candidates who undergo 
the procedure. Patients with alcoholic cirrhosis can 
be considered as candidates for transplantation if they 
meet strict criteria for abstinence and reform; however, 
these criteria still do not prevent recidivism in up to a 
quarter of cases. Patients with chronic hepatitis C have 
early allograft and patient survival comparable to those 
of other subsets of patients after transplantation; how-
ever, reinfection in the donor organ is universal, recur-
rent hepatitis C is insidiously progressive, the impact 
of antiviral therapy is limited, allograft cirrhosis devel-
ops in 20–30% at 5 years, and cirrhosis and late organ 
failure are being recognized with increasing frequency 
beyond 5 years. In patients with chronic hepatitis B, in 
the absence of measures to prevent recurrent hepatitis B, 
survival after transplantation is reduced by approxi-
mately 10–20%; however, prophylactic use of hepatitis B 
immune globulin (HBIg) during and after transplanta-
tion increases the success of transplantation to a level 
comparable to that seen in patients with nonviral causes 
of liver decompensation. Specific oral antiviral drugs 
(e.g., lamivudine, adefovir, entecavir, and tenofovir 
disoproxil fumarate) (Chap. 40) can be used both for 
prophylaxis against and for treatment of recurrent hepa-
titis B, facilitating further the management of patients 
undergoing liver transplantation for end-stage hepatitis 
B; most transplantation centers rely on a combination 
of HBIg and antiviral drugs to manage patients with 
hepatitis B. Issues of disease recurrence are discussed in 
more detail later. Patients with nonmetastatic primary 
hepatobiliary tumors—primary hepatocellular carcinoma 
(HCC), cholangiocarcinoma, hepatoblastoma, angiosar-
coma, epithelioid hemangioendothelioma, and multiple 
or massive hepatic adenomata—have undergone liver 
Table 46-1
Indications for Liver Transplantation
Children
Adults
Biliary atresia
Neonatal hepatitis
Congenital hepatic fibrosis
Alagille’s syndromea
Byler’s diseaseb
α1-Antitrypsin deficiency
Inherited disorders of 
metabolism
Wilson’s disease
Tyrosinemia
Glycogen storage diseases
Lysosomal storage  
diseases
Protoporphyria
Crigler-Najjar disease 
type I
Familial hypercholester-
olemia
Primary hyperoxaluria 
type I
Hemophilia
Primary biliary cirrhosis
Secondary biliary cirrhosis
Primary sclerosing cholangitis
Autoimmune hepatitis
Caroli’s diseasec
Cryptogenic cirrhosis
Chronic hepatitis with  
cirrhosis
Hepatic vein thrombosis
Fulminant hepatitis
Alcoholic cirrhosis
Chronic viral hepatitis
Primary hepatocellular 
malignancies
Hepatic adenomas
Nonalcoholic  
steatohepatitis
Familial amyloid  
polyneuropathy
aArteriohepatic dysplasia, with paucity of bile ducts, and congenital 
malformations, including pulmonary stenosis.
bIntrahepatic cholestasis, progressive liver failure, mental and growth 
retardation.
cMultiple cystic dilatations of the intrahepatic biliary tree.
SECTION VII
Liver Transplantation
478
transplantation; however, for some hepatobiliary malig-
nancies, overall survival is significantly lower than that 
for other categories of liver disease. Most transplanta-
tion centers have reported 5-year recurrence-free sur-
vival rates in patients with unresectable HCC for single 
tumors <5 cm in diameter or for three or fewer lesions 
all <3 cm comparable to those seen in patients undergo-
ing transplantation for nonmalignant indications. Con-
sequently, liver transplantation is currently restricted to 
patients whose hepatic malignancies meet these criteria. 
Expanded criteria for patients with HCC are being 
evaluated. Because the likelihood of recurrent cholan-
giocarcinoma is very high, only highly selected patients 
with limited disease are being evaluated for transplanta-
tion after intensive chemotherapy and radiation.
Contraindications
Absolute contraindications for transplantation include life-
threatening systemic diseases, uncontrolled extra­hepatic 
bacterial or fungal infections, preexisting advanced 
cardiovascular or pulmonary disease, multiple uncor-
rectable life-threatening congenital anomalies, meta-
static malignancy, and active drug or alcohol abuse 
(Table 46-2). Because carefully selected patients in 
their sixties and even seventies have undergone trans-
plantation successfully, advanced age per se is no lon-
ger considered an absolute contraindication; however, 
in older patients a more thorough preoperative evalu-
ation should be undertaken to exclude ischemic car-
diac disease and other comorbid conditions. Advanced 
age (>70 years), however, should be considered a relative 
contraindication—that is, a factor to be taken into account 
with other relative contraindications. Other rela-
tive contraindications include portal vein thrombosis, 
HIV infection, preexisting renal disease not associ-
ated with liver disease (which may prompt consider-
ation of combined liver and kidney transplantation), 
intrahepatic or biliary sepsis, severe hypoxemia (Po2 
<50 mmHg) resulting from right-to-left intrapulmo-
nary shunts, portopulmonary hypertension with high 
mean pulmonary artery pressures (>35 mmHg), previ-
ous extensive hepatobiliary surgery, any uncontrolled 
serious psychiatric disorder, and lack of sufficient social 
supports. Any one of these relative contraindications 
is insufficient in and of itself to preclude transplanta-
tion. For example, the problem of portal vein throm-
bosis can be overcome by constructing a graft from the 
donor liver portal vein to the recipient’s superior mes-
enteric vein. Now that highly active antiretroviral ther-
apy has dramatically improved the survival of persons 
with HIV infection, and because end-stage liver disease 
caused by chronic hepatitis C and B has emerged as a 
serious source of morbidity and mortality in the HIV-
infected population, liver transplantation has now been 
performed successfully in selected HIV-positive persons 
who have excellent control of HIV infection. Selected 
patients with CD4+ T cell counts >100/μL and with 
pharmacologic suppression of HIV viremia have under-
gone transplantation for end-stage liver disease. HIV-
infected persons who have received liver allografts for 
end-stage liver disease resulting from chronic hepatitis 
B have experienced survival rates compared to those of 
HIV-negative persons undergoing transplantation for 
the same indication. In contrast, recurrent hepatitis C 
virus (HCV) in the allograft has limited long-term 
success in persons with HCV-related end-stage liver 
disease.
Technical Considerations
Cadaver Donor Selection
Cadaver donor livers for transplantation are pro-
cured primarily from victims of head trauma. Organs 
from brain-dead donors up to age 60 are acceptable if 
Table 46-2
Contraindications to Liver Transplantation
Absolute
Relative
Uncontrolled extrahepatobi-
liary infection
Age <70
Active, untreated sepsis
Prior extensive  
hepatobiliary surgery
Uncorrectable, life-limiting 
congenital anomalies
Portal vein thrombosis
Active substance or alcohol 
abuse
Renal failure not attributable 
to liver disease
Advanced cardiopulmonary 
disease
Previous extrahepatic 
malignancy (not including 
nonmelanoma skin cancer)
Extrahepatobiliary  
malignancy (not including  
nonmelanoma skin cancer)
Severe obesity
Metastatic malignancy to 
the liver
Severe malnutrition/ 
wasting
Cholangiocarcinoma
Medical noncompliance
AIDS
HIV seropositivity with  
failure to control HIV  
viremia or CD4 <100/μL
Life-threatening systemic 
diseases
Intrahepatic sepsis
Severe hypoxemia  
secondary to right-to-left 
intrapulmonary shunts 
(Po2 <50 mmHg)
Severe pulmonary  
hypertension (mean  
pulmonary artery pressure 
>35 mmHg)
Uncontrolled psychiatric 
disorder
 
CHAPTER 46
Liver Transplantation
479
the following criteria are met: hemodynamic stability, 
adequate oxygenation, absence of bacterial or fun-
gal infection, absence of abdominal trauma, absence 
of hepatic dysfunction, and serologic exclusion of 
hepatitis B (HBV) and C viruses and HIV. Occasion-
ally, organs from donors with hepatitis B and C are 
used (e.g., for recipients with prior hepatitis B and 
C, respectively). Organs from donors with antibod-
ies to hepatitis B core antigen (anti-HBc) can also be 
used when the need is especially urgent, and recipients 
of these organs are treated prophylactically with HBIg 
and other antiviral drugs. Cardiovascular and respira-
tory functions are maintained artificially until the liver 
can be removed. Transplantation of organs procured 
from deceased donors who have succumbed to car-
diac death can be performed successfully under selected 
circumstances, when ischemic time is minimized and 
liver histology preserved. Compatibility in ABO blood 
group and organ size between donor and recipient are 
important considerations in donor selection; however, 
ABO-incompatible, split liver, or reduced-donor-organ 
transplants can be performed in emergencies or marked 
donor scarcity. Tissue typing for human leukocyte 
antigen (HLA) matching is not required, and preformed 
cytotoxic HLA antibodies do not preclude liver trans-
plantation. Following perfusion with cold electrolyte 
solution, the donor liver is removed and packed in ice. 
The use of University of Wisconsin (UW) solution, rich 
in lactobionate and raffinose, has permitted the exten-
sion of cold ischemic time up to 20 h; however, 
12 h may be a more reasonable limit. Improved tech-
niques for harvesting multiple organs from the same 
donor have increased the availability of donor livers, 
but the availability of donor livers is far outstripped by 
the demand. Currently in the United States, all donor 
livers are distributed through a nationwide organ-
sharing network (United Network for Organ Sharing 
[UNOS]) designed to allocate available organs based on 
regional considerations and recipient acuity. Recipients 
who have the highest disease severity generally have 
the highest priority, but allocation strategies that bal-
ance highest urgency against best outcomes continue 
to evolve to distribute cadaver organs most effectively. 
Allocation based on the Child-Turcotte-Pugh (CTP) 
score, which uses five clinical variables (encephalopathy 
stage, ascites, bilirubin, albumin, and prothrombin time) 
and waiting time, has been replaced by allocation based 
on urgency alone, calculated by the Model for End-
Stage Liver Disease (MELD) score. The MELD score is 
based on a mathematical model that includes bilirubin, 
creatinine, and prothrombin time expressed as interna-
tional normalized ratio (INR) (Table 46-3). Neither 
waiting time (except as a tie breaker between two 
potential recipients with the same MELD scores) nor 
posttransplantation outcome is taken into account, but 
the MELD score has been shown to reduce waiting list 
mortality, to reduce waiting time prior to transplanta-
tion, to be the best predictor of pretransplantation mor-
tality, to satisfy the prevailing view that medical need 
should be the decisive determinant, and to eliminate 
both the subjectivity inherent in the CTP scoring sys-
tem (presence and degree of ascites and hepatic enceph-
alopathy) and the differences in waiting times among 
different regions of the country. Recent data indicate 
that liver recipients with MELD scores <15 experienced 
higher posttransplantation mortality rates than similarly 
classified patients who remained on the wait list. This 
observation has led to the modification of UNOS pol-
icy to allocate donor organs to candidates with MELD 
scores exceeding 15 within the local or regional pro-
curement organization before offering the organ to 
local patients whose scores are <15. In addition, serum 
sodium, another important predictor of survival in liver 
transplantation candidates, is taken into consideration in 
allocating donor livers.
The highest priority (status 1) continues to be 
reserved for patients with fulminant hepatic failure 
Table 46-3 
United Network for Organ Sharing (UNOS) 
Liver Transplantation Waiting List Criteria
Status 1
Fulminant hepatic failure (including  
primary graft nonfunction and hepatic 
artery thrombosis within 7 days after 
transplantation as well as acute  
decompensated Wilson’s disease)a
The Model for End-Stage Liver Disease (MELD) score,  
on a continuous scale,b determines allocation of the 
remainder of donor organs. This model is based on the 
following calculation:
3.78 × loge bilirubin (mg/100 mL) + 11.2 × loge international 
normalized ratio (INR) + 9.57 × loge creatinine (mg/100 mL) + 
6.43 (× 0 for alcoholic and cholestatic liver disease, × 1 
for all other types of liver disease).c,d,e
Online calculators to determine MELD scores are available, 
such as the following: http://optn.transplant.hrsa.gov/
resources/professionalresources.asp?index=9.
aFor children <18 years of age, status 1 includes acute or chronic 
liver failure plus hospitalization in an intensive care unit or inborn 
errors of metabolism. Status 1 is retained for those persons with ful-
minant hepatic failure and supersedes the MELD score.
bThe MELD scale is continuous, with 34 levels ranging between 
6 and 40. Donor organs usually do not become available unless the 
MELD score exceeds 20.
cPatients with stage T2 hepatocellular carcinoma receive 22 disease-
specific points. An α-fetoprotein level = 500 ng/mL is considered as 
stage I hepatocellular carcinoma even without evidence for a tumor 
on imaging.
dCreatinine is included because renal function is a validated pre-
dictor of survival in patients with liver disease. For adults undergo-
ing dialysis twice a week, the creatinine in the equation is set to 
4 mg/100 mL.
eFor children <18 years of age, the Pediatric End-Stage Liver 
Disease (PELD) scale is used. This scale is based on albumin, bilirubin, 
INR, growth failure, and age. Status 1 is retained.
SECTION VII
Liver Transplantation
480
or primary graft nonfunction. Because candidates for 
liver transplantation who have HCC may not be suf-
ficiently decompensated to compete for donor organs 
based on urgency criteria alone, and because pro-
tracted waiting for cadaver donor organs often results 
in tumor growth beyond acceptable limits for trans-
plantation, such patients are assigned disease-specific 
MELD points (Table 46-3).
Living Donor Transplantation
Occasionally, especially for liver transplantation in 
children, one cadaver organ can be split between two 
recipients (one adult and one child). A more viable 
alternative, transplantation of the right lobe of the liver 
from a healthy adult donor into an adult recipient, has 
gained increased popularity. Living donor transplanta-
tion of the left lobe (left lateral segment), introduced 
in the early 1990s to alleviate the extreme shortage of 
donor organs for small children, accounts currently for 
approximately one-third of all liver transplantation pro-
cedures in children. Driven by the shortage of cadaver 
organs, living donor transplantation involving the more 
sizable right lobe is being considered with increasing 
frequency in adults; however, living donor liver trans-
plantation cannot be expected to solve the donor organ 
shortage; 219 such procedures were done in 2009, rep-
resenting only about 4% of all liver transplant operations 
done in the United States.
Living donor transplantation can reduce waiting 
time and cold-ischemia time; is done under elective, 
rather than emergency, circumstances; and may be 
lifesaving in recipients who cannot afford to wait for 
a cadaver donor. The downside, of course, is the risk 
to the healthy donor (a mean of 10 weeks of medical 
disability; biliary complications in ∼5%; postoperative 
complications such as wound infection, small-bowel 
obstruction, and incisional hernias in 9–19%; and 
even, in 0.2–0.4%, death) as well as the increased fre-
quency of biliary (15–32%) and vascular (10%) com-
plications in the recipient. Potential donors must 
participate voluntarily without coercion, and trans-
plantation teams should go to great lengths to exclude 
subtle coercive or inappropriate psychological factors 
as well as outline carefully to both donor and recipi-
ent the potential benefits and risks of the procedure. 
Donors for the procedure should be 18–60 years old; 
have a compatible blood type with the recipient; have 
no chronic medical problems or history of major 
abdominal surgery; be related genetically or emotion-
ally to the recipient; and pass an exhaustive series of 
clinical, biochemical, and serologic evaluations to 
unearth disqualifying medical disorders. The recipient 
should meet the same UNOS criteria for liver trans-
plantation as recipients of a cadaver donor allograft. 
Comprehensive outcome data on adult-to-adult living 
donor liver transplantation are being collected (www.
nih-a2all.org).
Surgical Technique
Removal of the recipient’s native liver is technically 
difficult, particularly in the presence of portal hyper-
tension with its associated collateral circulation and 
extensive varices and especially in the presence of 
scarring from previous abdominal operations. The 
combination of portal hypertension and coagulopa-
thy (elevated prothrombin time and thrombocytope-
nia) may translate into large blood product transfusion 
requirements. After the portal vein and infrahepatic 
and suprahepatic inferior vena cavae are dissected, the 
hepatic artery and common bile duct are dissected. 
Then the native liver is removed and the donor organ 
inserted. During the anhepatic phase, coagulopathy, 
hypoglycemia, hypocalcemia, and hypothermia are 
encountered and must be managed by the anesthe-
siology team. Caval, portal vein, hepatic artery, and 
bile duct anastomoses are performed in succession, the 
last by end-to-end suturing of the donor and recipient 
common bile ducts or by choledochojejunostomy to 
a Roux-en-Y loop if the recipient common bile duct 
cannot be used for reconstruction (e.g., in sclerosing 
cholangitis). A typical transplant operation lasts 8 h, 
with a range of 6–18 h. Because of excessive bleed-
ing, large volumes of blood, blood products, and 
volume expanders may be required during surgery; 
however, blood requirements have fallen sharply with 
improvements in surgical technique and experience.
As noted earlier, emerging alternatives to ortho-
topic liver transplantation include split-liver grafts, in 
which one donor organ is divided and inserted into two 
recipients; and living donor procedures, in which part 
of the left (for children), the left (for children or small 
adults), or the right (for adults) lobe of the liver is har-
vested from a living donor for transplantation into the 
recipient. In the adult procedure, once the right lobe is 
removed from the donor, the donor right hepatic vein 
is anastomosed to the recipient right hepatic vein rem-
nant, followed by donor-to-recipient anastomoses of 
the portal vein and then the hepatic artery. Finally, the 
biliary anastomosis is performed, duct-to-duct if prac-
tical or via Roux-en-Y anastomosis. Heterotopic liver 
transplantation, in which the donor liver is inserted 
without removal of the native liver, has met with very 
limited success and acceptance, except in a very small 
number of centers. In attempts to support desperately 
ill patients until a suitable donor organ can be identi-
fied, several transplantation centers are studying extra-
corporeal perfusion with bioartificial liver cartridges 
constructed from hepatocytes bound to hollow fiber 
 
CHAPTER 46
Liver Transplantation
481
systems and used as temporary hepatic-assist devices, 
but their efficacy remains to be established. Areas of 
research with the potential to overcome the shortage 
of donor organs include hepatocyte transplantation and 
xenotransplantation with genetically modified organs of 
nonhuman origin (e.g., swine).
Postoperative Course  
and Management
Immunosuppressive Therapy
The introduction in 1980 of cyclosporine as an 
immunosuppressive agent contributed substantially to 
the improvement in survival after liver transplanta-
tion. Cyclosporine, a calcineurin inhibitor (CNI), 
blocks early activation of T cells and is specific for 
T cell functions that result from the interaction of the 
T cell with its receptor and that involve the calcium-
dependent signal transduction pathway. As a result, the 
activity of cyclosporine leads to inhibition of lympho-
kine gene activation, blocking interleukins 2, 3, and 
4, tumor necrosis factor α, and other lymphokines. 
Cyclosporine also inhibits B cell functions. This pro-
cess occurs without affecting rapidly dividing cells in 
the bone marrow, which may account for the reduced 
frequency of posttransplantation systemic infections. 
The most common and important side effect of cyclo-
sporine therapy is nephrotoxicity. Cyclosporine causes 
dose-dependent renal tubular injury and direct renal 
artery vasospasm. Following renal function is therefore 
important in monitoring cyclosporine therapy, perhaps 
even a more reliable indicator than blood levels of the 
drug. Nephrotoxicity is reversible and can be man-
aged by dose reduction. Other adverse effects of cyclo-
sporine therapy include hypertension, hyperkalemia, 
tremor, hirsutism, glucose intolerance, and gingival 
hyperplasia.
Tacrolimus, a macrolide lactone antibiotic isolated 
from a Japanese soil fungus, Streptomyces tsukubaensis, 
has the same mechanism of action as cyclosporine but is 
10–100 times more potent. Initially applied as “rescue” 
therapy for patients in whom rejection occurred despite 
the use of cyclosporine, tacrolimus was shown to be 
associated with a reduced frequency of acute, refrac-
tory, and chronic rejection. Although patient and graft 
survival are the same with these two drugs, the advan-
tage of tacrolimus in minimizing episodes of rejection, 
reducing the need for additional glucocorticoid doses, 
and reducing the likelihood of bacterial and cytomega-
lovirus (CMV) infection has simplified the management 
of patients undergoing liver transplantation. In addition, 
the oral absorption of tacrolimus is more predictable 
than that of cyclosporine, especially during the early 
postoperative period when T-tube drainage interferes 
with the enterohepatic circulation of cyclosporine. As 
a result, in most transplantation centers tacrolimus has 
now supplanted cyclosporine for primary immunosup-
pression, and many centers rely on oral rather than IV 
administration from the outset. For transplantation cen-
ters that prefer cyclosporine, a better-absorbed micro-
emulsion preparation is now available.
Although more potent than cyclosporine, tacrolimus 
is also more toxic and more likely to be discontinued 
for adverse events. The toxicity of tacrolimus is simi-
lar to that of cyclosporine; nephrotoxicity and neuro-
toxicity are the most commonly encountered adverse 
effects, and neurotoxicity (tremor, seizures, hallucina-
tions, psychoses, coma) is more likely and more severe 
in tacrolimus-treated patients. Both drugs can cause 
diabetes mellitus, but tacrolimus does not cause hir-
sutism or gingival hyperplasia. Because of overlapping 
­toxicity between cyclosporine and tacrolimus, especially 
nephrotoxicity, and because tacrolimus reduces cyclo-
sporine clearance, these two drugs should not be used 
together. Because 99% of tacrolimus is metabolized by 
the liver, hepatic dysfunction reduces its clearance; in 
primary graft nonfunction (when, for technical reasons 
or because of ischemic damage prior to its insertion, 
the allograft is defective and does not function normally 
from the outset), tacrolimus doses have to be reduced 
substantially, especially in children. Both cyclospo-
rine and tacrolimus are metabolized by the cytochrome 
P450 IIIA system, and, therefore, drugs that induce 
cytochrome P450 (e.g., phenytoin, phenobarbital, car-
bamazepine, rifampin) reduce available levels of cyclo-
sporine and tacrolimus; drugs that inhibit cytochrome 
P450 (e.g., erythromycin, fluconazole, ketoconazole, 
clotrimazole, itraconazole, verapamil, diltiazem, nicardip-
ine, cimetidine, danazol, metoclopramide, bromocrip-
tine, and the HIV protease inhibitor ritonavir) increase 
cyclosporine and tacrolimus blood levels. Indeed, itra-
conazole is used occasionally to help boost tacrolimus 
levels. Like azathioprine, cyclosporine and tacrolimus 
appear to be associated with a risk of lymphoproliferative 
malignancies (discussed later), which may occur earlier 
after cyclosporine or tacrolimus than after azathioprine 
therapy. Because of these side effects, combinations of 
cyclosporine or tacrolimus with prednisone and an anti-
metabolite (azathioprine or mycophenolic acid, discussed 
later)—all at reduced doses—are preferable regimens for 
immunosuppressive therapy.
Mycophenolic acid, a nonnucleoside purine metab-
olism inhibitor derived as a fermentation product from 
several Penicillium species, is another immunosuppressive 
drug being used increasingly for patients undergoing 
liver transplantation. Mycophenolate has been shown 
to be better than azathioprine, when used with other 
standard immunosuppressive drugs, in preventing rejec-
tion after renal transplantation and has been adopted 
widely as well for use in liver transplantation. The most 
SECTION VII
Liver Transplantation
482
common adverse effects of mycophenolate are bone 
marrow suppression and gastrointestinal complaints.
In patients with pretransplantation renal dysfunction 
or renal deterioration that occurs intraoperatively or 
immediately postoperatively, tacrolimus or cyclosporine 
therapy may not be practical; under these circumstances, 
induction or maintenance of immunosuppression with 
antithymocyte globulin (ATG, thymoglobulin) or 
monoclonal antibodies to T cells, OKT3, may be appro-
priate. Therapy with these agents has been especially 
effective in reversing acute rejection in the posttransplant 
period and is the standard treatment for acute rejec-
tion that fails to respond to methylprednisolone boluses. 
Available data support the use of thymoglobulin induc-
tion to delay CNI use and its attendant nephrotoxicity. 
IV infusions of thymoglobulin may be complicated by 
fever and chills, which can be ameliorated by premedi-
cation with antipyretics and a low dose of glucocorti-
coids. Infusions of OKT3 may be complicated by fever, 
chills, and diarrhea, or by pulmonary edema, which can 
be fatal. Because OKT3 is such a potent immunosup-
pressive agent, its use is also more likely to be compli-
cated by opportunistic infection or lymphoproliferative 
disorders; therefore, because of the availability of alter-
native immunosuppressive drugs, OKT3 is used less 
often nowadays.
Rapamycin, an inhibitor of later events in T cell acti-
vation, is approved for use in kidney transplantation 
but is not approved for use in liver transplant recipients 
because of the reported association with an increased 
frequency of hepatic artery thrombosis in the first 
month posttransplantation. In patients with CNI-related 
nephrotoxicity, conversion to rapamycin has been dem-
onstrated to be effective in preventing rejection with 
accompanying improvements in renal function. Because 
of its profound antiproliferative effects, rapamycin has 
also been suggested to be a useful immunosuppres-
sive agent in patients with a prior or current history of 
malignancy, such as HCC. Side effects include hyper-
lipidemia, peripheral edema, oral ulcers, and interstitial 
pneumonitis.
The most important principle of immunosuppres-
sion is that the ideal approach strikes a balance between 
immunosuppression and immunologic competence. In 
general, given sufficient immunosuppression, acute liver 
allograft rejection is nearly always reversible. On one 
hand, incompletely treated acute rejection predisposes 
to the development of chronic rejection, which can 
threaten graft survival. On the other hand, if the cumu-
lative dose of immunosuppressive therapy is too large, 
the patient may succumb to opportunistic infection. In 
hepatitis C, pulse glucocorticoids or OKT3 use accel-
erate recurrent allograft hepatitis. Further complicating 
matters, acute rejection can be difficult to distinguish 
histologically from recurrent hepatitis C. Therefore, 
immunosuppressive drugs must be used judiciously, 
with strict attention to the infectious consequences of 
such therapy and careful confirmation of the diagno-
sis of acute rejection. In this vein, efforts have been 
made to minimize the use of glucocorticoids, a main-
stay of immunosuppressive regimens, and steroid-free 
immunosuppression can be achieved in some instances. 
Patients who undergo liver transplantation for autoim-
mune diseases such as primary biliary cirrhosis, autoim-
mune hepatitis, and primary sclerosing cholangitis are 
less likely to achieve freedom from glucocorticoids.
Postoperative Complications
Complications of liver transplantation can be divided 
into nonhepatic and hepatic categories (Tables 46-4 
and 46-5). In addition, both immediate postop-
erative and late complications are encountered. As a 
rule, patients who undergo liver transplantation have 
been chronically ill for protracted periods and may be 
Table 46-4 
Nonhepatic Complications of Liver 
Transplantation
Fluid overload
Cardiovascular 
instability
Arrhythmias
Congestive heart failure
Cardiomyopathy
Pulmonary  
compromise
Pneumonia
Pulmonary capillary vascular  
permeability
Fluid overload
Renal dysfunction
Prerenal azotemia
Hypoperfusion injury (acute tubular 
necrosis)
Drug nephrotoxicity
↓ Renal blood flow secondary to 
↑ intraabdominal pressure
Hematologic
Anemia 2° to gastrointestinal and/
or intraabdominal bleeding
Hemolytic anemia, aplastic anemia
Thrombocytopenia
Infection
Bacterial: early, common post­
operative infections
Fungal/parasitic: late, opportunistic 
infections
Viral: late, opportunistic infections, 
recurrent hepatitis
Neuropsychiatric
Seizures
Metabolic encephalopathy
Depression
Difficult psychosocial adjustment
Diseases of donor
Infectious
Malignant
Malignancy
B cell lymphoma (posttransplanta-
tion lymphoproliferative disorders)
De novo neoplasms (particularly 
squamous cell skin carcinoma)
 
CHAPTER 46
Liver Transplantation
483
malnourished and wasted. The impact of such chronic 
illness and the multisystem failure that accompanies 
liver failure continue to require attention in the post-
operative period. Because of the massive fluid losses and 
fluid shifts that occur during the operation, patients 
may remain fluid-overloaded during the immediate 
postoperative period, straining cardiovascular reserve; 
this effect can be amplified in the face of transient renal 
dysfunction and pulmonary capillary vascular permeability. 
Continuous monitoring of cardiovascular and pulmo-
nary function, measures to maintain the integrity of the 
intravascular compartment and to treat extravascular 
volume overload, and scrupulous attention to potential 
sources and sites of infection are of paramount impor-
tance. Cardiovascular instability may also result from the 
electrolyte imbalance that may accompany reperfusion 
of the donor liver as well as from restoration of systemic 
vascular resistance following implantation. Pulmonary 
function may be compromised further by paralysis of 
the right hemidiaphragm associated with phrenic nerve 
injury. The hyperdynamic state with increased cardiac 
output that is characteristic of patients with liver failure 
reverses rapidly after successful liver transplantation.
Other immediate management issues include renal 
dysfunction. Prerenal azotemia, acute kidney injury 
associated with hypoperfusion (acute tubular necrosis), 
and renal toxicity caused by antibiotics, tacrolimus, or 
cyclosporine are encountered frequently in the 
postoperative period, sometimes necessitating dialysis. 
Hemolytic uremic syndrome can be associated with 
cyclosporine, tacrolimus, or OKT3. Occasionally, post-
operative intraperitoneal bleeding may be sufficient to 
increase intraabdominal pressure, which, in turn, may 
reduce renal blood flow; this effect is rapidly reversible 
when abdominal distention is relieved by exploratory 
laparotomy to identify and ligate the bleeding site and 
to remove intraperitoneal clot.
Anemia may also result from acute upper gastroin-
testinal bleeding or from transient hemolytic anemia, 
which may be autoimmune, especially when blood 
group O livers are transplanted into blood group A 
or B recipients. This autoimmune hemolytic anemia 
is mediated by donor intrahepatic lymphocytes that 
recognize red blood cell A or B antigens on recipient 
erythrocytes. Transient in nature, this process resolves 
once the donor liver is repopulated by recipient bone 
marrow–derived lymphocytes; the hemolysis can be 
treated by transfusing blood group O red blood cells 
and/or by administering higher doses of glucocorti-
coids. Transient thrombocytopenia is also commonly 
encountered. Aplastic anemia, a late occurrence, is rare 
but has been reported in almost 30% of patients who 
underwent liver transplantation for acute, severe hepati-
tis of unknown cause.
Bacterial, fungal, or viral infections are common 
and may be life-threatening postoperatively. Early after 
transplant surgery, common postoperative infections 
predominate—pneumonia, wound infections, infected 
intraabdominal collections, urinary tract infections, and 
IV line infections—rather than opportunistic infections; 
these infections may involve the biliary tree and liver as 
well. Beyond the first postoperative month, the toll of 
immunosuppression becomes evident, and opportunis-
tic infections—CMV, herpes viruses, fungal infections 
(Aspergillus, Candida, cryptococcal disease), mycobacterial 
infections, parasitic infections (Pneumocystis, Toxoplasma), 
bacterial infections (Nocardia, Legionella, and Listeria)—
predominate. Rarely, early infections represent those 
transmitted with the donor liver, either infections pres-
ent in the donor or infections acquired during pro-
curement processing. De novo viral hepatitis infections 
acquired from the donor organ or, almost unheard of 
nowadays, from transfused blood products occur after 
typical incubation periods for these agents (well beyond 
the first month). Obviously, infections in an immuno-
suppressed host demand early recognition and prompt 
management; prophylactic antibiotic therapy is admin-
istered routinely in the immediate postoperative period. 
Use of sulfamethoxazole with trimethoprim reduces the 
incidence of postoperative Pneumocystis carinii pneumo-
nia. Antiviral prophylaxis for CMV with ganciclovir 
Table 46-5
Hepatic Complications of Liver 
Transplantation
Hepatic Dysfunction Common after Major Surgery
Prehepatic
Pigment load
Hemolysis
Blood collections (hematomas, 
abdominal collections)
Intrahepatic
Early
Hepatotoxic drugs and anesthesia
Hypoperfusion (hypotension, shock, 
sepsis)
Benign postoperative cholestasis
Late
Transfusion-associated hepatitis
Exacerbation of primary hepatic  
disease
Posthepatic
Biliary obstruction
↓ Renal clearance of conjugated 
bilirubin (renal dysfunction)
Hepatic Dysfunction Unique to Liver Transplantation
Primary graft  
nonfunction
Vascular  
compromise
Portal vein obstruction
Hepatic artery thrombosis
Anastomotic leak with  
intraabdominal bleeding
Bile duct disorder
Stenosis, obstruction, leak
Rejection
Recurrent primary 
hepatic disease
SECTION VII
Liver Transplantation
484
should be administered in patients at high risk (e.g., 
when a CMV-seropositive donor organ is implanted 
into a CMV-seronegative recipient).
Neuropsychiatric complications include seizures 
(commonly associated with cyclosporine and tacroli-
mus toxicity), metabolic encephalopathy, depression, 
and difficult psychosocial adjustment. Rarely, diseases 
are transmitted by the allograft from the donor to the 
recipient. In addition to viral and bacterial infections, 
malignancies of donor origin have occurred. Posttrans-
plantation lymphoproliferative disorders, especially B cell 
lymphoma, are a recognized complication associated 
with immunosuppressive drugs such as azathioprine, 
tacrolimus, and cyclosporine (discussed earlier). Epstein-
Barr virus has been shown to play a contributory role in 
some of these tumors, which may regress when immu-
nosuppressive therapy is reduced. De novo neoplasms 
appear at increased frequency after liver transplanta-
tion, particularly squamous cell carcinomas of the skin. 
Routine screening should be performed.
Long-term complications after liver transplantation 
attributable primarily to immunosuppressive medica-
tions include diabetes mellitus (associated with gluco-
corticoids) as well as hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and 
chronic renal insufficiency (associated with cyclosporine 
and tacrolimus). Monitoring and treating these disorders 
is a routine component of posttransplantation care; in 
some cases, they respond to changes in immunosuppres-
sive regimen, while in others, specific treatment of the 
disorder is introduced.
Hepatic Complications
Hepatic dysfunction after liver transplantation is similar 
to the hepatic complications encountered after major 
abdominal and cardiothoracic surgery; however, in 
addition, hepatic complications include primary graft 
failure, vascular compromise, failure or stricture of the 
biliary anastomoses, and rejection. As in nontransplant 
surgery, postoperative jaundice may result from pre­
hepatic, intrahepatic, and posthepatic sources. Prehepatic 
sources represent the massive hemoglobin pigment load 
from transfusions, hemolysis, hematomas, ecchymoses, 
and other collections of blood. Early intrahepatic liver 
injury includes effects of hepatotoxic drugs and anesthesia; 
hypoperfusion injury associated with hypotension, sep-
sis, and shock; and benign postoperative cholestasis. Late 
intrahepatic sources of liver injury include posttrans-
fusion hepatitis and exacerbation of primary disease. 
Posthepatic sources of hepatic dysfunction include biliary 
obstruction and reduced renal clearance of conjugated 
bilirubin. Hepatic complications unique to liver trans-
plantation include primary graft failure associated with 
ischemic injury to the organ during harvesting; vascular 
compromise associated with thrombosis or stenosis of 
the portal vein or hepatic artery anastomoses; vascular 
anastomotic leak; stenosis, obstruction, or leakage of the 
anastomosed common bile duct; recurrence of primary 
hepatic disorder (discussed later); and rejection.
Transplant Rejection
Despite the use of immunosuppressive drugs, rejection 
of the transplanted liver still occurs in a proportion of 
patients, beginning 1–2 weeks after surgery. Clinical 
signs suggesting rejection are fever, right upper quad-
rant pain, and reduced bile pigment and volume. 
Leukocytosis may occur, but the most reliable indicators 
are increases in serum bilirubin and aminotransferase 
levels. Because these tests lack specificity, distinguish-
ing among rejection, biliary obstruction, primary graft 
nonfunction, vascular compromise, viral hepatitis, CMV 
infection, drug hepatotoxicity, and recurrent primary 
disease may be difficult. Radiographic visualization of 
the biliary tree and/or percutaneous liver biopsy often 
help to establish the correct diagnosis. Morphologic fea-
tures of acute rejection include a mixed portal cellular 
infiltrate, bile duct injury, and/or endothelial inflam-
mation (“endothelialitis”); some of these findings are 
reminiscent of graft-versus-host disease, primary biliary 
cirrhosis, or recurrent allograft hepatitis C. As soon as 
transplant rejection is suspected, treatment consists of 
IV methylprednisolone in repeated boluses; if this fails 
to abort rejection, many centers use thymoglobulin or 
OKT3. Caution should be exercised when managing 
acute rejection with pulse glucocorticoids or OKT3 in 
patients with HCV infection, because of the high risk of 
triggering recurrent allograft hepatitis C.
Chronic rejection is a relatively rare outcome that 
can follow repeated bouts of acute rejection or that 
occurs unrelated to preceding rejection episodes. Mor-
phologically, chronic rejection is characterized by 
progressive cholestasis, focal parenchymal necrosis, mono-
nuclear infiltration, vascular lesions (intimal fibrosis, 
subintimal foam cells, fibrinoid necrosis), and fibrosis. 
This process may be reflected as ductopenia—the van-
ishing bile duct syndrome. Reversibility of chronic 
rejection is limited; in patients with therapy-resistant 
chronic rejection, retransplantation has yielded encour-
aging results.
Outcome
Survival
The survival rate for patients undergoing liver trans-
plantation has improved steadily since 1983. One-year 
survival rates have increased from ∼70% in the early 
1980s to 85–90% from 2003 to 2009. Currently the 
5-year survival rate exceeds 60%. An important obser-
vation is the relationship between clinical status before 
 
CHAPTER 46
Liver Transplantation
485
transplantation and outcome. For patients who undergo 
liver transplantation when their level of compensation 
is high (e.g., still working or only partially disabled), 
a 1-year survival rate of >85% is common. For those 
whose level of decompensation mandates continu-
ous in-hospital care prior to transplantation, the 1-year 
survival rate is about 70%, while for those who are 
so decompensated that they require life support in an 
intensive care unit, the 1-year survival rate is ∼50%. 
Since UNOS’s adoption in 2002 of the MELD sys-
tem for organ allocation, posttransplantation survival 
has been found to be affected adversely for candidates 
with MELD scores >25, considered high disease severity. 
Thus, irrespective of allocation scheme, high disease 
severity pretransplantation corresponds to diminished 
posttransplantation survival. Another important dis-
tinction in survival has been drawn between high- and 
low-risk patient categories. For patients who do not fit 
any “high-risk” designations, 1-year and 5-year survival 
rates of 85 and 80%, respectively, have been recorded. 
In contrast, among patients in high-risk categories—
cancer, fulminant hepatitis, age >65, concurrent renal 
failure, respirator dependence, portal vein thrombosis, 
and history of a portacaval shunt or multiple right upper 
quadrant operations—survival statistics fall into the 
range of 60% at 1 year and 35% at 5 years. Survival after 
retransplantation for primary graft nonfunction is ∼50%. 
Causes of failure of liver transplantation vary with time. 
Failures within the first 3 months result primarily from 
technical complications, postoperative infections, and 
hemorrhage. Transplant failures after the first 3 months 
are more likely to result from infection, rejection, or 
recurrent disease (such as malignancy or viral hepatitis).
Recurrence of Primary Disease
Features of autoimmune hepatitis, primary sclerosing 
cholangitis, and primary biliary cirrhosis overlap with 
those of rejection or posttransplantation bile duct injury. 
Whether autoimmune hepatitis and sclerosing cho-
angitis recur after liver transplantation is controversial; 
data supporting recurrent autoimmune hepatitis (in 
up to one-third of patients in some series) are more 
convincing than those supporting recurrent sclerosing 
cholangitis. Similarly, reports of recurrent primary biliary 
cirrhosis after liver transplantation have appeared; how-
ever, the histologic features of primary biliary cirrhosis 
and chronic rejection are virtually indistinguishable and 
occur as frequently in patients with primary biliary cir-
rhosis as in patients undergoing transplantation for other 
reasons. The presence of a florid inflammatory bile duct 
lesion is highly suggestive of the recurrence of primary 
biliary cirrhosis, but even this lesion can be observed in 
acute rejection. Hereditary disorders such as Wilson’s 
disease and α1-antitrypsin deficiency have not recurred 
after liver transplantation; however, recurrence of 
disordered iron metabolism has been observed in some 
patients with hemochromatosis. Hepatic vein throm-
bosis (Budd-Chiari syndrome) may recur; this can be 
minimized by treating underlying myeloproliferative 
disorders and by anticoagulation. Because cholangiocar-
cinoma recurs almost invariably, few centers now offer 
transplantation to such patients; however, a few highly 
selected patients with operatively confirmed stage I or II 
cholangiocarcinoma who undergo liver transplantation 
combined with neoadjuvant chemoradiation may expe-
rience excellent outcomes. In patients with intrahepatic 
hepatocellular carcinoma who meet criteria for trans-
plantation, 1- and 5-year survivals are similar to those 
observed in patients undergoing liver transplantation 
for nonmalignant disease. Finally, metabolic disorders 
such as nonalcoholic steatohepatitis recur frequently, 
especially if the underlying metabolic predisposition 
is not altered. The metabolic syndrome occurs com-
monly after liver transplantation as a result of recurrent 
nonalcoholic fatty liver, immunosuppressive medica-
tions, and/or, in patients with hepatitis C related to the 
impact of HCV infection on insulin resistance, diabetes, 
and fatty liver.
Hepatitis A can recur after transplantation for ful-
minant hepatitis A, but such acute reinfection has 
no serious clinical sequelae. In fulminant hepatitis B, 
recurrence is not the rule; however, in the absence of 
any prophylactic measures, hepatitis B usually recurs 
after transplantation for end-stage chronic hepatitis B. 
Before the introduction of prophylactic antiviral ther-
apy, immunosuppressive therapy sufficient to prevent 
allograft rejection led inevitably to marked increases 
in hepatitis B viremia, regardless of pretransplantation 
levels. Overall graft and patient survival were poor, 
and some patients experienced a rapid recapitulation 
of severe injury—severe chronic hepatitis or even ful-
minant hepatitis—after transplantation. Also recog-
nized in the era before availability of antiviral regimens 
was fibrosing cholestatic hepatitis, rapidly progressive liver 
injury associated with marked hyperbilirubinemia, sub-
stantial prolongation of the prothrombin time (both 
out of proportion to relatively modest elevations of 
aminotransferase activity), and rapidly progressive liver 
failure. This lesion has been suggested to represent a 
“choking off” of the hepatocyte by an overwhelming 
density of HBV proteins. Complications such as sep-
sis and pancreatitis were also observed more frequently 
in patients undergoing liver transplantation for hepati-
tis B prior to the introduction of antiviral therapy. The 
introduction of long-term prophylaxis with HBIg revo-
lutionized liver transplantation for chronic hepatitis B. 
Preoperative hepatitis B vaccination, preoperative or 
postoperative interferon (IFN) therapy, or short-term 
(≤2 months) HBIg prophylaxis has not been shown 
to be effective, but a retrospective analysis of data 
from several hundred European patients followed for 
SECTION VII
Liver Transplantation
486
3 years after transplantation has shown that long-term 
(≥6 months) prophylaxis with HBIg is associated with 
a lowering of the risk of HBV reinfection from ∼75% 
to 35% and a reduction in mortality from ∼50% to 20%.
As a result of long-term HBIg use following liver 
transplantation for chronic hepatitis B, similar improve-
ments in outcome have been observed in the United 
States, with 1-year survival rates between 75% and 90%. 
Currently, with HBIg prophylaxis, the outcome of liver 
transplantation for chronic hepatitis B is indistinguish-
able from that for chronic liver disease unassociated 
with chronic hepatitis B; essentially, medical concerns 
regarding liver transplantation for chronic hepatitis B 
have been eliminated. Passive immunoprophylaxis with 
HBIg is begun during the anhepatic stage of surgery, 
repeated daily for the first 6 postoperative days, then 
continued with infusions that are given either at regu-
lar intervals of 4–6 weeks or, alternatively, when anti-
hepatitis B surface (HBs) levels fall below a threshold of 
100 mIU/mL. The current approach in most centers is 
to continue HBIg indefinitely, which can add approxi-
mately $20,000 per year to the cost of care; some cen-
ters are evaluating regimens that shift to less frequent 
administration or to IM administration in the late post-
transplantation period or, in low-risk patients, mainte-
nance with antiviral therapy (discussed later) alone. Still, 
“breakthrough” HBV infection occasionally occurs.
Further improving the outcome of liver transplanta-
tion for chronic hepatitis B is the current availability of 
such antiviral drugs as lamivudine, adefovir, entecavir, 
and tenofovir disoproxil fumarate (Chap. 40). When 
these drugs are administered to patients with decom-
pensated liver disease, a proportion improve sufficiently 
to postpone imminent liver transplantation. In addi-
tion, lamivudine can be used to prevent recurrence of 
HBV infection when administered prior to transplan-
tation; to treat hepatitis B that recurs after transplanta-
tion, including in patients who break through HBIg 
prophylaxis; and to reverse the course of otherwise fatal 
fibrosing cholestatic hepatitis. Clinical trials have shown 
that lamivudine antiviral therapy reduces the level of 
HBV replication substantially, sometimes even result-
ing in clearance of hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg); 
reduces alanine aminotransferase (ALT) levels; and 
improves histologic features of necrosis and inflam-
mation. Long-term use of lamivudine is safe and effec-
tive, but after several months a proportion of patients 
become resistant to lamivudine, resulting from YMDD 
(tyrosine-methionine-aspartate-aspartate) mutations in the 
HBV polymerase motif (Chap. 40). In approximately 
one-half of such resistant patients, hepatic deterioration 
may ensue. Fortunately, adefovir or tenofovir disoproxil 
fumarate are available as well and can be used to treat 
lamivudine-associated YMDD variants, effectively “res-
cuing” patients experiencing hepatic decompensation 
after lamivudine breakthrough. Currently, most liver 
transplantation centers combine HBIg plus lamivu-
dine, adefovir, entecavir, or tenofovir disoproxil fuma-
rate. Clinical trials are underway to define the optimal 
application of these antiviral agents in the management 
of patients undergoing liver transplantation for chronic 
hepatitis B; conceivably, in the future, combinations of 
oral antiviral drugs may supplant HBIg.
Prophylactic approaches applied to patients undergo-
ing liver transplantation for chronic hepatitis B are being 
used as well for patients without hepatitis B who receive 
organs from donors with anti-hepatitis B core (HBc). 
Patients who undergo liver transplantation for chronic 
hepatitis B plus D are less likely to experience recurrent 
liver injury than patients undergoing liver transplanta-
tion for hepatitis B alone; still, such co-infected patients 
would also be offered standard posttransplantation pro-
phylactic therapy for hepatitis B.
Accounting for up to 40% of all liver transplanta-
tion procedures, the most common indication for liver 
transplantation is end-stage liver disease resulting from 
chronic hepatitis C. Recurrence of HCV infection 
after liver transplantation can be documented in almost 
every patient. The clinical consequences of recur-
rent hepatitis C are limited during the first 5 years after 
transplantation. Nonetheless, despite the relative clini-
cal benignity of recurrent hepatitis C in the early years 
after liver transplantation, and despite the negligible 
impact on patient survival during these early years, 
histologic studies have documented the presence of 
moderate to severe chronic hepatitis in more than one-
half of all patients and bridging fibrosis or cirrhosis in 
∼10%. Moreover, progression to cirrhosis within 5 years 
is even more common, occurring in up to two-thirds 
of patients if moderate hepatitis is detected in a 1-year 
biopsy. Not surprisingly, then, for patients undergo-
ing transplantation for hepatitis C, allograft and patient 
survival are diminished substantially between 5 and 
10 years after transplantation. In a proportion of patients, 
even during the early posttransplantation period, recur-
rent hepatitis C may be sufficiently severe biochemically 
and histologically to merit antiviral therapy. Treatment 
with pegylated interferon (IFN) can suppress HCV-­
associated liver injury but rarely leads to sustained 
benefit. Sustained virologic responses are the exception, 
and reduced tolerability is often dose-limiting. Preemp-
tive combination antiviral therapy with pegylated IFN 
and the nucleoside analogue ribavirin immediately after 
transplantation does not appear to provide any advan-
tage over therapy introduced after clinical hepatitis 
has occurred. Similarly, although IFN-based antiviral 
therapy is not recommended for patients with decom-
pensated liver disease, some centers have experimented 
with pretransplantation antiviral therapy in an attempt 
to eradicate HCV replication prior to transplantation; 
 
CHAPTER 46
Liver Transplantation
487
preliminary results are promising, but IFN treatment of 
patients with end-stage liver disease can lead to worsening 
of hepatic decompensation, and HCV infection has 
recurred after transplantation in some of these recipients. 
Trials of hepatitis C immune globulin preparations to 
prevent recurrent hepatitis C after liver transplantation 
have not been successful.
A small number succumb to early HCV-associated 
liver injury, and a syndrome reminiscent of fibrosing 
cholestatic hepatitis (discussed earlier) has been observed 
rarely. Because patients with more episodes of rejection 
receive more immunosuppressive therapy, and because 
immunosuppressive therapy enhances HCV replication, 
patients with severe or multiple episodes of rejection are 
more likely to experience early recurrence of hepatitis C 
after transplantation. Both high viral levels and older 
donor age have been linked to recurrent HCV-induced 
liver disease and to earlier disease recurrence after 
transplantation.
Patients who undergo liver transplantation for end-
stage alcoholic cirrhosis are at risk of resorting to drink-
ing again after transplantation, a potential source of 
recurrent alcoholic liver injury. Currently, alcoholic 
liver disease is one of the more common indications 
for liver transplantation, accounting for 20–25% of all 
liver transplantation procedures, and most transplanta-
tion centers screen candidates carefully for predictors 
of continued abstinence. Recidivism is more likely in 
patients whose sobriety prior to transplantation was 
<6 months. For abstinent patients with alcoholic cir-
rhosis, liver transplantation can be undertaken success-
fully, with outcomes comparable to those for other 
categories of patients with chronic liver disease, when 
coordinated by a team approach that includes substance 
abuse counseling.
Posttransplantation Quality of Life
Full rehabilitation is achieved in the majority of 
patients who survive the early postoperative months 
and escape chronic rejection or unmanageable infec-
tion. Psychosocial maladjustment interferes with medi-
cal compliance in a small number of patients, but 
most manage to adhere to immunosuppressive regi-
mens, which must be continued indefinitely. In one 
study, 85% of patients who survived their transplant 
operations returned to gainful activities. In fact, some 
women have conceived and carried pregnancies to 
term after transplantation without demonstrable injury 
to their infants.
This page intentionally left blank 
Disorders of the  
pancreas
SECTION VIII
 norton J. Greenberger 
I   Darwin L. conwell 
I  peter a. Banks 
490
 gENEral CONSIDEraTIONS 
 As emphasized in  Chap. 48 , the etiologies as well as 
the clinical manifestations of pancreatitis are quite  varied. 
Although it is well-appreciated that pancreatitis is fre-
quently secondary to biliary tract disease and alcohol 
abuse, it can also be caused by drugs, trauma, and viral 
infections and is associated with metabolic and connec-
tive tissue disorders. In ∼30% of patients with acute 
pancreatitis and 25–40% of patients with chronic pan-
creatitis, the etiology initially can be obscure. 
 Although good data exist concerning the incidence 
of acute pancreatitis (about 5–35/100,000 new cases 
per year worldwide, with a mortality rate of about 3%), 
the number of patients who suffer with acute pancre-
atitis is largely increasing and is now estimated to be 
70 hospitalizations/100,000 persons annually, resulting 
in >200,000 new cases of acute pancreatitis per year in 
the United States. Only one prospective study on the 
incidence of chronic pancreatitis is available; it showed 
an incidence of 8.2 new cases per 100,000 per year and 
a prevalence of 26.4 cases per 100,000. These numbers 
probably underestimate considerably the true incidence 
and prevalence, because non alcohol–induced pancreati-
tis has been largely ignored. At autopsy, the prevalence 
of chronic pancreatitis ranges from 0.04 to 5%. The 
relative inaccessibility of the pancreas to direct exami-
nation and the nonspecifi city of the abdominal pain 
associated with pancreatitis make the diagnosis of pan-
creatitis diffi cult and usually dependent on elevation of 
blood amylase and/or lipase levels. Many patients with 
chronic pancreatitis do not have elevated blood amylase 
or lipase levels. Some patients with chronic pancreati-
tis develop signs and symptoms of pancreatic exocrine 
insuffi ciency, and, thus, objective evidence for pancre-
atic disease can be demonstrated. However, there is a 
very large reservoir of pancreatic exocrine function. 
More than 90% of the pancreas must be damaged before 
maldigestion of fat and protein is manifested. Non-
invasive, indirect tests of pancreatic exocrine function 
(fecal elastase) are much more likely to give abnormal 
results in patients with obvious pancreatic disease (i.e., 
pancreatic calcifi cation, steatorrhea, or diabetes mellitus, 
than in patients with occult disease). Thus, the number 
of patients who have subclinical exocrine dysfunction 
(<90% loss of function) is unknown. 
 TESTS USEfUl IN ThE DIagNOSIS Of 
PaNCrEaTIC DISEaSE 
 Several tests have proved of value in the evaluation of 
pancreatic disease. Examples of specifi c tests and their 
usefulness in the diagnosis of acute and chronic pan-
creatitis are summarized in  Table 47-1 and  Fig. 47-1 . 
At some institutions, pancreatic-function tests are  available 
and performed if the diagnosis of pancreatic disease remains 
a possibility after noninvasive tests (ultrasound, CT, mag-
netic resonance cholangiopancreatography [MRCP]) 
or invasive tests (endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancrea-
tography [ERCP], endoscopic ultrasonography [EUS]) 
have given normal or inconclusive results. In this 
regard, tests employing  direct stimulation of the pancreas 
are the most sensitive. 
 Pancreatic enzymes in body ﬂ uids 
 The serum amylase and lipase levels are widely used 
as screening tests for acute pancreatitis in the patient 
with acute abdominal pain or back pain.  Values 
greater than three times the upper limit of normal 
 virtually clinch the diagnosis if gut perforation or 
infarction is excluded. In acute pancreatitis, the serum 
amylase and lipase are usually elevated within 24 h 
of onset and remain so for 3–7 days. Levels usually 
 APPROACH TO THE PATIENT WITH 
PANCREATIC DISEASE 
 CHAPTER 47 
 
CHAPTER 47
Approach to the Patient with Pancreatic Disease
491
Table 47-1
Tests Useful in the Diagnosis of Acute and Chronic Pancreatitis and Pancreatic Tumors
Test
Principle
Comment
Pancreatic Enzymes in Body Fluids
Amylase
1. Serum
Pancreatic inflammation leads to 
increased enzyme levels
Simple; 20–40% false negatives and positives; 
reliable if test results are three times the upper 
limit of normal
2. Urine
Renal clearance of amylase is 
increased in acute pancreatitis
Infrequently used
3. Ascitic fluid
Disruption of gland or main pancre-
atic duct leads to increased amylase 
­concentration
Can help establish diagnosis of acute 
­pancreatitis; false positives occur with intestinal 
obstruction and perforated ulcer
4. Pleural fluid
Exudative pleural effusion with 
­pancreatitis
False positives occur with carcinoma of the lung 
and esophageal perforation
Serum lipase
Pancreatic inflammation leads to 
increased enzyme levels
New methods have greatly simplified 
­determination; positive in 70–85% of cases
Studies Pertaining to Pancreatic Structure
Radiologic and radionuclide tests
1.  Plain film of the abdomen
Can be abnormal in acute and chronic 
pancreatitis
Simple; normal in >50% of cases of both acute 
and chronic pancreatitis
2.  Upper GI x-rays
Now obsolete
3.  Ultrasonography (US)
Can provide information on 
edema, ­inflammation, calcification, 
­pseudocysts, and mass lesions
Simple, noninvasive; sequential studies quite 
feasible; useful in diagnosis of pseudocyst 
­limited by interference by bowel gas
4.  CT scan
Permits detailed visualization of 
­pancreas and surrounding structures, 
pancreatic fluid collection, pseudo-
cyst, degree of necrosis
Useful in the diagnosis of pancreatic calcifica-
tion, dilated pancreatic ducts, and pancreatic 
tumors; may not be able to distinguish between 
inflammatory and neoplastic mass lesions
5.  Endoscopic retrograde 
cholangiopancreatography 
(ERCP)
Cannulation of pancreatic and ­common 
bile duct permits visualization of 
­pancreatic-biliary ductal system
Can provide diagnostic data in 60–85% of 
cases; differentiation of chronic pancreatitis 
from pancreatic carcinoma may be ­difficult; 
now considered primarily a therapeutic 
­procedure
6.  Endoscopic ultrasonography 
(EUS)
High-frequency transducer employed 
with EUS can produce very high-­
resolution images and depict 
changes in the ­pancreatic duct and 
­parenchyma with great detail
Can be used to assess chronic pancreatitis and 
pancreatic carcinoma
7.  Magnetic resonance 
cholangiopancreatography
Three-dimensional rendering has been 
used to produce very good images of 
the pancreatic duct by a noninvasive 
technique
Has largely replaced ERCP as a diagnostic test
Pancreatic biopsy with US or 
CT guidance
Percutaneous aspiration biopsy with 
skinny needle and localization of 
lesion by US
High diagnostic yield; laparotomy avoided; can 
be done with EUS; requires special technical 
skills
Tests of Exocrine Pancreatic Function
Direct stimulation of the pancreas with analysis of duodenal contents
1.  Secretin-pancreozymin 
(CCK) test
Secretin leads to increased output 
of ­pancreatic juice and HCO3
−; 
CCK leads to increased output of 
­pancreatic enzymes; pancreatic 
secretory response is related to the 
functional mass of ­pancreatic tissue
Sensitive enough to detect occult disease; 
involves duodenal intubation and fluoroscopy; 
poorly defined normal enzyme response; 
overlap in chronic pancreatitis; large secretory 
reserve capacity of the pancreas, currently 
done at only a few medical centers
(continued)
SECTION VIII
Disorders of the Pancreas
492
return to normal within 7 days unless there is pancre-
atic ductal disruption, ductal obstruction, or pseudo-
cyst formation. Approximately 85% of patients with 
acute pancreatitis have a threefold or greater elevated 
serum amylase and lipase levels. The values may be 
normal if (1) there is a delay (of 2–5 days) before 
blood samples are obtained, (2) the underlying disor-
der is chronic pancreatitis rather than acute pancre-
atitis, or (3) hypertriglyceridemia is present. Patients 
with hypertriglyceridemia and proven pancreatitis have 
been found to have spuriously low levels of amylase 
and perhaps lipase activity. In the absence of objective 
evidence of pancreatitis by abdominal ultrasound, CT 
scan, MRCP, or EUS, mild to moderate elevations 
of amylase, and/or lipase are not helpful in making a 
diagnosis of chronic pancreatitis.
The serum amylase can be elevated in other con-
ditions (Table 47-2), in part because the enzyme is 
found in many organs. In addition to the pancreas and 
salivary glands, small quantities of amylase are found 
in the tissues of the fallopian tubes, lung, thyroid, 
and tonsils and can be produced by various tumors 
­(carcinomas of the lung, esophagus, breast, and ovary). 
Urinary amylase measurements, including the amylase/
creatinine clearance ratio, are no more sensitive or spe-
cific than blood amylase levels and are rarely employed. 
Isoamylase determinations do not accurately distin-
guish elevated blood amylase levels due to bona fide 
pancreatitis from elevated blood amylase levels due to 
a nonpancreatic source of amylase, especially when the 
blood amylase level is only moderately elevated.
Elevation of ascitic fluid amylase occurs in acute pan-
creatitis as well as in (1) pancreatogenous ascites due 
to disruption of the main pancreatic duct or a leaking 
pseudocyst and (2) other abdominal disorders that sim-
ulate pancreatitis (e.g., intestinal obstruction, intestinal 
infarction, or perforated peptic ulcer). Elevation of pleu-
ral fluid amylase can occur in acute pancreatitis, chronic 
pancreatitis, carcinoma of the lung, and esophageal 
perforation.
Lipase may now be the single best enzyme to measure 
for the diagnosis of acute pancreatitis. Improvements 
in substrates and technology offer clinicians improved 
options, especially when a turbidimetric assay is used. 
The newer lipase assays have colipase as a cofactor and 
are fully automated.
No single blood test is reliable for the ­diagnosis 
of acute pancreatitis in patients with renal failure. 
­Determining whether a patient with renal failure and 
abdominal pain has pancreatitis remains a difficult 
clinical problem. One study found that serum amylase 
levels were elevated in patients with renal dysfunc-
tion only when creatinine clearance was <0.8 mL/s 
(<50 mL/min). In such patients, the serum amylase 
level was invariably <8.3 μkat/L (<500 IU/L) in the 
absence of objective evidence of acute pancreatitis. In 
that study, serum lipase and trypsin levels paralleled 
serum amylase values. With these limitations in mind, 
Table 47-1
Tests Useful in the Diagnosis of Acute and Chronic Pancreatitis and Pancreatic Tumors 
(continued)
Test
Principle
Comment
2.  Endoscopic secretin—CCK 
test
Replaces need for tube placement 
duodenum
Sensitive enough to detect occult disease; 
avoids intubation and fluoroscopy; requires 
sedation
Measurement of intraluminal digestion products
1.  Microscopic examination 
of stool for undigested meat 
fibers and fat
Lack of proteolytic and lipolytic 
enzymes causes decreased digestion 
of meat fibers and triglycerides
Simple, reliable; not sensitive enough to detect 
milder cases of pancreatic insufficiency
2.  Quantitative stool fat 
­determination
Lack of lipolytic enzymes brings about 
impaired fat digestion
Reliable, reference standard for defining severity 
of malabsorption; does not distinguish between 
maldigestion and malabsorption
3. Fecal nitrogen
Lack of proteolytic enzymes leads to 
impaired protein digestion, resulting in 
an increase in stool nitrogen
Does not distinguish between maldigestion and 
malabsorption; low sensitivity
Measurement of pancreatic enzymes in feces
1. Elastase
Pancreatic secretion of proteolytic 
enzymes; not degraded in intestine
Good sensitivity if stools not liquid
Abbreviation: CCK, cholecystokinin.
 
CHAPTER 47
Approach to the Patient with Pancreatic Disease
493
Figure 47-1 
A step-wise diagnostic approach to the patient with sus-
pected chronic pancreatitis (CP). Endoscopic ultrasono­gra­
phy (EUS) and magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography 
• Clinical signs and symptoms suggestive of chronic pancreatic disease: abdominal pain, weight loss, steatorrhea,
 malabsorption, history of alcohol abuse, recurrent pancreatitis, fatty-food intolerance
• Perform history, physical exam, review of laboratory studies, consider fecal elastase measurement  
• CT Scan
• CP Diagnostic criteria: calcifications in combination with atrophy and/or dilated duct 
• Diagnostic criteria met; no further imaging needed
• Inconclusive or nondiagnostic results; continue to Step 2 
• MRI/MRCP with secretin enhancement (sMRCP)
• CP Diagnostic criteria: Cambridge Class III, dilated duct, atrophy of gland, fillings defects in duct suggestive of stones
• Diagnostic criteria met; no further imaging needed
• Inconclusive or nondiagnostic results; continue to Step 3 
• Endoscopic Ultrasound (EUS) with quantification of parenchymal and ductal criteria
• CP Diagnostic criteria: ≥ 5 EUS CP criteria
• Diagnostic criteria met; no further imaging needed
• Inconclusive or nondiagnostic results; continue to Step 4 
• Pancreas Function Test (with secretin)—gastroduodenal (SST) or endoscopic (ePFT) collection method
• CP Diagnostic criteria: peak [bicarbonate] <80 meq/L
• Diagnostic criteria met; no further imaging needed
• Inconclusive or nondiagnostic results; continue to Step 5
• Note: Consider combining ePFT with EUS 
• Endoscopic Retrograde Cholangiopancreatography (ERCP)
• CP Diagnostic criteria: Cambridge III, Dilated main pancreatic duct and greater than 3 dilated side branch 
• Diagnostic criteria met; no further imaging needed
• Inconclusive or nondiagnostic results require monitoring of signs and symptoms and repeat
 testing in 6 months–1 year 
Initial imaging modality 
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3
Step 4
Step 5
Chronic Pancreatitis
the recommended screening tests for acute pancreati-
tis are serum lipase and serum amylase levels. Serum lipase 
and amylase values greater than three times normal are 
highly specific.
Studies pertaining to pancreatic structure
Radiologic tests
Plain films of the abdomen, which once provided useful 
information in patients with acute and chronic pancre-
atitis, have been superceded by other detailed imaging 
procedures (US, EUS, CT, MRCP).
Ultrasonography can provide important information 
in patients with acute pancreatitis, chronic pancreatitis, 
pseudocysts, and pancreatic carcinoma. Echographic 
appearances can indicate the presence of edema, inflam-
mation, and calcification (not obvious on plain films of 
the abdomen), as well as pseudocysts, mass lesions, and 
gallstones. In acute pancreatitis, the pancreas is charac-
teristically enlarged. In pancreatic pseudocyst, the usual 
appearance is primarily that of smooth, round fluid col-
lection. Pancreatic carcinoma distorts the usual land-
marks, and mass lesions >3.0 cm are usually detected 
as localized, solid lesions. Ultrasound is often the initial 
investigation for most patients with suspected pancreatic 
disease. However, obesity and excess small- and large-
bowel gas can interfere with pancreatic imaging by 
ultrasound studies.
(sMRCP/MRCP) are appropriate diagnostic alternatives to 
endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP).
SECTION VIII
Disorders of the Pancreas
494
CT is the best imaging study for initial evaluation of 
a suspected pancreatic disorder and for the complica-
tions of acute and chronic pancreatitis. It is especially 
useful in the detection of pancreatic and peripancre-
atic acute fluid collections, fluid-containing lesions 
such as pseudocysts, walled-off necrosis, calcium 
deposits (see Chap. 48, Figs. 48-1, 48-2, and 48-4), 
and pancreatic neoplasms. Most lesions are charac-
terized by (1) enlargement of the pancreatic outline, 
(2) distortion of the pancreatic contour, and/or (3) a 
fluid filling that has a different attenuation coefficient 
than normal pancreas. Oral, water-soluble ­contrast 
agents are used to opacify the stomach and duode-
num during CT scans; this strategy permits more 
precise delineation of various organs as well as mass 
lesions. Dynamic CT (using rapid IV administration of 
Table 47-3 
Endoscopic Ultrasonographic Criteria for 
Chronic Pancreatitis
Ductal
Parenchymal
Stones
Echogenic strands
Echogenic ductal walls
Echogenic foci
Irregular ductal walls
Calcifications
Stricture
Lobular contour
Visible side branches
Cyst
Ductular dilatation
Table 47-2
Causes of Hyperamylasemia and 
Hyperamylasuria
Pancreatic Disease
I.  Pancreatitis
   A.  Acute
   B.  Chronic: ductal 
­obstruction
  C.  Complications of 
pancreatitis
      1.  Pancreatic pseudocyst
      2.  Pancreatogenous 
ascites
      3.  Pancreatic abscess
      4.  Pancreatic necrosis
  II.  Pancreatic 
trauma
III.  Pancreatic 
carcinoma
Nonpancreatic Disorders
    I.  Renal insufficiency
  II.  Salivary gland lesions
    A.  Mumps
    B.  Calculus
    C.  Irradiation sialadenitis
    D.  Maxillofacial surgery
III.  “Tumor” hyperamylasemia
    A.  Carcinoma of the lung
    B.  Carcinoma of the 
esophagus
    C.  Breast carcinoma, 
­ovarian carcinoma
  
    IV.  Macroamylasemia
      V.  Burns
   VI.  Diabetic 
ketoacidosis
 VII.  Pregnancy
VIII.  Renal 
transplantation
    IX.  Cerebral trauma
      X.  Drugs: morphine
Other Abdominal Disorders
  I.  Biliary tract disease: cholecystitis, choledocholithiasis
II.  Intraabdominal disease
     A.  Perforated or penetrating peptic ulcer
     B.  Intestinal obstruction or infarction
     C.  Ruptured ectopic pregnancy
     D.  Peritonitis
     E.  Aortic aneurysm
     F.   Chronic liver disease
    G.  Postoperative hyperamylasemia
contrast) is useful in estimating the extent of pancre-
atic necrosis and in predicting morbidity and mortality. 
Spiral (helical) CT provides clear images much more 
rapidly and essentially negates artifact caused by patient 
movement.
EUS produces high-resolution images of the pancre-
atic parenchyma and pancreatic duct with a transducer 
fixed to an endoscope that can be directed onto the 
surface of the pancreas through the stomach or duode-
num. EUS and MRCP have largely replaced ERCP for 
diagnostic purposes in many centers. EUS allows one to 
obtain information about the pancreatic duct as well as 
the parenchyma and has few procedure-related compli-
cations associated with it, in contrast to the 5–20% of 
post-ERCP pancreatitis observed. EUS is also helpful in 
detecting common bile duct stones. Pancreatic masses 
can be biopsied via EUS and one can deliver nerve-
blocking agents through EUS fine-needle injection. 
Criteria for abnormalities on EUS in severe chronic 
pancreatic disease have been developed. Currently, 
chronic pancreatitis is considered diagnosed by EUS if 
five or more criteria listed in Table 47-3 are present. 
Recent studies comparing EUS and ERCP to the secre-
tin test in patients with unexplained abdominal pain 
suspected of having chronic pancreatitis show equiva-
lent diagnostic accuracy in detecting early changes of 
chronic pancreatitis. The exact role of EUS versus CT, 
ERCP, or function testing in the early diagnosis of 
chronic pancreatitis has yet to be clearly defined.
MRCP/MRI is now being used to view the bile 
ducts, pancreatic duct, and the pancreas parenchyma. 
Non breath–holding and three-dimensional turbo spin-
echo techniques are being used to produce superb MRCP 
images. The main pancreatic duct and common bile duct 
can be seen well, but there is still a question as to whether 
changes can be detected consistently in the ­secondary 
ducts. The secondary ducts are not visualized in a nor-
mal pancreas. MRCP may be particularly useful to eval-
uate the pancreatic duct in high-risk patients such as the 
elderly because this is a noninvasive procedure. Secretin 
enhanced MRCP is currently under investigation but is 
emerging as a method to better evaluate ductal changes.
 
CHAPTER 47
Approach to the Patient with Pancreatic Disease
495
Both EUS and MRCP have largely replaced diag-
nostic ERCP in most patients. As these techniques 
become more refined, they may well be the diagnos-
tic tests of choice to evaluate the pancreatic duct. 
ERCP is still needed for treatment of bile duct and 
pancreatic duct lesions. ERCP is primarily of thera-
peutic value after CT, EUS, or MRCP have detected 
abnormalities requiring invasive endoscopic treatment. 
ERCP can also be helpful at clarification of equivo-
cal ­findings discovered with other imaging techniques 
(see Chap. 48, Figs. 48-1C, 48-3D, and 48-4B). Pan-
creatic carcinoma is characterized by stenosis or 
obstruction of either the pancreatic duct or the com-
mon bile duct; both ductal systems are often abnormal. 
In chronic pancreatitis, ERCP abnormalities include 
(1) luminal narrowing; (2) irregularities in the ductal 
system with stenosis, dilation, sacculation, and ecta-
sia; and (3) blockage of the pancreatic duct by calcium 
deposits. The presence of ductal stenosis and ­irregularity 
can make it difficult to distinguish chronic pancre-
atitis from carcinoma. It is important to be aware that 
ERCP changes interpreted as indicating chronic pan-
creatitis actually may be due to the effects of aging on 
the pancreatic duct or to the fact that the procedure 
was performed within several weeks of an attack of 
acute pancreatitis. Although aging may cause impressive 
ductal alterations, it does not affect the results of pan-
creatic function tests (i.e., the secretin test). Elevated 
serum amylase levels after ERCP have been reported 
in 25–75% of patients, and clinical pancreatitis in 5–20% 
of patients. There are no satisfactory means to pharma-
cologically prevent ERCP-induced pancreatitis, despite 
many agents such as octreotide and nitroglycerin hav-
ing been suggested and evaluated. The best way to pre-
vent ERCP-induced pancreatitis is to not ­perform this 
procedure for diagnostic purposes in high-risk patients, 
especially in women with acute relapsing pancreatitis in 
whom there is no evidence of biliary obstruction and 
patients with unexplained abdominal pain but no other 
abnormalities. If no lesion is found in the biliary and/
or pancreatic ducts in a patient with repeated attacks of 
acute pancreatitis, manometric studies of the sphincter 
of Oddi may be indicated. Such studies, however, do 
increase the risk of post-ERCP/manometry acute pan-
creatitis. Such pancreatitis appears to be more common 
in patients with a nondilated pancreatic duct.
Pancreatic biopsy with radiologic guidance
Percutaneous aspiration biopsy or a trucut biopsy of a 
pancreatic mass often distinguishes a pancreatic inflam-
matory mass from a pancreatic neoplasm.
Tests of Exocrine Pancreatic 
Function
Pancreatic function tests (Table 47-1) can be divided 
into the following:
1.	 Direct stimulation of the pancreas by IV infusion of 
secretin or secretin plus cholecystokinin (CCK) fol-
lowed by collection and measurement of duodenal 
contents
2.	 Study of intraluminal digestion products, such as undi-
gested meat fibers, stool fat, and fecal nitrogen
3.	 Measurement of fecal pancreatic enzymes such as elastase
The secretin test, used to detect diffuse pancre-
atic disease, is based on the physiologic principle that 
the pancreatic secretory response is directly related to 
the functional mass of pancreatic tissue. In the stan-
dard assay, secretin is given IV in a dose of 0.2 μg/kg 
of synthetic human secretin as a bolus. Normal values 
for the standard secretin test are (1) volume output 
>2 mL/kg per hour, (2) bicarbonate (HCO3
–) con-
centration >80 mmol/L, and (3) HCO3
– output 
>10 mmol/L in 1 h. The most reproducible mea-
surement, giving the highest level of discrimination 
between normal subjects and patients with chronic pan-
creatic exocrine insufficiency, appears to be the maxi-
mal bicarbonate concentration.
There may be a dissociation between the results of 
the secretin test and other tests of absorptive function. 
For example, patients with chronic pancreatitis often 
have abnormally low outputs of HCO3
– after secretin 
but have normal fecal fat excretion. Thus the secretin 
test measures the secretory capacity of ductular epithe-
lium, while fecal fat excretion indirectly reflects intra-
luminal lipolytic activity. Steatorrhea does not occur 
until intraluminal levels of lipase are markedly reduced, 
underscoring the fact that only small amounts of 
enzymes are necessary for intraluminal digestive activi-
ties. It must be noted that, an abnormal secretin test 
result suggests only that chronic pancreatic damage is 
present.
Measurement of intraluminal digestion products (i.e., 
undigested muscle fibers, stool fat, and fecal nitrogen) 
is discussed in Chap. 15. The amount of human elas-
tase in stool reflects the pancreatic output of this pro-
teolytic enzyme. Decreased elastase activity in stool is an 
excellent test to detect severe pancreatic exocrine insuf-
ficiency in patients with chronic pancreatitis and cystic 
fibrosis provided that the stool specimen is solid.
Tests useful in the diagnosis of exocrine pancreatic 
insufficiency and the differential diagnosis of malabsorption 
are also discussed in Chaps. 15 and 48.
 Norton J. Greenberger 
I  Darwin L. Conwell 
 Bechien U. Wu 
I  Peter A. Banks 
496
 BiocheMistry And PhysioLoGy of 
PAncreAtic exocrine secretion 
 GenerAl considerAtions 
 The pancreas secretes 1500–3000 mL of isosmotic alka-
line (pH >8) fl uid per day containing about 20 enzymes. 
The pancreatic secretions provide the enzymes needed 
to effect the major digestive activity of the gastrointesti-
nal tract and provide an optimal pH for the function of 
these enzymes. 
 reGulAtion of pAncreAtic secretion 
 The exocrine pancreas is infl uenced by intimately inter-
acting hormonal and neural systems.  Gastric acid is the 
stimulus for the release of secretin from the duodenum, 
which stimulates the secretion of water and electrolytes 
from pancreatic ductal cells. Release of cholecystoki-
nin (CCK) from the duodenum and proximal jejunum 
is largely triggered by long-chain fatty acids,  certain 
essential amino acids (tryptophan, phenylalanine, valine, 
methionine), and gastric acid itself. CCK evokes an 
enzyme-rich secretion from acinar cells in the pancreas. 
The  parasympathetic nervous system (via the vagus nerve) 
exerts signifi cant control over pancreatic secretion. 
Secretion evoked by secretin and CCK depends on 
permissive roles of vagal afferent and efferent pathways. 
This is particularly true for enzyme secretion, whereas 
water and bicarbonate secretions are heavily depen-
dent on the hormonal effects of secretin and to a lesser 
extent CCK. Also, vagal stimulation effects the release 
of vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP), a secretin agonist. 
 Pancreatic exocrine secretion is infl uenced by inhibitory 
neuropeptides such as somatostatin, pancreatic polypeptide, 
peptide YY, neuropeptide Y, enkephalin,  pancreastatin, 
calcitonin gene–related peptides, glucagon, and galanin. 
Although pancreatic polypeptide and peptide YY may act 
primarily on nerves outside the pancreas, somatostatin acts 
at multiple sites. Nitric oxide (NO) is also an important 
neurotransmitter. The mechanism of action of these vari-
ous factors has not been fully defi ned. 
 WAter And electrolyte secretion 
 Bicarbonate is the ion of primary physiologic impor-
tance within pancreatic secretion. The ductal cells 
secrete bicarbonate predominantly derived from plasma 
(93%) more than from intracellular metabolism (7%). 
Bicarbonate enters through the sodium bicarbonate 
cotransporter with depolarization caused by chloride 
effl ux through the cystic fi brosis transmembrane con-
ductance regulator (CFTR). Secretin and VIP, both 
of which increase intracellular cyclic AMP, act on the 
ductal cells opening the CFTR in promoting secretion. 
CCK, acting as a neuromodulator, markedly potenti-
ates the stimulatory effects of secretin. Acetylcholine 
also plays an important role in ductal cell secretion. 
Bicarbonate helps neutralize gastric acid and creates the 
appropriate pH for the activity of pancreatic enzymes 
and bile salts. 
 enzyme secretion 
 The acinar cell is highly compartmentalized and is 
concerned with the secretion of pancreatic enzymes. 
Proteins synthesized by the rough endoplasmic reticu-
lum are processed in the Golgi and then targeted to 
the appropriate site, whether that be zymogen gran-
ules, lysosomes, or other cell compartments. The pan-
creas secretes amylolytic, lipolytic, and proteolytic 
enzymes.  Amylolytic enzymes such as amylase, hydro-
lyze starch to oligosaccharides and to the disaccharide 
maltose. The  lipolytic enzymes include lipase, phospho-
lipase A 2 , and cholesterol esterase. Bile salts inhibit 
 ACUTE AND CHRONIC PANCREATITIS 
 chAPter 48 
 
CHAPTER 48
Acute and Chronic Pancreatitis
497
lipase in isolation, but colipase, another constituent of 
pancreatic secretion, binds to lipase and prevents this 
inhibition. Bile salts activate phospholipase A and cho-
lesterol esterase. Proteolytic enzymes include endopep-
tidases (trypsin, chymotrypsin), which act on internal 
peptide bonds of proteins and polypeptides; exopep-
tidases (carboxypeptidases, aminopeptidases), which 
act on the free carboxyl- and amino-terminal ends of 
peptides, respectively; and elastase. The proteolytic 
enzymes are secreted as inactive precursors and pack-
aged as zymogens. Ribonucleases (deoxyribonucle-
ases, ribonuclease) are also secreted. Enterokinase, an 
enzyme found in the duodenal mucosa, cleaves the 
lysine-isoleucine bond of trypsinogen to form trypsin. 
Trypsin then activates the other proteolytic zymo-
gens and phospholipase A2 in a cascade phenomenon. 
All pancreatic enzymes have pH optima in the alka-
line range. The nervous system initiates pancreatic 
enzyme secretion. The neurologic stimulation is cho-
linergic, involving extrinsic innervation by the vagus 
nerve and subsequent innervation by intrapancreatic 
cholinergic nerves. The stimulatory neurotransmitters 
are acetylcholine and gastrin-releasing peptides. These 
neurotransmitters activate calcium-dependent second 
messenger systems, resulting in the release of zymogen 
granules. VIP is present in intrapancreatic nerves and 
potentiates the effect of acetylcholine. In contrast to 
other species, there are no CCK receptors on acinar 
cells in humans. CCK in physiologic concentrations 
stimulates pancreatic secretion by stimulating afferent 
vagal and intrapancreatic nerves.
Autoprotection of the Pancreas
Autodigestion of the pancreas is prevented by the pack-
aging of pancreatic proteases in precursor form and by 
the synthesis of protease inhibitor (i.e., pancreatic secre-
tory trypsin inhibitor [PSTI] or SPINK1), which can 
bind and inactivate about 20% of trypsin activity. Meso-
trypsin, chymotrypsin c, and enzyme y can also lyse and 
inactivate trypsin. These protease inhibitors are found in 
the acinar cell, the pancreatic secretions, and the a1- and 
a2-globulin fractions of plasma. In addition, low cal-
cium concentration within the cytosol of acinar cells in 
the normal pancreas promotes the destruction of spon-
taneously activated trypsin. Loss of any of these protective 
mechanisms leads to zymogen activation, autodigestion, 
and acute pancreatitis.
Exocrine-Endocrine Relationships
Insulin appears to be needed locally for secretin and 
CCK to promote exocrine secretion; thus, it acts in a 
permissive role for these two hormones.
Enteropancreatic Axis and  
Feedback Inhibition
Pancreatic enzyme secretion is controlled, at least in 
part, by a negative feedback mechanism induced by the 
presence of active serine proteases in the duodenum. 
To illustrate, perfusion of the duodenal lumen with 
phenylalanine causes a prompt result in increased plasma 
CCK levels as well as increased secretion of chymo-
trypsin and other pancreatic enzymes. However, simul-
taneous perfusion with trypsin blunts both responses. 
Conversely, perfusion of the duodenal lumen with 
protease inhibitors actually leads to enzyme hypersecre-
tion. The available evidence supports the concept that 
the duodenum contains a peptide called CCK-releasing 
factor (CCK-RF) that is involved in stimulating CCK 
release. It appears that serine proteases inhibit pancre-
atic secretion by inactivating a CCK-releasing peptide 
in the lumen of the small intestine. Thus, the integra-
tive result of both bicarbonate and enzyme secretion 
depends on a feedback process for both bicarbonate 
and pancreatic enzymes. Acidification of the duode-
num releases secretin, which stimulates vagal and other 
neural pathways to activate pancreatic duct cells, which 
secrete bicarbonate. This bicarbonate then neutralizes 
the duodenal acid, and the feedback loop is completed. 
Dietary proteins bind proteases, thereby leading to an 
increase in free CCK-RF. CCK is then released into 
the blood in physiologic concentrations, acting pri-
marily through the neural pathways (vagal-vagal). This 
leads to acetylcholine-mediated pancreatic enzyme 
secretion. Proteases continue to be secreted from the 
pancreas until the protein within the duodenum is 
digested. At this point, pancreatic protease secretion is 
reduced to basic levels, thus completing this step in the 
feedback process.
Acute Pancreatitis
General Considerations
Pancreatic inflammatory disease may be classified as 
(1) acute pancreatitis or (2) chronic pancreatitis. The 
pathologic spectrum of acute pancreatitis varies from 
interstitial pancreatitis, which is usually a mild and self-
limited disorder, to necrotizing pancreatitis, in which the 
extent of pancreatic necrosis may correlate with the 
severity of the attack and its systemic manifestations.
The incidence of pancreatitis varies in different 
countries and depends on cause (e.g., alcohol, gall-
stones, metabolic factors, and drugs [Table 48-1]). The 
estimated incidence in the United States is increasing 
and is now estimated to be 70 hospitalizations/100,000 
persons annually, thus resulting in >200,000 new cases 
of acute pancreatitis per year.
SECTION VIII
Disorders of the Pancreas
498
Etiology and Pathogenesis
There are many causes of acute pancreatitis (Table 48-1), 
but the mechanisms by which these conditions trig-
ger pancreatic inflammation have not been fully elu-
cidated. Gallstones continue to be the leading cause 
of acute pancreatitis in most series (30–60%). The 
risk of acute pancreatitis in patients with at least one 
gallstone <5 mm in diameter is fourfold greater than 
that in patients with larger stones. Alcohol is the 
­second most common cause, responsible for 15–30% of 
Table 48-1
Causes of Acute Pancreatitis
Common Causes
Gallstones (including microlithiasis)
Alcohol (acute and chronic alcoholism)
Hypertriglyceridemia
Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP), 
especially after biliary manometry
Trauma (especially blunt abdominal trauma)
Postoperative (abdominal and nonabdominal operations)
Drugs (azathioprine, 6-mercaptopurine, sulfonamides, 
­estrogens, tetracycline, valproic acid, anti-HIV 
­medications)
Sphincter of Oddi dysfunction
Uncommon Causes
Vascular causes and vasculitis (ischemic-hypoperfusion 
states after cardiac surgery)
Connective tissue disorders and thrombotic 
­thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP)
Cancer of the pancreas
Hypercalcemia
Periampullary diverticulum
Pancreas divisum
Hereditary pancreatitis
Cystic fibrosis
Renal failure
Rare Causes
Infections (mumps, coxsackievirus, cytomegalovirus, 
echovirus, parasites)
Autoimmune (e.g., Sjögren’s syndrome)
Causes to Consider in Patients with Recurrent 
Bouts of Acute Pancreatitis without an Obvious 
­Etiology
Occult disease of the biliary tree or pancreatic ducts, 
especially microlithiasis, sludge
Drugs
Hypertriglyceridemia
Pancreas divisum
Pancreatic cancer
Sphincter of Oddi dysfunction
Cystic fibrosis
Idiopathic
cases in the United States. The incidence of pancre-
atitis in alcoholics is surprisingly low (5/100,000), 
indicating that in addition to the amount of alcohol 
ingested unknown factors affect a person’s suscepti-
bility to pancreatic injury. The mechanism of injury 
is incompletely understood. Acute pancreatitis occurs 
in 5–20% of patients following endoscopic retrograde 
cholangiopancreatography (ERCP). Despite exten-
sive research into the medical and ­endoscopic preven-
tion of post-ERCP pancreatitis, there has been little 
decline in incidence. Use of prophylactic pancreatic 
duct stent after retrograde pancreatogram or pancreatic 
sphincterotomy has shown promise in reducing pan-
creatitis but requires further prospective evaluation. 
Risk factors for post-ERCP pancreatitis include minor 
papilla sphincterotomy, sphincter of Oddi dysfunction, 
prior history of post-ERCP pancreatitis, age <60 years, 
>2 contrast injections into the pancreatic duct, and 
endoscopic trainee involvement. Hypertriglyceridemia 
is the cause of acute pancreatitis in 1.3–3.8% of cases; 
serum triglyceride levels are usually >11.3 mmol/L 
(>1000 mg/dL). Most patients with hypertriglyceride-
mia, when subsequently examined, show ­evidence of 
an underlying derangement in lipid metabolism, prob-
ably unrelated to pancreatitis. Such patients are prone 
to recurrent episodes of pancreatitis. Any factor (e.g., 
drugs or alcohol) that causes an abrupt increase in 
serum triglycerides to levels >11 mmol/L (1000 mg/
dL) can precipitate a bout of acute pancreatitis. Finally, 
patients with a deficiency of apolipoprotein CII have 
an increased incidence of ­pancreatitis; apolipoprotein 
CII activates lipoprotein lipase, which is important in 
clearing chylomicrons from the bloodstream. Patients 
with diabetes mellitus who have developed keto-
acidosis and patients who are on certain ­medications 
such as oral contraceptives may also develop high tri-
glyceride levels. Approximately 2–5% of cases of acute 
pancreatitis are drug related. Drugs cause pancreatitis 
either by a hypersensitivity reaction or by the genera-
tion of a toxic metabolite, although in some cases it 
is not clear which of these mechanisms is operative 
(Table 48-1).
Autodigestion is a currently accepted pathogenic 
theory; according to it, pancreatitis results when pro-
teolytic enzymes (e.g., trypsinogen, chymotrypsinogen, 
proelastase, and lipolytic enzymes such as phospholi-
pase A2) are activated in the pancreas rather than in the 
intestinal lumen. A number of factors (e.g., endotoxins, 
exotoxins, viral infections, ischemia, anoxia, lysosomal 
calcium, and direct trauma) are believed to facilitate 
activation of trypsin. Activated proteolytic enzymes, 
especially trypsin, not only digest pancreatic and peri-
pancreatic tissues but also can activate other enzymes, 
such as elastase and phospholipase A2. Spontaneous 
­activation of trypsin also can occur.
 
CHAPTER 48
Acute and Chronic Pancreatitis
499
Activation of Pancreatic Enzymes  
in the Pathogenesis of  
Acute Pancreatitis
Several recent studies have suggested that pancreatitis is a 
disease that evolves in three phases. The initial phase is 
characterized by intrapancreatic digestive enzyme acti-
vation and acinar cell injury. Trypsin activation appears 
to be mediated by lysosomal hydrolases such as cathep-
sin B that become colocalized with digestive enzymes 
in intracellular organelles; it is currently believed that 
acinar cell injury is the consequence of trypsin activa-
tion. The second phase of pancreatitis involves the 
activation, chemoattraction, and sequestration of leu-
kocytes and macrophages in the pancreas, resulting in 
an enhanced intrapancreatic inflammatory reaction. 
Neutrophil depletion induced by prior administration 
of an antineutrophil serum has been shown to reduce 
the severity of experimentally induced pancreatitis. 
There is also evidence to support the concept that neu-
trophil sequestration can activate trypsinogen. Thus, 
intrapancreatic acinar cell activation of trypsinogen 
could be a two-step process (i.e., an early neutrophil-
independent and a later neutrophil-dependent phase). 
The third phase of pancreatitis is due to the effects of 
activated proteolytic enzymes and cytokines, released 
by the inflamed pancreas, on distant organs. Activated 
proteolytic enzymes, especially trypsin, not only digest 
pancreatic and peripancreatic tissues but also activate 
other enzymes such as elastase and phospholipase A2. 
The active enzymes and cytokines then digest cellu-
lar membranes and cause proteolysis, edema, intersti-
tial hemorrhage, vascular damage, coagulation necrosis, 
fat necrosis, and parenchymal cell necrosis. Cellular 
injury and death result in the liberation of bradykinin 
peptides, vasoactive substances, and histamine that can 
produce vasodilation, increased vascular permeability, 
and edema with profound effects on many organs, most 
notably the lung. The systemic inflammatory response 
syndrome (SIRS) and acute respiratory distress syn-
drome (ARDS) as well as multiorgan failure may occur 
as a result of this cascade of local as well as distant 
effects.
There appear to be a number of genetic factors that 
can increase the susceptibility and/or modify the sever-
ity of pancreatic injury in acute pancreatitis. Four 
­susceptibility genes have been identified: (1) cationic 
trypsinogen mutations (PRSS1m, R122Hm, and N291), 
(2) pancreatic secretory trypsin inhibitor (SPINK1), 
(3) CFTR, and (4) monocyte chemotactic protein 
(MCP-1). Experimental and clinical data indicate that 
MCP-1 may be an important inflammatory mediator in 
the early pathologic process of acute pancreatitis, a deter-
minant of the severity of the inflammatory response, and 
a promoter of organ failure.
APPROACH TO THE
PATIENT	
Abdominal Pain
Abdominal pain is the major symptom of acute ­pancreatitis. 
Pain may vary from a mild and tolerable discomfort and 
more commonly to severe, constant, and incapacitating 
distress. Characteristically, the pain, which is steady and 
boring in character, is located in the epigastrium and peri-
umbilical region and often radiates to the back as well as 
to the chest, flanks, and lower abdomen. The pain is fre-
quently more intense when the patient is supine, and 
patients may obtain some relief by sitting with the trunk 
flexed and knees drawn up. Nausea, vomiting, and abdom-
inal distention due to gastric and intestinal hypomotility 
and chemical peritonitis are also frequent complaints.
Physical examination frequently reveals a distressed 
and anxious patient. Low-grade fever, tachycardia, and 
hypotension are fairly common. Shock is not unusual 
and may result from (1) hypovolemia secondary to 
­exudation of blood and plasma proteins into the ret-
roperitoneal space and a “retroperitoneal burn” due to 
activated proteolytic enzymes; (2) increased formation 
and release of kinin peptides, which cause vasodilation 
and increased vascular permeability; and (3) systemic 
effects of proteolytic and lipolytic enzymes released into 
the circulation. Jaundice occurs infrequently; when pres-
ent, it usually is due to edema of the head of the pan-
creas with compression of the intrapancreatic portion 
of the common bile duct. Erythematous skin nodules 
due to subcutaneous fat necrosis may occur. In 10–20% 
of patients, there are pulmonary findings, including 
basilar rales, atelectasis, and pleural effusion, the lat-
ter most frequently left sided. Abdominal tenderness 
and muscle rigidity are present to a variable degree, 
but, compared with the intense pain, these signs may 
be unimpressive. Bowel sounds are usually diminished 
or absent. An enlarged pancreas with walled off necro-
sis or a pseudocyst may be palpable in the upper abdo-
men later in the disease course (i.e., 4 to 6 weeks). A faint 
blue discoloration around the umbilicus (Cullen’s sign) 
may occur as the result of hemoperitoneum, and a blue-
red-purple or green-brown discoloration of the flanks  
(Turner’s sign) reflects tissue catabolism of hemoglobin. 
The latter two findings, which are uncommon, indicate 
the presence of a severe necrotizing pancreatitis.
Laboratory Data
The diagnosis of acute pancreatitis is usually established 
by the detection of an increased level of serum amylase 
and lipase. Values threefold or more above normal vir-
tually clinch the diagnosis if gut perforation, ischemia, 
and infarction are excluded. However, there appears 
to be no definite correlation between the severity of 
pancreatitis and the degree of serum lipase and amylase 
SECTION VIII
Disorders of the Pancreas
500
elevations. After 3 to 7 days, even with continuing evi-
dence of pancreatitis, total serum amylase values tend to 
return toward normal. However, pancreatic isoamylase 
and lipase levels may remain elevated for 7 to 14 days. 
It will be recalled that amylase elevations in serum and 
urine occur in many conditions other than pancreatitis 
(see Chap. 47, Table 47-2). Importantly, patients with 
acidemia (arterial pH ≤7.32) may have spurious eleva-
tions in serum amylase. In one study, 12 of 33 patients 
with acidemia had elevated serum amylase, but only 1 
had an elevated lipase value; in 9, salivary-type amy-
lase was the predominant serum isoamylase. This find-
ing explains why patients with diabetic ketoacidosis may 
have marked elevations in serum amylase without any 
other evidence of acute pancreatitis. Serum lipase activ-
ity increases in parallel with amylase activity. A three-
fold elevated serum lipase value is usually diagnostic of 
acute pancreatitis; these tests are especially helpful in 
patients with nonpancreatic causes of hyperamylasemia 
(see Chap. 47, Table 47-2).
Leukocytosis (15,000–20,000 leukocytes per μL) 
occurs frequently. Patients with more severe disease 
may show hemoconcentration with hematocrit val-
ues >44% and/or azotemia with a blood urea nitrogen 
(BUN) level >22 mg/dL because of loss of plasma into 
the retroperitoneal space and peritoneal cavity. Hemo-
concentration may be the harbinger of more severe 
Table 48-2
Severe Acute Pancreatitis
Risk Factors for Severity
•  Age >60 years
•  Obesity, BMI >30
•  Comorbid disease
Markers of Severity within 24 h
•  SIRS (temperature >38° or <36°C [>100.4° or 96.8°F],
pulse >90, tachypnea >24, ↑ WBC >12,000)
•  Hemoconcentration (Hct >44%)
•  BISAP
  •  (B) Blood urea nitrogen (BUN) >22 mg%
  •  (I) Impaired mental status
  •  (S) SIRS: 2/4 present
  •  (A) Age >60 years
  •  (P) Pleural effusion
•  Organ Failure
  •  Cardiovascular: systolic BP <90 mmHg, 
heart rate >130
  •  Pulmonary: Pao2 <60 mmHg
  •  Renal serum creatinine >2.0 mg
Markers of Severity during Hospitalization
•  Persistent organ failure
•  Pancreatic necrosis
•  Hospital-acquired infection
Abbreviation: BISAP, Bedside Index of Severity in Acute Pancreatitis.
disease (i.e., pancreatic necrosis), while azotemia is a sig-
nificant risk factor for mortality. Hyperglycemia is common 
and is due to multiple factors, including decreased insu-
lin release, increased glucagon release, and an increased 
output of adrenal glucocorticoids and catecholamines. 
Hypocalcemia occurs in ∼25% of patients, and its patho-
genesis is incompletely understood. Although earlier 
studies suggested that the response of the parathyroid 
gland to a decrease in serum calcium is impaired, sub-
sequent observations have failed to confirm this phe-
nomenon. Intraperitoneal saponification of calcium 
by fatty acids in areas of fat necrosis occurs occasion-
ally, with large amounts (up to 6.0 g) dissolved or sus-
pended in ascitic fluid. Such “soap formation” may 
also be significant in patients with pancreatitis, mild 
hypocalcemia, and little or no obvious ascites. Hyper-
bilirubinemia (serum bilirubin >68 μmol/L [>4.0 mg/
dL]) occurs in ∼10% of patients. However, jaundice 
is transient, and serum bilirubin levels return to nor-
mal in four to seven days. Serum alkaline phosphatase 
and aspartate aminotransferase levels are also transiently 
elevated and they parallel serum bilirubin values and 
may point to gallbladder-related disease. Markedly ele-
vated serum lactic dehydrogenase levels (>8.5 μmol/L 
[>500 U/dL]) suggest a poor prognosis. Hypertriglyceri-
demia occurs in 5–10% of patients, and serum amylase 
levels in these individuals are often spuriously normal 
(Chap. 47). Approximately 5–10% of patients have 
hypoxemia (arterial Po2 ≤ 60 mmHg), which may her-
ald the onset of ARDS. Finally, the electrocardiogram 
is occasionally abnormal in acute pancreatitis with 
ST-segment and T-wave abnormalities simulating myo-
cardial ischemia.
A CT scan can confirm the clinical impression 
of acute pancreatitis even with less than a threefold 
increase in serum amylase and lipase levels. Importantly, 
CT can be helpful in indicating the severity of acute 
pancreatitis and the risk of morbidity and mortality 
and in evaluating the complications of acute pancreati-
tis (Table 48-3). However, a CT scan obtained within 
the first several days of symptom onset may underesti-
mate the extent of tissue injury. What may appear to be 
intestinal pancreatitis on initial CT scan may evolve to 
pancreatic necrosis on repeat CT scan 3 to 5 days later 
(Fig. 48-1). Sonography is useful in acute pancreatitis to 
evaluate the gallbladder if gallstone disease is suspected. 
Radiologic studies useful in the diagnosis of acute 
pancreatitis are discussed in Chap. 47, and listed in 
Table 47-1, and depicted in Figs. 48-1 to 48-3.
Diagnosis
Any severe acute pain in the abdomen or back should 
suggest the possibility acute pancreatitis. The diagno-
sis is usually entertained when a patient with a possible 
predisposition to pancreatitis presents with severe and 
 
CHAPTER 48
Acute and Chronic Pancreatitis
501
constant abdominal pain, frequently associated with nau-
sea, emesis, fever, tachycardia, and abnormal findings on 
abdominal examination. Laboratory studies may reveal 
leukocytosis, hypocalcemia, and hyperglycemia. The diag-
nosis of acute pancreatitis requires two of the following: 
typical abdominal pain, threefold or greater elevation in 
serum amylase and/or lipase level, and/or confirmatory 
findings on cross-sectional abdominal imaging. Although 
not required for diagnosis, markers of severity include 
hemoconcentration (hematocrit >44%), azotemia (BUN 
>22 mg/dL), and signs of organ failure (Table 48-2).
The differential diagnosis should include the following 
disorders: (1) perforated viscus, especially peptic ulcer; 
(2) acute cholecystitis and biliary colic; (3) acute ­intestinal 
obstruction; (4) mesenteric vascular ­occlusion; (5) renal 
colic; (6) myocardial infarction; (7) dissecting aortic 
aneurysm; (8) connective tissue disorders with vasculitis; 
(9) pneumonia; and (10) diabetic ketoacidosis. A penetrat-
ing duodenal ulcer can usually be identified by imag-
ing studies or endoscopy. A perforated duodenal ulcer is 
readily diagnosed by the presence of free intraperitoneal 
air on abdominal imaging. It may be difficult to differen-
tiate acute cholecystitis from acute pancreatitis, since an 
elevated serum amylase may be found in both disorders. 
Pain of biliary tract origin is more right sided or epigastric 
than periumbilical and can be more severe; ileus is ­usually 
absent. Sonography is helpful in establishing the diagno-
sis of cholelithiasis and cholecystitis. Intestinal obstruc-
tion due to mechanical factors can be differentiated from 
pancreatitis by the history of crescendo-decrescendo 
Table 48-3 
CT Findings and Grading of Acute 
Pancreatitis (CT Severity Index [CTSI])
Grade
Findings
Score
A
Normal pancreas: normal size,  
sharply defined, smooth contour, 
homogeneous enhancement,  
retroperitoneal peripancreatic fat 
without ­enhancement
0
B
Focal or diffuse enlargement of 
the pancreas, contour may show 
­irregularity, enhancement may be 
inhomogeneous but there is no  
peripancreatic inflammation
1
C
Peripancreatic inflammation with  
intrinsic pancreatic abnormalities
2
D
Intrapancreatic or extrapancreatic fluid 
collections
3
E
Two or more large ­collections or gas in 
the pancreas or ­retroperitoneum
4
Necrosis score based on contrast-enhanced CT
Necrosis, %
Score
0
0
<33
2
33–50
4
≥50
6
Note: CT severity index equals unenhanced CT score plus necrosis 
score: maximum = 10; ≥6 = severe disease.
Source: Modified from EJ Balthazar et al: Radiology 1990;174:331.
Figure 48-1
Acute pancreatitis: CT evolution. A. Contrast-enhanced CT 
scan of the abdomen performed on admission for a patient 
with clinical and biochemical parameters suggestive of acute 
pancreatitis. Note the abnormal enhancement of the pancre-
atic parenchyma (arrow) suggestive of interstitial pancreatitis. 
B. Contrast-enhanced CT scan of the abdomen performed 
on the same patient 6 days later for persistent fever and 
systemic inflammatory response syndrome. The ­pancreas 
now demonstrates significant areas of ­nonenhancement 
consistent with development of necrosis, particularly in the 
body and neck region (arrow). Note that an early CT scan 
obtained within the first 48 hours of hospitalization may 
underestimate or miss necrosis. C. Contrast-enhanced 
CT scan of the abdomen performed on the same patient 
2  months after the initial episode of acute pancreatitis. CT 
now demonstrates evidence of a fluid collection consistent 
with walled-off pancreatic necrosis (arrow). (Courtesy of Dr. KJ 
Mortele, Brigham and Women’s Hospital; with permission.)
A
B
C
SECTION VIII
Disorders of the Pancreas
502
Figure 48-2
A. Acute necrotizing pancreatitis: CT scan. Contrast-
enhanced CT scan showing acute pancreatitis with necrosis. 
Arrow shows partially enhancing body/tail of pancreas sur-
rounded by fluid with decreased enhancement in the neck/
body of the pancreas. B. Acute fluid collection: CT scan. 
Contrast-enhanced CT scan showing fluid collection in the 
retroperitoneum (arrow) compressing the air-filled stomach 
arising from the pancreas in a patient with asparaginase-
induced acute necrotizing pancreatitis. C. Walled-off pancre-
atic necrosis: CT scan. CT scan showing marked walled-off 
necrosis of the pancreas and peripancreatic area (arrow) in 
a patient with necrotizing pancreatitis. Addendum: In past 
years, both of these CT findings (Figs. 48-2B and 48-2C) 
would have been misinterpreted as pseudocysts. D. Spiral 
CT showing a pseudocyst (small arrow) with a pseudoan-
eurysm (light area in pseudocyst). Note the demonstration 
of the main pancreatic duct (big arrow), even though this 
duct is minimally dilated by ERCP. (A, B, C, courtesy of 
Dr. KJ Mortele, Brigham and Women’s Hospital; D, courtesy of 
Dr. PR Ros, Brigham and Women’s Hospital; with permission.)
A
B
C
D
Figure 48-3
A. Pancreaticopleural fistula: pancreatic duct leak on 
ERCP. Pancreatic duct leak demonstrated (arrow) at the time 
of retrograde pancreatogram in a patient with acute exac-
erbation of alcohol-induced acute or chronic pancreatitis. 
B. Pancreaticopleural fistula: CT scan. Contrast-enhanced 
CT scan (coronal view) with arrows showing fistula tract from 
pancreatic duct disruption in the pancreatic pleural fistula. 
C. Pancreaticopleural fistula: Chest x-ray. Large pleural effu-
sion in the left hemithorax from a disrupted pancreatic duct. 
Analysis of pleural fluid revealed elevated amylase concen-
tration. (Courtesy of Dr. KJ Mortele, Brigham and Women’s 
Hospital; with permission.)
A
B
C
 
CHAPTER 48
Acute and Chronic Pancreatitis
503
pain, findings on abdominal examination, and CT of the 
abdomen showing changes characteristic of mechanical 
obstruction. Acute mesenteric vascular occlusion is usu-
ally suspected in elderly debilitated patients with brisk 
leukocytosis, abdominal distention, and bloody diarrhea, 
confirmed by CT or MR angiography. Systemic lupus 
erythematosus and polyarteritis nodosa may be confused 
with pancreatitis, especially since pancreatitis may develop 
as a complication of these diseases. Diabetic ketoaci-
dosis is often accompanied by abdominal pain and ele-
vated total serum amylase levels, thus closely mimicking 
acute pancreatitis. However, the serum lipase level is not 
­elevated in diabetic ketoacidosis.
Course of the Disease  
and Complications
The initial assessment of severity in acute pancreati-
tis is critical for the appropriate triage and management 
of patients. The basis for the classification, severity, and 
complications of acute pancreatitis was initially established 
at the International Symposium held in Atlanta in 1992. 
While the definitions have come under greater scrutiny 
in recent years, it still serves as the common language for 
clinical care and research in acute pancreatitis. The crite-
ria for severity in acute pancreatitis was defined as organ 
failure of at least one organ system (defined as a systolic 
blood pressure <90 mmHg, Pao2 ≤60 mmHg, creatinine 
>2.0 mg/dL after rehydration, and gastrointestinal bleed-
ing >500 mL/24 h) and the presence of a local complica-
tion such as necrosis, pseudocyst, and abscess.
Early predictors of severity at 48 h included 
≥3  Ranson’s signs and APACHE II score ≥8. 
­Traditional severity indices such as APACHE II and 
Ranson’s criteria have not been clinically useful since 
they are cumbersome, require collection of a large 
amount of clinical and laboratory data over time, and 
do not have acceptable positive and negative predictive 
value for severe acute pancreatitis. A recent simplified 
scoring system for the early prediction of mortality was 
developed from a large cohort of patients with acute 
pancreatitis. This scoring system, referred to as the Bed-
side Index of Severity in Acute Pancreatitis (BISAP), 
incorporates five clinical and laboratory parameters 
obtained within the first 24 h of hospitalization: (Table 
48-2) (BUN >25, Impaired mental status, SIRS, Age 
>60 years, Pleural effusion on radiography). Presence of 
three or more of these factors was associated with sub-
stantially increased risk for in-hospital mortality among 
patients with acute pancreatitis.
Apart from the severity indices, there are addi-
tional factors that can be used to assess severity in acute 
­pancreatitis. They are best separated into risk factors for 
severity and markers of severity within 24 h of admis-
sion and during hospitalization. Risk factors for 
severe acute pancreatitis on admission include older 
age (>60 years), obesity (BMI ≥30), and comorbid dis-
ease. There is also evidence to support initial episode 
and alcohol use as additional risk factors for severity. At 
admission and during the first 24 h, markers of sever-
ity in acute pancreatitis include scoring systems such as 
BISAP score and APACHE II, SIRS, azotemia, hemo-
concentration, and organ failure. During hospitalization, 
markers of severity include persistent organ failure last-
ing more than 48 h and pancreatic necrosis.
The course of acute pancreatitis is defined by two 
phases. In the first phase, which lasts 1 to 2 weeks, 
severity is defined by clinical parameters rather than 
morphologic findings. The most important clinical 
parameter is persistent organ failure (i.e., lasting longer 
than 48 h), which is the usual cause of death. Severity 
in the second phase is defined by both clinical param-
eters and morphologic criteria. The important clini-
cal parameter of severity, as in the first phase, is persis-
tent organ failure. The morphologic criteria of greatest 
interest is the development of necrotizing pancreatitis, 
especially when it prolongs hospitalization and/or it 
requires active intervention such as operative, endo-
scopic, or percutaneous therapy or requires ­supportive 
measures such as renal dialysis, ventilator support, or 
need for nasoenteric feeding.
The importance of the recognition of interstitial 
­versus necrotizing acute pancreatitis has lead to the 
development of a CT severity index (Table 48-3) as 
another measure of severity that is best evaluated 3 to 5 
days into hospitalization because it may not be possible 
to distinguish interstitial from necrotizing pancreatitis 
on contrast-enhanced CT scan on the day of admis-
sion. CT identification of local complications, particu-
larly necrosis, is critical because patients with infected 
and sterile necrosis are at greatest risk of mortality (Figs. 
48-1, 48-2). The median prevalence of organ failure is 
54% in necrotizing pancreatitis. The prevalence of organ 
failure is perhaps slightly higher in infected versus sterile 
necrosis. With single organ system failure, the mortality 
is 3–10% but increases to 47% with multisystem organ 
failure. These data serve to highlight that a patient found 
to have pancreatic necrosis with multisystem organ fail-
ure is the most likely to die.
However, it should be noted that necrotizing pancre-
atitis is uncommon (10% of all patients with acute pancre-
atitis), and the far greater proportion of patients presenting 
in clinical practice have interstitial pancreatitis, which also 
is associated with organ failure in 10% and death in 3% of 
cases. This roughly translates to similar absolute mortality 
figures in the interstitial and necrotizing pancreatitis popu-
lations since interstitial disease is far more prevalent.
Mild acute pancreatitis
The majority of patients with mild acute pancreati-
tis and either no organ failure or only transient organ 
SECTION VIII
Disorders of the Pancreas
504
failure will respond to simple supportive care measures 
that form the hallmark of treatment in acute pancre-
atitis: bowel rest, intravenous hydration with crystal-
loid, and analgesia. Oral intake can be resumed once 
the patient is essentially pain free in the absence of par-
enteral analgesia, has no nausea or vomiting, normal 
bowel sounds, and is hungry. Typically, a clear or full 
liquid diet has been recommended for the initial meal, 
but a low-fat solid diet is a reasonable choice follow-
ing recovery from mild acute pancreatitis. Patients with 
gallstone pancreatitis are at increased risk of recurrence. 
Therefore, following recovery from mild ­pancreatitis, 
consideration should be given to performing a lapa-
roscopic cholecystectomy during the same admis-
sion. An alternative for patients who are not surgical 
candidates would be to perform an endoscopic biliary 
sphincterotomy.
Severe acute pancreatitis (See Figs. 48-1, 48-2)
Patients with predictive markers of severity on admis-
sion such as obesity or hemoconcentration are also 
managed with supportive measures outlined earlier. It 
is recommended that vigorous fluid resuscitation take 
place. Measurement of hematocrit and BUN every 12 h 
is recommended to ensure adequacy of fluid resuscita-
tion. A decrease in hematocrit and BUN during the first 
12 to 24 h is strong evidence that sufficient fluids are 
being administered. If the hematocrit remains elevated 
or increases further (particularly among those whose 
hematocrit on admission are >44), fluid resuscitation is 
inadequate.
Patients with persistent organ failure that does not 
respond to increased fluids (to counteract hypotension 
and increased serum creatinine) and/or nasal oxygen 
to overcome hypoxemia as well as those patients with 
labored respirations that may herald respiratory fail-
ure should be transferred to an intensive care unit for 
aggressive hydration and close monitoring for the pos-
sible need of intubation with mechanical ventilation, 
hemodialysis, and support of blood pressure.
Treatment	
Acute Pancreatitis
In most patients (85–90%) with acute pancreatitis, the 
disease is self-limited and subsides spontaneously, 
­usually within 3 to 7 days after treatment is instituted. 
Conventional measures include (1) analgesics for pain, 
(2) IV fluids and colloids to maintain normal intravascu-
lar volume, and (3) no oral alimentation.
Once it is clear that a patient will not be able to tol-
erate oral feeding (a determination that can usually be 
made within 48–72 h), enteral nutrition should be con-
sidered (rather than total parenteral nutrition [TPN]) 
since it maintains gut barrier integrity, thereby prevent-
ing bacterial translocation, is less expensive, and has 
fewer complications than TPN. The route through which 
enteral feeding is administered is under debate. Naso-
gastric access is easier to establish and may be as safe as 
nasojejunal enteral nutrition. However, enteral nutrition 
that bypasses the stomach and duodenum stimulates 
pancreatic secretions less and this rationale ­theoretically 
supports the use of the nasojejunal route. It has not 
been demonstrated whether either route is superior in 
altering morbidity and mortality. When patients with 
necrotizing pancreatitis begin oral intake of food, con-
sideration should also be given to the addition of pan-
creatic enzyme supplementation and proton pump 
inhibitor therapy to assist with fat digestion and reduce 
gastric acid.
Role of Antibiotics  There is currently no 
role for prophylactic antibiotics in either interstitial or 
necrotizing pancreatitis. Although several early studies 
suggested a role for prophylactic antibiotics in patients 
with necrotizing pancreatitis, two recent double-blind, 
randomized controlled trials failed to demonstrate a 
reduction in pancreatic infection with use of antibiotic 
prophylaxis. However, it should also be noted that the 
overall rate of infected necrosis has been in decline over 
the past 10–15 years and currently is found in 20% of 
patients with necrotizing pancreatitis. It is reasonable 
to start antibiotics in a patient who appears septic while 
awaiting the results of cultures. If cultures are negative, 
the antibiotics should be discontinued to minimize the 
risk of developing fungal superinfection.
Percutaneous aspiration of necrosis with Gram stain 
and culture should generally not be performed until at 
least 7–10 days after establishing a diagnosis of necro-
tizing pancreatitis and only if there are ongoing signs 
of possible pancreatic infection such as sustained leu-
kocytosis, fever, or organ failure. Once a diagnosis of 
infected necrosis is established, appropriate antibiotics 
should be instituted and surgical debridement should 
be undertaken. There exist minimally invasive alterna-
tive therapies such as endoscopic, percutaneous cath-
eter, and retroperitoneal techniques for necrosectomy. 
However, there are currently no randomized studies 
supporting the use of one over another modality. For 
patients with sterile necrosis, medical management is 
usually maintained indefinitely unless patients develop 
serious complications such as compartment syndrome, 
intestinal perforation, pseudoaneurysms not respond-
ing to embolization, or inability to resume oral intake 
after 4 to 6 weeks of treatment (Fig. 48-2).
There are several clearly defined roles for ERCP in 
acute pancreatitis. Urgent ERCP (within 24 h) is indi-
cated in patients who have severe acute biliary pancre-
atitis with organ failure and/or cholangitis. ­Elective ERCP 
 
CHAPTER 48
Acute and Chronic Pancreatitis
505
with sphincterotomy can be considered in patients with 
persistent or incipient biliary obstruction, those deemed 
to be poor candidates for cholecystectomy, and for 
those in whom there is strong suspicion for bile duct 
stones after cholecystectomy. ERCP with stent place-
ment is also indicated for pancreatic ductal disruptions 
that occur as part of the inflammatory process and 
result in peripancreatic fluid collections (Fig. 48-3A).
Several drugs have been evaluated by prospective 
controlled trials and found ineffective in the treatment 
of acute pancreatitis. The list, by no means complete, 
includes glucagon, H2 blockers, protease inhibitors 
such as aprotinin, glucocorticoids, calcitonin, nonste-
roidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), and lexipafant,  
a platelet-activating factor inhibitor. A recent meta-­
analysis of somatostatin, octreotide, and the anti-
protease gabexate mesylate in the therapy of acute 
­pancreatitis suggested (1) a reduced mortality rate but 
no change in complications with octreotide and (2) no 
effect on the mortality rate but reduced pancreatic 
damage with gabexate.
A dynamic contrast-enhanced CT (CECT) scan per-
formed 3 to 5 days after hospitalization provides valu-
able information on the severity and prognosis of acute 
pancreatitis (Fig. 48-1). In particular, a CECT scan allows 
estimation of the presence and extent of pancreatic 
necrosis. Recent studies suggest that the likelihood of 
prolonged pancreatitis or a serious complication is neg-
ligible when the CT severity index is 1 or 2 and low with 
scores of 3–6. However, patients with scores of 7–10 had 
a 92% morbidity rate and a 17% mortality rate (Table 
48-3). A few retrospective studies have raised concern 
that the use of IV contrast early in the course of acute 
pancreatitis might intensify pancreatic necrosis. How-
ever, since prospective human studies are not available, 
it is recommended that a CECT scan be obtained only 
after vigorous initial fluid resuscitation.
Elevation of serum amylase/lipase or persistent 
inflammatory changes seen on CT scans should not 
discourage feeding a hungry asymptomatic patient. In 
this regard, persistence of inflammatory changes on CT 
scans or persistent elevations in serum amylase/lipase 
may not resolve for weeks to months. The patient with 
unremitting severe necrotizing pancreatitis requires 
vigorous fluid resuscitation and close attention to 
complications such as cardiovascular collapse, respira-
tory insufficiency, and pancreatic infection. A useful 
indicator of severe/complicated forms of acute pan-
creatitis is the persistence of the systemic SIRS beyond  
48 h. SIRS was defined in 1992 in a joint conference of 
the American College of Chest Physicians and Society 
of Critical Care Medicine as a standardized clinical syn-
drome to indicate the presence of systemic inflamma-
tion irrespective of etiology. Several studies have linked 
persistent SIRS with an increased risk of organ failure 
and death in acute pancreatitis. Complications from 
acute pancreatitis should be managed by a combina-
tion of radiologic and surgical means (discussed later). 
Although sterile necrosis is most often managed con-
servatively, surgical pancreatic debridement (necrosec-
tomy) should be considered for definitive management 
of infected necrosis. Such decisions are influenced by 
response to antibiotic treatment. Multiple operations 
may be required. A recent study compared the step-up 
approach, i.e., percutaneous or endoscopic transgas-
tric drainage with open necrosectomy for necrotiz-
ing pancreatitis. One third of the patients successfully 
treated with the step-up approach did not require major 
abdominal surgery. Enteral-feeding with a nasojejunal 
tube has been demonstrated to have fewer infectious 
complications than with total parenteral nutrition (TPN) 
and is the preferred method of nutritional support. In 
addition to nutritional support, enteral feeding helps to 
maintain integrity of the intestinal tract during severe 
acute pancreatitis.
Patients with severe gallstone-induced pancreatitis, 
complicated by cholangitis, may improve dramatically 
if papillotomy is carried out within the first 36–72 h of 
the attack. Studies indicate that only those patients with 
gallstone pancreatitis who are in the very severe group 
should be considered for urgent ERCP. Finally, the treat-
ment for patients with hypertriglyceridemia-associated 
pancreatitis includes (1) weight loss to ideal weight, (2) a 
lipid-restricted diet, (3) exercise, (4) avoidance of alcohol 
and of drugs that can elevate serum ­triglycerides (i.e., 
estrogens, vitamin A, thiazides, and propranolol), and  
(5) control of diabetes.
Recurrent pancreatitis
Approximately 25% of patients who have had an attack 
of acute pancreatitis have a recurrence. The two most 
common etiologic factors are alcohol and ­cholelithiasis. 
In patients with recurrent pancreatitis without an obvi-
ous cause the differential diagnosis should encom-
pass occult biliary tract disease including microlithiasis, 
hypertriglyceridemia, drugs, pancreatic cancer, sphinc-
ter of Oddi dysfunction, pancreas divisum, cystic fibro-
sis, and pancreatic cancer (Table 48-1). In one series of 
31 patients diagnosed initially as having idiopathic or 
recurrent acute pancreatitis, 23 were found to have 
occult gallstone disease. Thus, approximately two-thirds 
of patients with recurrent acute pancreatitis without 
an obvious cause actually have occult gallstone disease 
due to microlithiasis. Genetic defects as in hereditary 
pancreatitis can result in recurrent pancreatitis. Other 
diseases of the biliary tree and pancreatic ducts that can 
cause acute pancreatitis include choledochocele; ampul-
lary tumors; pancreas divisum; and pancreatic duct 
SECTION VIII
Disorders of the Pancreas
506
stones, stricture, and tumor. Approximately 2–4% of 
patients with pancreatic carcinoma present with acute 
pancreatitis.
Infected Pancreatic Necrosis  
and Pseudocyst
Pancreatic necrosis does not usually become second-
arily infected until at least 7–10 days after the onset of 
acute pancreatitis. Approximately one-half of cases of 
infected necrosis can be diagnosed between the 7th and 
21st day, the remainder after 21 days. The diagnosis of 
pancreatic infection can be accomplished by CT-guided 
needle aspiration with Gram stain and culture. The 
organisms are most frequently gram-negative bacteria 
of intestinal origin. Clinical clues that should alert the 
clinician to the possibility of infected necrosis are per-
sistent fever, leukocytosis, and organ failure in a patient 
with necrotizing pancreatitis. Some reports suggest that 
patients who have more than 50% pancreatic necrosis 
are more likely to have infected pancreatic necrosis than 
those who have lesser amounts of necrosis. Choices of 
treatment in infected pancreatic necrosis include surgi-
cal debridement; endoscopic debridement, if the pan-
creatic necrosis has been circumscribed into the entity 
termed walled-off necrosis that affects the posterior wall 
of the stomach; and, on occasion, radiologic catheter 
drainage with irrigation in an effort to eliminate at least 
some infected semisolid material as well as the infected 
liquid material. Radiologic approach is usually sug-
gested to treat a patient who is too ill to undergo surgi-
cal debridement.
Walled-off necrosis
In necrotizing pancreatitis, there is invariably an intense 
inflammatory response involving the fat around the 
pancreas. This inflammatory process frequently results in 
peripancreatic necrosis. Eventually, after 3 to 6 weeks, 
there is coalescence of the pancreatic necrosis and peri-
pancreatic fat necrosis into a structure that is encapsu-
lated by fibrous tissue. The name that was originally 
used to describe this entity was “organized necrosis.” 
New terminology now refers to it as “walled-off 
necrosis.”
The walled-off necrosis contains semisolid necrotic 
tissue together with a considerable amount of dark fluid 
representing liquefaction of devitalized pancreatic and 
peripancreatic tissue as well as some blood.
Walled-off necrosis and a pancreatic pseudocyst 
may look very similar on first inspection of a contrast-
enhanced CT scan. Both show a low attenuation 
nonenhancing round structure enclosed by a capsule 
containing fibrous tissue that enhances due to small 
blood vessels within the capsule. On closer inspec-
tion, a distinction can be made. In walled-off necrosis, 
serial images clearly show that a portion of the pan-
creas as well as variable amounts of peripancreatic tis-
sue are necrotic. In interstitial pancreatitis, the pancreas 
enhances normally in response to intravenous con-
trast, thereby confirming that the process is interstitial 
pancreatitis. The encapsulated structure is readily seen 
to be adjacent to the pancreas.
Pseudocysts
Pseudocysts of the pancreas are extrapancreatic collec-
tions of pancreatic fluid containing pancreatic enzymes 
and a small amount of debris. In contrast to true cysts, 
pseudocysts do not have an epithelial lining. The walls 
consist of necrotic tissue, granulation tissue, and fibrous 
tissue.
A pseudocyst should be distinguished from a post-
necrotic fluid collection that contains heterogeneous 
material including residual necrotic debris. Disruption 
of the pancreatic ductal system is common. However, 
the subsequent course of this disruption varies widely, 
ranging from spontaneous healing to continuous leakage 
of pancreatic juice, which results in tense ascites. Pseu-
docysts are preceded by pancreatitis in 90% of cases and 
by trauma in 10%. Approximately 85% are located in 
the body or tail of the pancreas and 15% in the head. 
Some patients have two or more pseudocysts. Abdomi-
nal pain, with or without radiation to the back, is the 
usual presenting complaint. A palpable, tender mass may 
be found in the middle or left upper abdomen.
On imaging studies, 75% of pseudocysts can be seen 
to displace some portion of the gastrointestinal tract. 
Sonography, however, is reliable in detecting pseudo-
cysts. Sonography also permits differentiation between 
an edematous, inflamed pancreas, which can give rise 
to a palpable mass, and an actual pseudocyst. Further-
more, serial ultrasound studies will indicate whether 
a pseudocyst has resolved. CT or MRI complements 
ultrasonography in the diagnosis of pancreatic pseu-
docyst, especially when the pseudocyst is infected as 
suggested by the rare finding of gas within the fluid 
collection.
In earlier studies with sonography, lesions thought 
to be pseudocysts were seen to resolve in 25–40% 
of patients. However, it is now recognized that it is 
important to distinguish between walled-off necro-
sis and pseudocysts that typically develop later in the 
course of acute pancreatitis. Pseudocysts that are >5 cm 
in diameter may persist for >6 weeks. Recent natural 
history studies have suggested that noninterventional, 
expectant management is the best course in selected 
patients with minimal symptoms and no evidence of 
active alcohol use in whom the pseudocyst appears 
mature by radiography and does not resemble a cystic 
neoplasm. A significant number of these pseudocysts 
resolve spontaneously in >6 weeks after their formation. 
 
CHAPTER 48
Acute and Chronic Pancreatitis
507
Also, these studies demonstrate that large pseudocyst 
size is not an absolute indication for interventional 
therapy and that many peripancreatic fluid collections 
detected on CT in cases of acute pancreatitis resolve 
spontaneously. A pseudocyst that does not resolve spon-
taneously can occasionally lead to serious complications, 
such as (1) pain caused by expansion of the lesion and 
pressure on other viscera, (2) rupture, (3) hemorrhage, 
and (4) abscess. Rupture of a pancreatic pseudocyst is 
a particularly serious complication. In this case, shock 
almost always supervenes, and mortality rates range 
from 14% if the rupture is not associated with hemor-
rhage to >60% if hemorrhage has occurred. Rupture 
and hemorrhage are the prime causes of death from 
pancreatic pseudocyst. A triad of findings—an increase 
in the size of the mass, a localized bruit over the mass, 
and a sudden decrease in hemoglobin level and hema-
tocrit without obvious external blood loss—should alert 
one to the possibility of hemorrhage from a pseudocyst. 
Thus, in patients who are stable and free of complica-
tions and in whom serial ultrasound studies show that 
the pseudocyst is shrinking, conservative therapy is indi-
cated. Conversely, if the pseudocyst is expanding and is 
complicated by severe pain, hemorrhage, or abscess, the 
patient should be operated on. Chronic pseudocysts can 
be treated safely and drainage can be accomplished by 
endoscopic, radiologic, or surgical means.
Pseudoaneurysms develop in up to 10% of patients 
with acute pancreatitis at sites reflecting the distribu-
tion of pseudocysts and fluid collections (Fig. 48-2D). 
The splenic artery is most frequently involved, followed 
by the inferior and superior pancreatic duodenal arter-
ies. This diagnosis should be suspected in patients with 
pancreatitis who develop upper gastrointestinal bleed-
ing without an obvious cause or in whom thin-cut CT 
scanning reveals a contrast-enhanced lesion within or 
adjacent to a suspected pseudocyst. CT angiography 
can identify the lesion, which can then be treated with 
angiographic embolization.
The local and systemic complications of acute 
­pancreatitis are summarized in Table 48-4. Systemic 
complications include pulmonary, cardiovascular, hema-
tologic, renal, metabolic, and central nervous system 
(CNS) abnormalities. Purtscher’s retinopathy, a relatively 
unusual complication, is manifested by a sudden and 
severe loss of vision in a patient with acute pancreatitis. 
It is characterized by a peculiar funduscopic appearance 
with cotton-wool spots and hemorrhages confined to an 
area limited by the optic disc and macula; it is believed 
to be due to occlusion of the posterior retinal artery 
with aggregated granulocytes.
Pancreatitis in patients with AIDS
The incidence of acute pancreatitis is increased in 
patients with AIDS for two reasons: (1) the high 
Table 48-4
Complications of Acute Pancreatitis
Local
Necrosis
  Sterile
  Infected
  Walled-off necrosis
Pancreatic fluid collections
  Pancreatic abscess
  Pancreatic pseudocyst
    Pain
    Rupture
    Hemorrhage
    Infection
    Obstruction of 
  ­gastrointestinal 
tract (stomach, 
­duodenum, colon)
Pancreatic ascites
  Disruption of main 
  pancreatic duct
  Leaking pseudocyst
Involvement of ­ 
contiguous organs by 
necrotizing ­pancreatitis
  Massive intraperitoneal 
  hemorrhage
  Thrombosis of blood 
  ­vessels (splenic vein,  
portal vein)
  Bowel infarction
Obstructive jaundice
Systemic
Pulmonary
  Pleural effusion
  Atelectasis
  Mediastinal abscess
  Pneumonitis
  Acute respiratory ­ 
  distress syndrome
Cardiovascular
  Hypotension
  Hypovolemia
  Sudden death
  Nonspecific ST-T 
  changes in 
­electrocardiogram 
simulating myocardial 
infarction
Pericardial effusion
Hematologic
  Disseminated 
  intravascular 
­coagulation
Gastrointestinal  
hemorrhage
  Peptic ulcer disease
  Erosive gastritis
  Hemorrhagic pancreatic 
  necrosis with ­erosion 
into major blood 
­vessels
  Portal vein thrombosis, 
  variceal hemorrhage
Renal
  Oliguria
  Azotemia
  Renal artery and/or renal 
  vein thrombosis
  Acute tubular necrosis
Metabolic
  Hyperglycemia
  Hypertriglyceridemia
  Hypocalcemia
  Encephalopathy
  Sudden blindness 
  (Purtscher’s retinopathy)
Central ­nervous system
  Psychosis
  Fat emboli
Fat necrosis
  Subcutaneous tissues 
­  (erythematous nodules)
  Bone
  Miscellaneous 
  (mediastinum, pleura, 
 nervous system)
incidence of infections involving the pancreas such as 
infections with cytomegalovirus, Cryptosporidium, and the 
Mycobacterium avium complex; and (2) the frequent use by 
patients with AIDS of medications such as didano­sine, 
pentamidine, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, and pro-
tease inhibitors.
SECTION VIII
Disorders of the Pancreas
508
Pancreatic Ascites and Pancreatic 
Pleural Effusions
Pancreatic ascites or pancreatic pleural effusion are ini-
tially identified based on CT or MRI imaging and are 
usually due to disruption of the main pancreatic duct, 
often by an internal fistula between the duct and the 
peritoneal cavity or a leaking pseudocyst (Fig. 48-3A). 
This diagnosis is suggested in a patient with a history of 
acute pancreatitis in whom the ascites or pleural fluid has 
both increased levels of albumin [>30 g/L (>3 g/dL)] 
and a markedly elevated level of amylase. An ERCP or 
magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) 
confirms the clinical suspicion and radiologic findings 
and often demonstrates passage of contrast material from 
a disrupted major pancreatic duct or a pseudocyst into 
the peritoneal cavity. The differential diagnosis of pan-
creatic ascites should include intraperitoneal carcinoma-
tosis, tuberculous peritonitis, constrictive pericarditis, and 
Budd-Chiari syndrome.
Treatment	
Pancreatic Ascites and Pancreatic
	
Pleural Effusions
If the pancreatic duct disruption is posterior, an inter-
nal fistula may develop between the pancreatic duct 
and  the pleural space, producing a pleural effusion 
(pancreaticopleural fistula) that is usually left-sided and 
often massive (Fig. 48-3). If the pancreatic duct disrup-
tion is anterior, amylase- and lipase-rich peritoneal fluid 
accumulate (pancreatic ascites). A leaking, disrupted 
pancreatic duct is best treated by ERCP and “bridging” 
stent placement and infrequently requires thoracentesis 
or chest tube drainage.
Treatment may also require enteral or parenteral ali-
mentation to improve nutrition. If ascites or pleural fluid 
persists after 2 to 3 weeks of medical management, 
and the disruption is unable to be stented, the patient 
should be considered for surgical intervention after ret-
rograde pancreatography to define the anatomy of the 
disrupted duct.
Chronic Pancreatitis 
and Pancreatic Exocrine 
Insufficiency
Pathophysiology
Chronic pancreatitis is a disease process character-
ized by irreversible damage to the pancreas as distinct 
from the reversible changes noted in acute pancreatitis. 
The condition is best defined by the presence of his-
tologic abnormalities, including chronic inflammation, 
Table 48-5
Chronic Pancreatitis and Pancreatic 
Exocrine Insufficiency: TIGAR-O 
Classification System
Toxic-metabolic
  Alcoholic
  Tobacco smoking
  Hypercalcemia
  Hyperlipidemia
  Chronic renal failure
  Medications— 
  phenacetin abuse
  Toxins—organotin 
  compounds 
(e.g., DBTC)
Idiopathic
  Early onset
  Late onset
  Tropical
Genetic
  Hereditary pancreatitis
  Cationic trypsinogen
  PRSS1
  PRSS2
  CFTR mutations
  SPINK1 mutations
Autoimmune
  Isolated autoimmune chronic 
  pancreatitis
  Autoimmune chronic 
  pancreatitis associated with 
Sjögren’s syndrome
  Inflammatory bowel disease
  Primary biliary cirrhosis
Recurrent and Severe Acute 
Pancreatitis
  Postnecrotic (severe acute 
  pancreatitis)
  Recurrent acute pancreatitis
  Vascular diseases/ischemia
  Postirradiation
Obstructive
  Pancreas divisum
  Sphincter of Oddi disorders 
  (controversial)
  Duct obstruction (e.g., tumor)
  Preampullary duodenal wall 
  cysts
  Posttraumatic pancreatic  
  duct scars
Abbreviations: DBTC, dibutylin dichloride; TIGAR-O, toxic-­metabolic, 
idiopathic, genetic, autoimmune, recurrent and severe acute pancre-
atitis, obstructive.
fibrosis, and progressive destruction of both exocrine 
and eventually endocrine tissue. A number of etiolo-
gies may result in chronic pancreatitis, and may result in 
the cardinal complications of chronic pancreatitis such 
as abdominal pain, steatorrhea, weight loss, and diabetes 
mellitus (Table 48-5).
The events that initiate the inflammatory process 
in the pancreas are incompletely understood. ­Current 
experimental and clinical observations have shown 
that alcohol has a direct toxic effect on the pancreas. 
While patients with alcohol-induced pancreatitis gener-
ally consume large amounts of alcohol, some consume 
as little as ≤50 g/d. Prolonged consumption of socially 
acceptable amounts of alcohol is compatible with the 
development of chronic pancreatitis. Findings of exten-
sive pancreatic fibrosis in patients who died during their 
first attack of clinical acute alcohol-induced pancreati-
tis support the concept that such patients already had 
chronic pancreatitis.
There is a strong association of smoking and 
chronic pancreatitis. Cigarette smoke leads to an 
increased susceptibility to pancreatic self-digestion and 
predisposes to dysregulation of duct cell CFTR func-
tion. It has become increasingly apparent that smok-
ing is an independent, dose-dependent risk factor for 
 
CHAPTER 48
Acute and Chronic Pancreatitis
509
chronic pancreatitis and recurrent acute pancreatitis. 
Smoking is clearly associated with progression of dis-
ease in late-onset idiopathic chronic pancreatitis and 
with increased disease severity in alcohol-induced 
chronic pancreatitis.
Recent characterization of pancreatic stellate cells 
(PSC) has added insight to the underlying cellular 
responses behind development of chronic pancreatitis. 
Specifically, PSCs are believed to play a role in main-
taining normal pancreatic architecture that can shift 
toward fibrogenesis in the case of chronic pancreatitis. 
The sentinel acute pancreatitis event (SAPE) hypothesis 
uniformly describes the events in the pathogenesis of 
chronic pancreatitis. It is believed that alcohol or addi-
tional stimuli lead to matrix metalloproteinase–medi-
ated destruction of normal collagen in pancreatic paren-
chyma, which later allows for pancreatic remodeling. 
Proinflammatory cytokines, tumor necrosis ­factor α 
(TNF-α), interleukin 1 (IL-1), and interleukin 6 (IL-6) as 
well as oxidant complexes are able to induce PSC activ-
ity with subsequent new collagen synthesis. In addition 
to being stimulated by cytokines, ­oxidants, or growth 
factors, PSCs also possess transforming growth factor β 
(TGF-β)–mediated self-activating autocrine pathways 
that may explain disease progression in chronic pancreati-
tis even after removal of noxious stimuli.
Etiologic Considerations
Among adults in the United States, alcoholism is the 
most common cause of clinically apparent chronic pan-
creatitis, while cystic fibrosis is the most frequent cause 
in children. In up to 25% of adults in the United States 
with chronic pancreatitis, the cause is not known. That 
is, they are labeled as idiopathic chronic pancreatitis. Recent 
investigations have indicated that up to 15% of patients 
with idiopathic pancreatitis may have pancreatitis due to 
genetic defects (Table 48-5).
Whitcomb and associates studied several large fami-
lies with hereditary chronic pancreatitis and were able 
to identify a genetic defect that affects the gene encod-
ing for trypsinogen. Several additional defects of this 
gene have also been described. The defect prevents the 
destruction of trypsinogen and allows it to be resistant 
to the effect of trypsin inhibitor, become spontane-
ously activated, and to remain activated. It is hypoth-
esized that this continual activation of digestive enzymes 
within the gland leads to acute injury and, finally, 
chronic pancreatitis. This group of investigators has also 
reported that another form of hereditary chronic pan-
creatitis tends to present later in life, has a female pre-
dominance, and frequently leads to chronic pancreatitis.
Several other groups of investigators have docu-
mented mutations of CFTR. This gene functions as a 
cyclic AMP–regulated chloride channel. In patients 
with cystic fibrosis, the high concentration of macro-
molecules can block the pancreatic ducts. It must be 
appreciated, however, that there is a great deal of het-
erogeneity in relationship to the CFTR gene defect. 
More than 1000 putative mutations of the CFTR gene 
have been identified. Attempts to elucidate the relation-
ship between the genotype and pancreatic manifesta-
tions have been hampered by the number of ­mutations. 
The ability to detect CFTR mutations has led to the 
recognition that the clinical spectrum of the disease is 
broader than previously thought. Two recent stud-
ies have clarified the association between mutations of 
the CFTR gene and another monosymptomatic form 
of cystic fibrosis (i.e., chronic pancreatitis). It is esti-
mated that in patients with idiopathic pancreatitis, the 
frequency of a single CFTR mutation is 11 times the 
expected frequency and the frequency of two mutant 
alleles is 80 times the expected frequency. In these stud-
ies, the patients were adults when the diagnosis of pan-
creatitis was made; none had any clinical evidence of 
pulmonary disease, and sweat test results were not diag-
nostic of cystic fibrosis. The prevalence of such muta-
tions is unclear, and further studies are certainly needed. 
In addition, the therapeutic and prognostic implication 
of these findings with respect to managing pancreati-
tis remains to be determined. Long-term follow-up of 
affected patients is needed. CFTR mutations are com-
mon in the general population. It is unclear whether 
the CFTR mutation alone can lead to pancreatitis as 
an autosomal recessive disease. A recent study evalu-
ated 39 patients with idiopathic chronic pancreatitis to 
assess the risk associated with these mutations. Patients 
with two CFTR mutations (compound heterozygotes) 
demonstrated CFTR function at a level between that 
seen in typical cystic fibrosis and cystic fibrosis carriers 
and had a fortyfold increased risk of pancreatitis. The 
presence of an N34S SPINK1 mutation increased the 
risk twentyfold. A combination of two CFTR muta-
tions and an N34S SPINK1 mutation increased the 
risk of pancreatitis 900-fold. Table 48-5 lists recognized 
causes of chronic pancreatitis and pancreatic exocrine 
insufficiency.
Autoimmune Pancreatitis (Table 48-6)
Autoimmune pancreatitis (AIP) is an uncommon ­disorder 
of presumed autoimmune causation with characteristic 
laboratory, histologic, and morphologic findings. AIP has 
been described as a primary pancreatic disorder; how-
ever, it is also associated with other clinical features such 
as parotid enlargement, submandibular adenopathy, thy-
roiditis, pericarditis, orbital mass lesions, and retroperito-
neal fibrosis as part of a broader entity identified as IgG 
related disease. Mild symptoms, usually abdominal pain, 
are present but attacks of acute pancreatitis are unusual. 
Furthermore, AIP is not a common cause of idiopathic 
SECTION VIII
Disorders of the Pancreas
510
recurrent pancreatitis. In the United States, 50–75% of 
patients with AIP present with obstructive jaundice.
Weight loss and new onset of diabetes may also 
occur. An obstructive pattern on liver tests is com-
mon (i.e., disproportionately elevated serum alkaline 
phosphatase and minimally elevated serum amino-
transferases). Elevated serum levels of immunoglobulin 
G4 (IgG4) provide a marker for the disease, particularly 
in Western populations. Serum IgG4 normally accounts 
for only 5–6% of the total IgG4 in healthy patients but 
is elevated at least twofold higher than 135 mg/dL in 
those with AIP. CT scans reveal abnormalities in the 
majority of patients and include diffuse enlargement, 
focal enlargement, and a distinct enlargement at the 
head of the pancreas. ERCP or MRCP reveals strictures 
in the bile duct in more than one-third of patients with 
AIP; these may be common bile duct strictures, intrahe-
patic bile duct strictures, or proximal bile duct strictures, 
with accompanying narrowing of the pancreatic bile 
duct. This has been termed autoimmune ­cholangitis. 
Characteristic histologic findings include extensive lym-
phoplasmacytic infiltrates with dense fibrosis around 
pancreatic ducts, as well as a lymphoplasmacytic infiltra-
tion, resulting in an obliterative phlebitis.
The Mayo Clinic criteria indicate that AIP can 
be diagnosed with at least one of three abnormalities: 
(1) diagnostic histology; (2) characteristic findings on 
Table 48-6
Clinical Features of Autoimmune 
Pancreatitis (AIP)
•  Mild symptoms usually abdominal pain, but without 
­frequent attacks of pancreatitis, which are unusual
•  Presentation with obstructive jaundice
•  Diffuse swelling and enlargement of the pancreas, 
­especially the head, the latter mimicking carcinoma of 
the pancreas
•  Diffuse irregular narrowing of the pancreatic duct in 
ERCP
•  Increased levels of serum gamma globulins especially 
IgG4
•  Presence of other autoantibodies (ANA), rheumatoid 
­factor (RF)
•  Can occur with other autoimmune diseases: Sjögren’s 
syndrome, primary sclerosing cholangitis, ulcerative 
­colitis, rheumatoid arthritis
•  Extra pancreatic bile duct changes such as stricture of 
the common bile duct and intrahepatic ducts
•  Absence of pancreatic calcifications or cysts
•  Pancreatic biopsies reveal extensive fibrosis and 
­lymphoplasmacytic infiltration
•  Glucocorticoids are effective in alleviating ­symptoms, 
decreasing size of the pancreas, and reversing 
­histopathologic changes
•  Two-thirds of patients present with either ­obstructive 
jaundice or a “mass” in the head of the pancreas 
­mimicking carcinoma
CT and pancreatography combined with elevated 
IgG4 levels; and (3) response to glucocorticoid therapy, 
with improvement in pancreatic and extrapancreatic 
manifestations.
Glucocorticoids have shown efficacy in ­alleviating 
symptoms, decreasing the size of the pancreas, and 
reversing histopathologic features in patients with AIP. 
Patients may respond dramatically to glucocorticoid 
therapy within a 2- to 4-week period. Prednisone is 
usually administered at an initial dose of 40 mg/d for 
4 weeks followed by a taper of the daily dosage by 5 mg/
week based on monitoring of clinical parameters. Relief 
of symptoms, serial changes in abdominal imaging of 
the pancreas and bile ducts, decreased serum γ-globulin 
and IgG4 levels, and improvements in liver tests are 
parameters to follow. A poor response to glucocorti-
coids over a 2- to 4-week period should raise suspicion 
of pancreatic cancer or other forms of chronic pancre-
atitis. In most reports, 50–70% of patients responded 
to glucocorticoids, but about 25% required a second 
course of treatment while a smaller number required 
maintenance treatment with prednisone at a dosage of 
5–10 mg/d. Patients with bile duct strictures are less 
likely to have a sustained response to glucocorticoids 
and may require immunosuppressive therapy with aza-
thioprine or 6-mercaptopurine.
Clinical features of chronic pancreatitis
Patients with chronic pancreatitis seek medical ­attention 
predominantly because of two symptoms: abdominal 
pain or maldigestion and weight loss. The abdominal 
pain may be quite variable in location, severity, and fre-
quency. The pain can be constant or intermittent with 
frequent pain-free intervals. Eating may exacerbate the 
pain, leading to a fear of eating with consequent weight 
loss. The spectrum of abdominal pain ranges from mild 
to quite severe, with narcotic dependence as a frequent 
consequence. Maldigestion is manifested as chronic 
diarrhea, steatorrhea, weight loss, and fatigue. Patients 
with chronic abdominal pain may or may not prog-
ress to maldigestion, and ∼20% of patients will present 
with symptoms of maldigestion without a history of 
abdominal pain. Patients with chronic pancreatitis have 
significant morbidity and mortality and utilize appre-
ciable amounts of societal resources. Despite the steat-
orrhea, clinically apparent deficiencies of fat-soluble 
vitamins are surprisingly uncommon. Physical findings 
in these patients are usually unimpressive so that there 
is a disparity between the severity of abdominal pain 
and the physical signs that usually consist of some mild 
tenderness.
In contrast to acute pancreatitis, the serum amylase 
and lipase levels are usually not strikingly elevated in 
chronic pancreatitis. Elevation of serum bilirubin and 
alkaline phosphatase may indicate cholestasis secondary 
 
CHAPTER 48
Acute and Chronic Pancreatitis
511
to common bile duct stricture caused by chronic 
inflammation. Many patients have impaired glucose tol-
erance with elevated fasting blood glucose levels. The 
diagnostic test with the best sensitivity and specific-
ity is the hormone stimulation test utilizing secretin. It 
becomes abnormal when ≥60% of the pancreatic exo-
crine function has been lost. This usually correlates well 
with the onset of chronic abdominal pain. In earlier 
studies, approximately 40% of patients with chronic 
pancreatitis had cobalamin (vitamin B12) malabsorption. 
This can be corrected by the administration of oral pan-
creatic enzymes. The fecal elastase-1 and small bowel 
biopsy are useful in the evaluation of patients with sus-
pected pancreatic steatorrhea. The fecal elastase level 
will be abnormal and small bowel histology will be nor-
mal in such patients. A decrease of fecal elastase level 
to <100 μg per gram of stool strongly suggests severe 
pancreatic exocrine insufficiency.
Utilizing radiographic techniques (Fig. 48-4), it 
can be shown that diffuse calcifications noted on plain 
film of the abdomen usually indicate significant dam-
age to the pancreas. While alcohol is by far the most 
common cause of pancreatic calcification such calci-
fication may also be noted in hereditary pancreatitis, 
posttraumatic pancreatitis, hypercalcemic pancreati-
tis, islet cell tumors, idiopathic chronic pancreatitis, 
and ­tropical pancreatitis. Abdominal ultrasonography, 
CT scanning, and MRCP greatly aid in the diagno-
sis of pancreatic disease (Fig. 48-4). In addition to 
excluding a pseudocyst and pancreatic cancer, CT 
may show calcification, dilated ducts, or an atrophic 
pancreas. MRCP provides a direct view of the pan-
creatic duct and is now the diagnostic procedure 
of choice. The role of endoscopic ultrasonography 
(EUS) in diagnosing early chronic pancreatitis is still 
being defined. A total of nine endosonographic fea-
tures have been described in chronic pancreatitis. 
The presence of five or more features is ­considered 
diagnostic of chronic pancreatitis. EUS comple-
ments pancreatic function tests, and a combination 
of a hormone-stimulation function test and EUS is a 
modality to evaluate the pancreatic duct morphol-
ogy, parenchymal architecture, and secretory func-
tion for the presence or extent of chronic pancreatitis 
(Chap. 47). Whether EUS alone can detect early, non-
calcific chronic pancreatitis with the same degree of 
accuracy as the hormone-stimulation test is contro-
versial. Data comparing these modalities head-to-head 
have indicated that EUS is not a sensitive enough test 
for detecting early chronic pancreatitis (Chap. 47) and 
may show positive features in patients who have dys-
pepsia or even in normal controls. However, recent 
data suggest that EUS can be combined with endo-
scopic pancreatic function testing (EUS-ePFT) during 
a single endoscopy to screen for chronic pancreatitis in 
patients with chronic abdominal pain.
Figure 48-4 
A. Chronic pancreatitis and pancreatic calculi: CT scan. In this 
contrast-enhanced CT scan of the abdomen, there is evidence 
of an atrophic pancreas with multiple calcifications and stones 
in the parenchyma and dilated pancreatic duct (arrow). B. In this 
contrast-enhanced CT scan of the abdomen, there is evidence 
of an atrophic pancreas with multiple calcifications (arrows). 
Note the markedly dilated pancreatic duct seen in this section 
through the body and tail (open arrows). C. Chronic pancre-
atitis on MRCP: dilated duct with filling defects. Gadolinium-
enhanced MRI/MRCP reveals a dilated pancreatic duct (arrow) 
in chronic pancreatitis with multiple filling defects suggestive 
of pancreatic duct calculi. (A, C, courtesy of Dr. KJ Mortele, 
Brigham and Women’s Hospital; with permission.)
A
B
C
SECTION VIII
Disorders of the Pancreas
512
Complications of chronic pancreatitis
The complications of chronic pancreatitis are protean 
and are listed in Table 48-7. Although most patients 
have impaired glucose tolerance, diabetic ketoacido-
sis and coma are uncommon. Likewise, end-organ 
­damage (retinopathy, neuropathy, nephropathy) is also 
uncommon. A nondiabetic retinopathy may be due to 
either vitamin A and/or zinc deficiency. Gastrointesti-
nal bleeding may occur from peptic ulceration, gastritis, 
a pseudocyst eroding into the duodenum, or ruptured 
varices secondary to splenic vein thrombosis due to 
chronic inflammation of the tail of the pancreas. Jaun-
dice, cholestasis, and biliary cirrhosis may occur from 
the chronic inflammatory reaction around the intrapan-
creatic portion of the common bile duct. Twenty years 
after the diagnosis of calcific chronic pancreatitis, the 
cumulative risk of pancreatic carcinoma is 4%. Patients 
with hereditary pancreatitis are at a tenfold higher risk 
for pancreatic cancer.
Treatment	
Chronic Pancreatitis
The treatment of steatorrhea with pancreatic enzymes 
is straightforward even though complete correction of 
steatorrhea is unusual. Enzyme therapy usually brings 
diarrhea under control and restores absorption of fat to 
an acceptable level and effects weight gain. Thus, pan-
creatic enzymes have been the cornerstone of ­pancreatic 
therapy. In treating steatorrhea, it is important to use a 
potent pancreatic formulation that will deliver sufficient 
lipase into the duodenum to correct maldigestion and 
decrease steatorrhea (Table 48-8). In an attempt to stan-
dardize the enzyme activity, potency and bioavailability, 
the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) required that 
all pancreas enzyme drugs in the United States obtain 
a New Drug Application (NDA) by April 2008. Table 48-8 
lists frequently utilized formulations but availability will 
be based on compliance with the FDA mandate. Recent 
data suggests that dosages up to 80,000–100,000 units of 
lipase per meal may be necessary to normalize nutritional 
parameters in malnourished chronic pancreatitis patients.
The management of pain in patients with chronic 
pancreatitis is problematic.
Table 48-7
Complications of Chronic Pancreatitis
Narcotic addiction
Impaired glucose tolerance
Gastroparesis
Cobalamin malabsorption
Nondiabetic retinopathy
Effusions with high amylase 
content
Gastrointestinal bleeding
Jaundice
Cholangitis and/or biliary 
­cirrhosis
Subcutaneous fat necrosis
Bone pain
Pancreatic cancer
Recent meta-analyses have shown no consistent 
benefit of enzyme therapy at reducing pain in chronic  
pancreatitis. In some patients with idiopathic chronic 
pancreatitis, conventional nonenteric coated enzyme 
preparations containing high concentrations of ser-
ine  proteases may relieve mild abdominal pain or dis-
comfort. The pain relief experienced by these patients 
actually may be due to improvements in the dyspepsia 
from maldigestion. Table 48-8 lists the frequently utilized 
pancreatic enzyme preparations in the United States.
Oxidative stress has also been implicated in the 
pathophysiology of the pain of chronic pancreatitis. 
A recent randomized prospective study from India 
showed antioxidant therapy to be beneficial at reduc-
ing pain in mild chronic pancreatitis. Gastroparesis is 
also quite common in patients with chronic pancreati-
tis. It is important to recognize this because treatment 
with enzymes may fail simply because gastroparesis 
is preventing the appropriate delivery of enzymes into 
the upper intestine where the enzymes can then act via 
a feedback inhibition process. In patients with painful 
chronic pancreatitis, it is important to evaluate gastric 
emptying and, if gastric emptying is impaired, to effect 
proper emptying with prokinetic agents. In this setting, 
enzyme therapy is more apt to be successful.
Endoscopic treatment of chronic pancreatitis pain 
may involve sphincterotomy, stenting, stone extrac-
tion, and drainage of a pancreatic pseudocyst. Therapy 
directed to the pancreatic duct would seem to be most 
appropriate in the setting of a dominant stricture, if a 
ductal stone has led to obstruction. The use of endo-
scopic stenting for patients with chronic pain, but with-
out a dominant stricture, has not been subjected to any 
controlled trials. It is now appreciated that significant 
complications can occur from stenting (i.e., bleeding, 
cholangitis, stent migration, and stent clogging). All of 
these may lead to pancreatitis. Importantly, damage 
to the pancreatic duct and the pancreatic parenchyma 
can occur following stenting. In patients with large-
duct ­disease usually from alcohol-induced chronic pan-
creatitis, ductal decompression has been the therapy 
of choice. Among such patients, 80% seem to obtain 
immediate relief; however, at the end of three years, 
one-half the patients have recurrence of pain. Two ran-
domized prospective trials comparing endoscopic to 
surgical therapy for chronic pancreatitis demonstrated 
that surgical therapy was superior to endoscopy at 
decreasing pain and improving quality of life in selected 
patients with dilated ducts and abdominal pain. This 
would suggest that chronic pancreatitis patients with 
dilated ducts and pain should be considered for surgical 
intervention. The role of preoperative stenting prior to 
surgery as a predictor of response has yet to be proven.
A Whipple procedure as well as total pancreatectomy 
and autologous islet cell transplantation have been 
 
CHAPTER 48
Acute and Chronic Pancreatitis
513
Table 48-8 
Frequently Utilized Pancreatic Enzyme Preparations
Enzyme Preparations
Manufacturer, Location
Lipasea
Proteasea
Amylasea
Enteric Coated (EC)
Ultrase
Axcan Pharma, Birmingham, AL
[EC microspheres in capsules]
  Ultrase
4500
25,000
20,000
  Ultrase 12
12,000
39,000
39,000
  Ultrase 18
18,000
58,500
58,500
  Ultrase 20
20,000
65,000
65,000
Creon
[delayed-release capsules containing EC 
spheres]
Solvay Pharmaceuticals, Marietta, 
GA
  Creon 6
6000
19,000
30,000
  Creon 12
12,000
38,000
60,000
  Creon 24
24,000
76,000
120,000
Pancrease
[EC microtablets in capsule]
Ortho-McNeil Pharmaceuticals, 
­Riritan, NJ
  Pancrease MT 4
4000
12,000
12,000
  Pancrease MT 10
10,000
30,000
30,000
  Pancrease MT 16
16,000
48,000
48,000
  Pancrease MT 20
20,000
44,000
56,000
Pancreacarb
Digestive Care, Inc., Bethlehem, PA
(EC microspheres [buffered] in delayed-release 
capsule)
Pancreacarb MS-8
8000
45,000
40,000
Nonenteric Coated
Viokase
Axcan Scandipharm, Birmingham, AL
(pancrelipase, USP) Tablets, Powder
  Viokase 8
8000
30,000
30,000
  Viokase 16
16,000
60,000
60,000
  Viokase Powder: Lactose, sodium chloride, 
  each 0.7 g (1/4 teaspoonful)
16,800
70,000
70,000
Ku-zyme/Kutrase
UCB Inc., Rochester, NY
  Ku-zyme
1200
15,000
15,000
  Kutrase
1200
30,000
30,000
aUnited States Pharmacopeia (USP) units per tablet or capsule
Note: FDA has mandated all enzyme manufacturers to submit new drug applications (NDAs) for all pancreatic extract drug products after 
reviewing data that showed substantial variations among currently marketed products. Numerous manufacturers have investigations underway 
to seek FDA approval for the treatment of exocrine pancreatic insufficiency (EPI) due to cystic fibrosis (CF) or other conditions under the new 
guidelines for this class of drugs (www.fda.gov).
used in selected patients with chronic pancreatitis and 
abdominal pain refractory to conventional therapy. The 
patients who have benefited the most from total pan-
createctomy have chronic pancreatitis without prior 
pancreatic surgery or evidence of islet cell insufficiency. 
The role of this procedure remains to be fully defined 
but may be an option in lieu of ductal decompression 
surgery or pancreatic resection in patients with intrac-
table, painful small-duct disease, particularly as the 
standard surgical procedures tend to decrease islet cell 
yield. Celiac plexus block has not been demonstrated to 
­provide long-lasting pain relief.
Hereditary Pancreatitis
Hereditary pancreatitis is a rare disease that is simi-
lar to chronic pancreatitis except for an early age of 
onset and evidence of hereditary factors (involving an 
SECTION VIII
Disorders of the Pancreas
514
autosomal dominant gene with incomplete penetrance). 
A genomewide search using genetic linkage analysis 
identified the hereditary pancreatitis gene on chromo-
some 7. Mutations in ion codons 29 (exon 2) and 122 
(exon 3) of the cationic trypsinogen gene cause auto-
somal dominant forms of hereditary pancreatitis. The 
codon 122 mutations lead to a substitution of the 
­corresponding arginine with another amino acid, usu-
ally histidine. This substitution, when it occurs, elimi-
nates a fail-safe trypsin self-destruction site necessary to 
eliminate trypsin that is prematurely activated within 
the acinar cell. These patients have recurring attacks of 
severe abdominal pain that may last from a few days to 
a few weeks. The serum amylase and lipase levels may 
be elevated during acute attacks but are usually normal. 
Patients frequently develop pancreatic calcification, dia-
betes mellitus, and steatorrhea; in addition, they have 
an increased incidence of pancreatic carcinoma, with 
the cumulative incidence being as high as 40% by 
age 70 years. A recent natural history study of heredi-
tary pancreatitis in more than 200 patients from France 
reported that abdominal pain started in childhood at 
age 10 years, steatorrhea developed at age 29 years, dia-
betes at age 38 years, and pancreatic carcinoma at age 
55 years. Such patients often require surgical ductal 
decompression for pain relief. Abdominal complaints in 
relatives of patients with hereditary pancreatitis should 
raise the question of pancreatic disease.
Pancreatic secretory trypsin inhibitor (PSTI) 
gene mutations
PSTI, or SPINK1, is a 56-amino-acid peptide that spe-
cifically inhibits trypsin by physically blocking its active 
site. SPINK1 acts as the first line of defense against 
prematurely activated trypsinogen in the acinar cell. 
Recently, it has been shown that the frequency of 
SPINK1 mutations in patients with idiopathic chronic 
pancreatitis is markedly increased, suggesting that these 
mutations may be associated with pancreatitis.
Pancreatic Endocrine Tumors
Pancreatic endocrine tumors are discussed in Chap. 52.
Other Conditions
Annular Pancreas
When the ventral pancreatic anlage fails to migrate 
correctly to make contact with the dorsal anlage, the 
result may be a ring of pancreatic tissue encircling the 
­duodenum. Such an annular pancreas may cause intes-
tinal obstruction in the neonate or the adult. Symptoms 
of postprandial fullness, epigastric pain, nausea, and 
vomiting may be present for years before the diagnosis 
is entertained. The radiographic findings are symmetric 
dilation of the proximal duodenum with bulging of the 
recesses on either side of the annular band, effacement 
but not destruction of the duodenal mucosa, accentua-
tion of the findings in the right anterior oblique posi-
tion, and lack of change on repeated examinations. The 
differential diagnosis should include duodenal webs, 
tumors of the pancreas or duodenum, postbulbar pep-
tic ulcer, regional enteritis, and adhesions. Patients with 
annular pancreas have an increased incidence of pan-
creatitis and peptic ulcer. Because of these and other 
potential complications, the treatment is surgical even 
if the condition has been present for years. Retro-
colic duodenojejunostomy is the procedure of choice, 
although some surgeons advocate Billroth II gastrec-
tomy, gastroenterostomy, and vagotomy.
Pancreas Divisum
Pancreas divisum occurs when the embryologic ven-
tral and dorsal pancreatic anlagen fail to fuse, so that 
pancreatic drainage is accomplished mainly through 
the accessory papilla. Pancreas divisum is the most 
­common congenital anatomic variant of the human 
pancreas. Current evidence indicates that this anomaly 
does not predispose to the development of pancre-
atitis in the great majority of patients who harbor it. 
­However, the combination of pancreas divisum and 
a small accessory orifice could result in dorsal duct 
obstruction. The challenge is to identify this subset 
of patients with dorsal duct pathology. Cannulation 
of the dorsal duct by ERCP is not as easily done as is 
cannulation of the ventral duct. Patients with pancre-
atitis and pancreas divisum demonstrated by MRCP or 
ERCP should be treated with conservative measures. 
In many of these patients, pancreatitis is idiopathic 
and unrelated to the pancreas divisum. Endoscopic 
or surgical intervention is indicated only if pancreati-
tis recurs and no other cause can be found. If marked 
dilation of the dorsal duct can be demonstrated, sur-
gical ductal decompression should be performed. It 
should be stressed that the ERCP appearance of pan-
creas divisum (i.e., a small-caliber ventral duct with an 
arborizing pattern) may be mistaken as representing an 
obstructed main pancreatic duct secondary to a mass 
lesion.
Macroamylasemia
In macroamylasemia, amylase circulates in the blood in 
a polymer form too large to be easily excreted by the 
kidney. Patients with this condition demonstrate an ele-
vated serum amylase value, a low urinary amylase value, 
and a Cam/Ccr ratio of <1%. The presence of mac-
roamylase can be documented by chromatography of 
 
CHAPTER 48
Acute and Chronic Pancreatitis
515
the serum. The prevalence of macroamylasemia is 1.5% 
of the nonalcoholic general adult hospital population. 
Usually macroamylasemia is an incidental finding and is 
not related to disease of the pancreas or other organs.
Macrolipasemia has now been documented in a few 
patients with cirrhosis or non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma. 
In these patients, the pancreas appeared normal on 
ultrasound and CT examination. Lipase was shown 
to be complexed with immunoglobulin A. Thus, the 
possibility of both macroamylasemia and macrolipasemia 
should be considered in patients with elevated blood 
levels of these enzymes.
Acknowledgments
This chapter represents a revised version of the chapter by 
Dr. Norton J. Greenberger and Dr. Phillip P. Toskes that 
was in the previous editions of Harrison’s Principles of Internal 
Medicine.
This page intentionally left blank 
Neoplastic Diseases 
of the  
Gastrointestinal 
System
SECTION IX
 robert J. mayer 
518
 The gastrointestinal tract is the second most common 
noncutaneous site for cancer and the second major 
cause of cancer-related mortality in the United States. 
 esoPhaGeal cancer 
 INCIDENCE aND ETIOlOgy 
 
Cancer of the esophagus is a relatively uncom-
mon but extremely lethal malignancy. The diag-
nosis was made in 16,640 Americans in 2010 
and led to 14,500 deaths. Worldwide, the incidence, of 
esophageal cancer varies strikingly. It occurs frequently 
within a geographic region extending from the southern 
shore of the Caspian Sea on the west to northern China 
on the east and encompassing parts of Iran, Central 
Asia, Afghanistan, Siberia, and Mongolia. Familial 
increased risk has been seen in regions with high inci-
dence, though gene associations are not yet defi ned. 
High-incidence “pockets” of the disease are also present 
in such disparate locations as Finland, Iceland, Curaçao, 
southeastern Africa, and northwestern France. In North 
America and western Europe, the disease is more com-
mon in blacks than whites and in males than females; it 
appears most often after age 50 and seems to be associ-
ated with a lower socioeconomic status. 
 A variety of causative factors have been implicated 
in the development of the disease  ( Table 49-1 ) . In the 
United States, esophageal cancer cases are either squa-
mous cell carcinomas or adenocarcinomas. The etiol-
ogy of squamous cell esophageal cancer is related to 
excess alcohol consumption and/or cigarette smoking. 
The relative risk increases with the amount of tobacco 
smoked or alcohol consumed, with these factors acting 
synergistically. The consumption of whiskey is linked 
to a higher incidence than the consumption of wine 
or beer. Squamous cell esophageal carcinoma has also 
been associated with the ingestion of nitrites, smoked 
opiates, and fungal toxins in pickled vegetables, as well 
as mucosal damage caused by such physical insults as 
long-term exposure to extremely hot tea, the ingestion 
of lye, radiation-induced strictures, and chronic acha-
lasia. The presence of an esophageal web in association 
with glossitis and iron defi ciency (i.e., Plummer-Vinson 
or Paterson-Kelly syndrome) and congenital hyper-
keratosis and pitting of the palms and soles (i.e., tylosis 
palmaris et plantaris) have each been linked with squa-
mous cell esophageal cancer, as have dietary defi cien-
cies of molybdenum, zinc, selenium, and vitamin A. 
Bisphosphonates may increase the risk in patients with 
Barrett’s esophagus. Patients with head and neck can-
cer are at increased risk of squamous cell cancer of the 
esophagus. 
 GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT CANCER 
 chaPTer 49 
Table 49-1
 SOmE ETIOlOgIC FaCTOrS BElIEvED TO BE 
aSSOCIaTED wITh ESOPhagEal CaNCEr 
 Excess alcohol consumption 
 Cigarette smoking 
 Other ingested carcinogens 
 Nitrates (converted to nitrites) 
 Smoked opiates 
 Fungal toxins in pickled vegetables 
Mucosal damage from physical agents 
 Hot tea 
 Lye ingestion 
 Radiation-induced strictures 
 Chronic achalasia 
 Host susceptibility 
 Esophageal web with glossitis and iron defi ciency (i.e., 
Plummer-Vinson or Paterson-Kelly syndrome) 
 Congenital hyperkeratosis and pitting of the palms and 
soles (i.e., tylosis palmaris et plantaris) 
 ? Dietary defi ciencies of selenium, molybdenum, zinc, and 
vitamin A 
 ? Celiac sprue 
 Chronic gastric refl ux (i.e., Barrett’s esophagus) for 
adenocarcinoma 
 
CHAPTER 49
Gastrointestinal Tract Cancer
519
For unclear reasons, the incidence of squamous cell 
esophageal cancer has decreased somewhat in both the 
black and white population in the United States over 
the past 30 years, while the rate of adenocarcinoma has 
risen dramatically, particularly in white males (M:F 6:1). 
Adenocarcinomas arise in the distal esophagus in the 
presence of chronic gastric reflux and gastric metapla-
sia of the epithelium (Barrett’s esophagus), which is 
more common in obese persons. Adenocarcinomas 
arise within dysplastic columnar epithelium in the dis-
tal esophagus. Even before frank neoplasia is detectable, 
aneuploidy and p53 mutations are found in the dysplas-
tic epithelium. These adenocarcinomas behave clinically 
like gastric adenocarcinoma and now account for >70% 
of esophageal cancers.
Clinical Features
About 10% of esophageal cancers occur in the upper 
third of the esophagus (cervical esophagus), 35% in the 
middle third, and 55% in the lower third. Squamous 
cell carcinomas and adenocarcinomas cannot be distin-
guished radiographically or endoscopically.
Progressive dysphagia and weight loss of short dura-
tion are the initial symptoms in the vast majority of 
patients. Dysphagia initially occurs with solid foods 
and gradually progresses to include semisolids and 
liquids. By the time these symptoms develop, the disease 
is usually incurable, since difficulty in swallowing does 
not occur until >60% of the esophageal circumference is 
infiltrated with cancer. Dysphagia may be associated with 
pain on swallowing (odynophagia), pain radiating to the 
chest and/or back, regurgitation or vomiting, and aspi-
ration pneumonia. The disease most commonly spreads 
to adjacent and supraclavicular lymph nodes, liver, 
lungs, pleura, and bone. Tracheoesophageal fistulas may 
develop as the disease advances, leading to severe suffer-
ing. As with other squamous cell carcinomas, hypercal-
cemia may occur in the absence of osseous metastases, 
probably from parathormone-related peptide secreted 
by tumor cells.
Diagnosis
Attempts at endoscopic and cytologic screening for 
carcinoma in patients with Barrett’s esophagus, while 
effective as a means of detecting high-grade dysplasia, 
have not yet been shown to improve the prognosis in 
individuals found to have a carcinoma. Routine con-
trast radiographs effectively identify esophageal lesions 
large enough to cause symptoms. In contrast to benign 
esophageal leiomyomas, which result in esophageal nar-
rowing with preservation of a normal mucosal pattern, 
esophageal carcinomas show ragged, ulcerating changes 
in the mucosa in association with deeper infiltration, 
producing a picture resembling achalasia. Smaller, 
potentially resectable tumors are often poorly visualized 
despite technically adequate esophagograms. Because of 
this, esophagoscopy should be performed in all patients 
suspected of having an esophageal abnormality, to visu-
alize the tumor and to obtain histopathologic confirma-
tion of the diagnosis. Because the population of persons 
at risk for squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus 
(i.e., smokers and drinkers) also has a high rate of 
cancers of the lung and the head and neck region, 
endoscopic inspection of the larynx, trachea, and bron-
chi should also be done. A thorough examination of the 
fundus of the stomach (by retroflexing the endoscope) 
is imperative as well. Endoscopic biopsies of esophageal 
tumors fail to recover malignant tissue in one-third of 
cases because the biopsy forceps cannot penetrate deeply 
enough through normal mucosa pushed in front of 
the carcinoma. Taking multiple biopsies increases the 
yield. Cytologic examination of tumor brushings com-
plements standard biopsies and should be performed 
routinely. The extent of tumor spread to the medias-
tinum and para-aortic lymph nodes should be assessed 
by CT scans of the chest and abdomen and by 
endoscopic ultrasound. Positron emission tomography 
scanning provides a useful assessment of resectabil-
ity, offering accurate information regarding spread to 
mediastinal lymph nodes. Most patients have advanced 
disease at presentation.
Treatment	
Esophageal Cancer
The prognosis for patients with esophageal carcinoma 
is poor. Fewer than 5% of patients survive 5 years after 
the diagnosis; thus, management focuses on symptom 
control. Surgical resection of all gross tumor (i.e., total 
resection) is feasible in only 45% of cases, with residual 
tumor cells frequently present at the resection margins. 
Such esophagectomies have been associated with a 
postoperative mortality rate of approximately 5% due to 
anastomotic fistulas, subphrenic abscesses, and respira-
tory complications. About 20% of patients who survive 
a total resection live 5 years. The efficacy of primary 
radiation therapy (5500–6000 cGy) for squamous cell 
carcinomas is similar to that of radical surgery, sparing 
patients perioperative morbidity but often resulting in 
less satisfactory palliation of obstructive symptoms. The 
evaluation of chemotherapeutic agents in patients with 
esophageal carcinoma has been hampered by ambigu-
ity in the definition of “response” and the debilitated 
physical condition of many treated individuals. None-
theless, significant reductions in the size of measur-
able tumor masses have been reported in 15–25% of 
patients given single-agent treatment and in 30–60% 
of patients treated with drug combinations that include 
SECTION IX
Neoplastic Diseases of the Gastrointestinal System
520
cisplatin. Combination chemotherapy and radiation 
therapy as the initial therapeutic approach, either alone 
or followed by an attempt at operative resection, seems 
to be beneficial. When administered along with radia-
tion therapy, chemotherapy produces a better survival 
outcome than radiation therapy alone. The use of pre-
operative chemotherapy and radiation therapy followed 
by esophageal resection appears to prolong survival as 
compared with controls in small, randomized trials, and 
some reports suggest that no additional benefit accrues 
when surgery is added if significant shrinkage of tumor 
has been achieved by the chemoradiation combination.
For the incurable, surgically unresectable patient 
with esophageal cancer, dysphagia, malnutrition, and 
the management of tracheoesophageal fistulas are 
major issues. Approaches to palliation include repeated 
endoscopic dilatation, the surgical placement of a gas-
trostomy or jejunostomy for hydration and feeding, 
and endoscopic placement of an expansive metal stent 
to bypass the tumor. Endoscopic fulguration of the 
obstructing tumor with lasers is the most promising of 
these techniques.
Tumors of the Stomach
Gastric Adenocarcinoma
Incidence and epidemiology
For unclear reasons, the incidence and mortality 
rates for gastric cancer have decreased markedly 
worldwide during the past 75 years. The mortality 
rate from gastric cancer in the United States has 
dropped in men from 28 to 5.8 per 100,000 persons, 
while in women the rate has decreased from 27 to 
2.8 per 100,000. Nonetheless, 21,000 new cases of 
stomach cancer were diagnosed in the United States, 
and 10,570 Americans died of the disease in 2010. Gas-
tric cancer incidence has decreased worldwide but 
remains high in Japan, China, Chile, and Ireland.
The risk of gastric cancer is greater among lower 
socioeconomic classes. Migrants from high- to low-
incidence nations maintain their susceptibility to gastric 
cancer, while the risk for their offspring approximates 
that of the new homeland. These findings suggest that 
an environmental exposure, probably beginning early in 
life, is related to the development of gastric cancer, with 
dietary carcinogens considered the most likely factor(s).
Pathology
About 85% of stomach cancers are adenocarcinomas, 
with 15% due to lymphomas and gastrointestinal stro-
mal tumors (GIST) and leiomyosarcomas. Gastric ade-
nocarcinomas may be subdivided into two categories: 
a diffuse type, in which cell cohesion is absent, so that 
individual cells infiltrate and thicken the stomach wall 
without forming a discrete mass; and an intestinal type, 
characterized by cohesive neoplastic cells that form 
glandlike tubular structures. The diffuse carcinomas 
occur more often in younger patients, develop through-
out the stomach (including the cardia), result in a loss 
of distensibility of the gastric wall (so-called linitis plas-
tica, or “leather bottle” appearance), and carry a poorer 
prognosis. Diffuse cancers have defective intercellular 
adhesion, mainly as a consequence of loss of expres-
sion of E-cadherin. Intestinal-type lesions are frequently 
ulcerative, more commonly appear in the antrum and 
lesser curvature of the stomach, and are often preceded 
by a prolonged precancerous process, often initiated by 
Helicobacter pylori infection. While the incidence of 
diffuse carcinomas is similar in most populations, the 
intestinal type tends to predominate in the high-risk 
geographic regions and is less likely to be found in 
areas where the frequency of gastric cancer is declining. 
Thus, different etiologic factor(s) are likely involved in 
these two subtypes. In the United States, ∼30% of gas-
tric cancers originate in the distal stomach, ∼20% arise 
in the midportion of the stomach, and ∼37% originate 
in the proximal third of the stomach. The remaining 
13% involve the entire stomach.
Etiology
The long-term ingestion of high concentrations of 
nitrates in dried, smoked, and salted foods appears to be 
associated with a higher risk. The nitrates are thought 
to be converted to carcinogenic nitrites by bacteria 
(Table 49-2). Such bacteria may be introduced exoge-
nously through the ingestion of partially decayed foods, 
Table 49-2 
Nitrate-Converting Bacteria as a Factor in 
the Causation of Gastric Carcinomaa
Exogenous sources of nitrate-converting bacteria:
Bacterially contaminated food (common in lower  
socioeconomic classes, who have a higher incidence of 
the disease; diminished by improved food preservation 
and refrigeration)
? Helicobacter pylori infection
Endogenous factors favoring growth of nitrate-converting 
bacteria in the stomach:
Decreased gastric acidity
Prior gastric surgery (antrectomy) (15- to 20-year latency 
period)
Atrophic gastritis and/or pernicious anemia
? Prolonged exposure to histamine H2-receptor 
antagonists
aHypothesis: Dietary nitrates are converted to carcinogenic nitrites 
by bacteria.
 
CHAPTER 49
Gastrointestinal Tract Cancer
521
which are consumed in abundance worldwide by the 
lower socioeconomic classes. Bacteria such as H. pylori 
may also contribute to this effect by causing chronic 
gastritis, loss of gastric acidity, and bacterial growth in 
the stomach. The effect of H. pylori eradication on the 
subsequent risk for gastric cancer in high-incidence 
areas is under investigation. Loss of acidity may occur 
when acid-producing cells of the gastric antrum have 
been removed surgically to control benign peptic ulcer 
disease or when achlorhydria, atrophic gastritis, and 
even pernicious anemia develop in the elderly. Serial 
endoscopic examinations of the stomach in patients 
with atrophic gastritis have documented replacement 
of the usual gastric mucosa by intestinal-type cells. 
This process of intestinal metaplasia may lead to 
cellular atypia and eventual neoplasia. Since the declining 
incidence of gastric cancer in the United States primar-
ily reflects a decline in distal, ulcerating, intestinal-type 
lesions, it is conceivable that better food preservation 
and the availability of refrigeration to all socioeconomic 
classes have decreased the dietary ingestion of exogenous 
bacteria. H. pylori has not been associated with the dif-
fuse, more proximal form of gastric carcinoma.
Several additional etiologic factors have been associ-
ated with gastric carcinoma. Gastric ulcers and adeno-
matous polyps have occasionally been linked, but data 
on a cause-and-effect relationship are unconvincing. 
The inadequate clinical distinction between benign 
gastric ulcers and small ulcerating carcinomas may, in 
part, account for this presumed association. The pres-
ence of extreme hypertrophy of gastric rugal folds (i.e., 
Ménétrier’s disease), giving the impression of polypoid 
lesions, has been associated with a striking frequency of 
malignant transformation; such hypertrophy, however, 
does not represent the presence of true adenomatous 
polyps. Individuals with blood group A have a higher 
incidence of gastric cancer than persons with blood 
group O; this observation may be related to differences 
in the mucous secretion, leading to altered mucosal pro-
tection from carcinogens. A germ-line mutation in the 
E-cadherin gene (CDH1), inherited in an autosomal 
dominant pattern and coding for a cell adhesion protein, 
has been linked to a high incidence of occult diffuse-
type gastric cancers in young asymptomatic carriers. 
Duodenal ulcers are not associated with gastric cancer.
In keeping with the stepwise model of carcinogenesis, 
K-ras mutations appear to be early events in intestinal-
type gastric cancer. C-met expression is amplified in 
about 1 in 5 cases and correlates with advanced stage. 
About half of intestinal-type tumors have mutations in 
tumor suppressor genes such as TP53, TP73, APC (ade-
nomatous polyposis coli), TFF (trefoid factor family), 
DCC (deleted in colon cancer), and FHIT (fragile his-
tidine triad). Cyclin E overexpression is associated with 
progression from dysplasia. Epigenetic changes (espe-
cially increased methylation) has been correlated with 
higher risk of invasive disease. Beta-catenin has been 
found in the nucleus of tumor cells at the leading edge 
of invasion.
Clinical features
Gastric cancers, when superficial and surgically curable, 
usually produce no symptoms. As the tumor becomes 
more extensive, patients may complain of an insidious 
upper abdominal discomfort varying in intensity from 
a vague, postprandial fullness to a severe, steady pain. 
Anorexia, often with slight nausea, is very common 
but is not the usual presenting complaint. Weight loss 
may eventually be observed, and nausea and vomiting 
are particularly prominent with tumors of the pylorus; 
dysphagia and early satiety may be the major symptoms 
caused by diffuse lesions originating in the cardia. There 
are no early physical signs. A palpable abdominal mass 
indicates long-standing growth and predicts regional 
extension.
Gastric carcinomas spread by direct extension 
through the gastric wall to the perigastric tissues, occa-
sionally adhering to adjacent organs such as the pan-
creas, colon, or liver. The disease also spreads via 
lymphatics or by seeding of peritoneal surfaces. Metas-
tases to intraabdominal and supraclavicular lymph nodes 
occur frequently, as do metastatic nodules to the ovary 
(Krukenberg’s tumor), periumbilical region (“Sister 
Mary Joseph node”), or peritoneal cul-de-sac (Blumer’s 
shelf palpable on rectal or vaginal examination); malig-
nant ascites may also develop. The liver is the most 
common site for hematogenous spread of tumor.
The presence of iron-deficiency anemia in men and 
of occult blood in the stool in both sexes mandates a 
search for an occult gastrointestinal tract lesion. A care-
ful assessment is of particular importance in patients 
with atrophic gastritis or pernicious anemia. Unusual 
clinical features associated with gastric adenocarcinomas 
include migratory thrombophlebitis, microangiopathic 
hemolytic anemia, diffuse seborrheic keratoses (so-called 
Leser-Trélat sign), and acanthosis nigricans.
Diagnosis
A double-contrast radiographic examination is the sim-
plest diagnostic procedure for the evaluation of a patient 
with epigastric complaints. The use of double-contrast 
techniques helps to detect small lesions by improving 
mucosal detail. The stomach should be distended at 
some time during every radiographic examination, since 
decreased distensibility may be the only indication of 
a diffuse infiltrative carcinoma. Although gastric ulcers 
can be detected fairly early, distinguishing benign from 
malignant lesions radiographically is difficult. The ana-
tomic location of an ulcer is not in itself an indication of 
the presence or absence of a cancer.
SECTION IX
Neoplastic Diseases of the Gastrointestinal System
522
Gastric ulcers that appear benign by radiography 
present special problems. Some physicians believe that 
gastroscopy is not mandatory if the radiographic features 
are typically benign, if complete healing can be visual-
ized by x-ray within 6 weeks, and if a follow-up con-
trast radiograph obtained several months later shows a 
normal appearance. However, we recommend gastro-
scopic biopsy and brush cytology for all patients with 
a gastric ulcer in order to exclude a malignancy. Malig-
nant gastric ulcers must be recognized before they pen-
etrate into surrounding tissues, because the rate of cure 
of early lesions limited to the mucosa or submucosa is 
>80%. Since gastric carcinomas are difficult to distin-
guish clinically or radiographically from gastric lympho-
mas, endoscopic biopsies should be made as deeply as 
possible, due to the submucosal location of lymphoid 
tumors.
The staging system for gastric carcinoma is shown in 
Table 49-3.
Treatment	
Gastric Adenocarcinoma
Complete surgical removal of the tumor with resection 
of adjacent lymph nodes offers the only chance for cure. 
However, this is possible in less than a third of patients. 
A subtotal gastrectomy is the treatment of choice for 
patients with distal carcinomas, while total or near-total 
Table 49-3
Staging System for Gastric Carcinoma
Data from ACS
Stage
TNM
Features
No. of 
Cases, %
5-Year 
Survival, %
0
TisN0M0
Node negative; limited to mucosa
1
90
IA
T1N0M0
Node negative; invasion of lamina propria or submucosa
7
59
IB
T2N0M0
T1N1M0
Node negative; invasion of muscularis propria
10
44
II
T1N2M0
T2N1M0
Node positive; invasion beyond mucosa but within wall
17
29
or
T3N0M0
Node negative; extension through wall
IIIA
T2N2M0
T3N1-2M0
Node positive; invasion of muscularis propria or  
through wall
21
15
IIIB
T4N0-1M0
Node negative; adherence to surrounding tissue
14
9
IIIC
T4N2-3M0
T3N3M0
>3 nodes positive; invasion of serosa or adjacent structures
7 or more positive nodes; penetrates wall without invading 
serosa or adjacent structures
IV
T4N2M0
Node positive; adherence to surrounding tissue
30
3
or
T1-4N0-2M1
Distant metastases
Abbreviation: ACS, American Cancer Society; TNM, tumor, node, metastasis.
gastrectomies are required for more proximal tumors. 
The inclusion of extended lymph node dissection in 
these procedures appears to confer an added risk for 
complications without enhancing survival. The prog-
nosis following complete surgical resection depends 
on the degree of tumor penetration into the stomach 
wall and is adversely influenced by regional lymph 
node involvement, vascular invasion, and abnormal 
DNA content (i.e., aneuploidy), characteristics found in 
the vast majority of American patients. As a result, the 
probability of survival after 5 years for the 25–30% of 
patients able to undergo complete resection is ∼20% for 
distal tumors and <10% for proximal tumors, with recur-
rences continuing for at least 8 years after surgery. In 
the absence of ascites or extensive hepatic or peritoneal 
metastases, even patients whose disease is believed to 
be incurable by surgery should be offered resection of 
the primary lesion. Reduction of tumor bulk is the best 
form of palliation and may enhance the probability of 
benefit from subsequent therapy.
Gastric adenocarcinoma is a relatively radioresis-
tant tumor, and adequate control of the primary tumor 
requires doses of external beam irradiation that exceed 
the tolerance of surrounding structures, such as bowel 
mucosa and spinal cord. As a result, the major role of  
radiation therapy in patients has been palliation of pain. 
Radiation therapy alone after a complete resection does not 
prolong survival. In the setting of surgically unresectable 
 
CHAPTER 49
Gastrointestinal Tract Cancer
523
disease limited to the epigastrium, patients treated with 
3500–4000 cGy did not live longer than similar patients 
not receiving radiotherapy; however, survival was pro-
longed slightly when 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) plus leucovorin 
was given in combination with radiation therapy (3-year  
survival 50% vs 41% for radiation therapy alone). In  
this clinical setting, the 5-FU may be functioning as a 
radiosensitizer.
The administration of combinations of cytotoxic 
drugs to patients with advanced gastric carcinoma has 
been associated with partial responses in 30–50% of 
cases; responders appear to benefit from treatment. 
Such drug combinations have generally included cis-
platin combined with epirubicin or docetaxel and infu-
sional 5-FU, or with irinotecan. Despite this encouraging 
response rate, complete remissions are uncommon, the 
partial responses are transient, and the overall influence 
of multidrug therapy on survival has been unclear. The 
use of adjuvant chemotherapy alone following the com-
plete resection of a gastric cancer has only minimally 
improved survival. However, combination chemother-
apy administered before and after surgery (perioperative 
treatment) as well as postoperative chemotherapy com-
bined with radiation therapy reduces the recurrence 
rate and prolongs survival.
Primary Gastric Lymphoma
Primary lymphoma of the stomach is relatively uncom-
mon, accounting for <15% of gastric malignancies and 
∼2% of all lymphomas. The stomach is, however, the 
most frequent extranodal site for lymphoma, and gas-
tric lymphoma has increased in frequency during the 
past 30 years. The disease is difficult to distinguish 
clinically from gastric adenocarcinoma; both tumors 
are most often detected during the sixth decade of life; 
present with epigastric pain, early satiety, and gen-
eralized fatigue; and are usually characterized by 
ulcerations with a ragged, thickened mucosal pattern 
demonstrated by contrast radiographs. The diagnosis of 
lymphoma of the stomach may occasionally be made 
through cytologic brushings of the gastric mucosa but 
usually requires a biopsy at gastroscopy or laparotomy. 
Failure of gastroscopic biopsies to detect lymphoma in 
a given case should not be interpreted as being conclu-
sive, since superficial biopsies may miss the deeper lym-
phoid infiltrate. The macroscopic pathology of gastric 
lymphoma may also mimic adenocarcinoma, consisting 
of either a bulky ulcerated lesion localized in the corpus 
or antrum or a diffuse process spreading throughout the 
entire gastric submucosa and even extending into the 
duodenum. Microscopically, the vast majority of gas-
tric lymphoid tumors are non-Hodgkin’s lymphomas of 
B cell origin; Hodgkin’s disease involving the stomach 
is extremely uncommon. Histologically, these tumors 
may range from well-differentiated, superficial pro-
cesses (mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue [MALT]) to 
high-grade, large-cell lymphomas. Like gastric adeno-
carcinoma, infection with H. pylori increases the risk for 
gastric lymphoma in general and MALT lymphomas in 
particular. Gastric lymphomas spread initially to regional 
lymph nodes (often to Waldeyer’s ring) and may then 
disseminate. Gastric lymphomas are staged like other 
lymphomas.
Treatment	
Primary Gastric Lymphoma
Primary gastric lymphoma is a far more treatable dis-
ease than adenocarcinoma of the stomach, a fact that 
underscores the need for making the correct diagnosis. 
Antibiotic treatment to eradicate H. pylori infection has 
led to regression of about 75% of gastric MALT lym-
phomas and should be considered before surgery, 
radiation therapy, or chemotherapy are undertaken in 
patients having such tumors. A lack of response to such 
antimicrobial treatment has been linked to a specific 
chromosomal abnormality, i.e., t(11;18). Responding 
patients should undergo periodic endoscopic surveil-
lance because it remains unclear whether the neoplastic 
clone is eliminated or merely suppressed, although the 
response to antimicrobial treatment is quite durable. 
Subtotal gastrectomy, usually followed by combination 
chemotherapy, has led to 5-year survival rates of 40–60% 
in patients with localized high-grade lymphomas.  
The need for a major surgical procedure has been ques-
tioned, particularly in patients with preoperative radio-
graphic evidence of nodal involvement, for whom che-
motherapy (CHOP [cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, 
vincristine, and prednisone]) plus rituximab is effec-
tive therapy. A role for radiation therapy is not defined 
because most recurrences develop at distant sites.
Gastric (Nonlymphoid) Sarcoma
Leiomyosarcomas and GISTs make up 1–3% of gastric 
neoplasms. They most frequently involve the anterior 
and posterior walls of the gastric fundus and often ulcer-
ate and bleed. Even those lesions that appear benign 
on histologic examination may behave in a malignant 
fashion. These tumors rarely invade adjacent viscera and 
characteristically do not metastasize to lymph nodes, but 
they may spread to the liver and lungs. The treatment 
of choice is surgical resection. Combination chemo-
therapy should be reserved for patients with metastatic 
disease. All such tumors should be analyzed for a muta-
tion in the c-kit receptor. GISTs are unresponsive to 
conventional chemotherapy; yet ∼50% of patients expe-
rience objective response and prolonged survival when 
SECTION IX
Neoplastic Diseases of the Gastrointestinal System
524
treated with imatinib mesylate (Gleevec) (400–800 mg 
PO daily), a selective inhibitor of the c-kit tyrosine 
kinase. Many patients with GIST whose tumors have 
become refractory to imatinib subsequently benefit 
from sunitinib (Sutent), another inhibitor of the c-kit 
tyrosine kinase.
Colorectal Cancer
Incidence
Cancer of the large bowel is second only to lung can-
cer as a cause of cancer death in the United States: 
142,570 new cases occurred in 2010, and 51,370 deaths 
were due to colorectal cancer. The incidence rate has 
decreased significantly during the past 20 years, likely 
due to enhanced and more compliantly followed 
screening practices. Similarly, mortality rates in the 
United States have decreased by approximately 25%, 
resulting largely from improved treatment and earlier 
detection.
Polyps and Molecular Pathogenesis
Most colorectal cancers, regardless of etiology, arise 
from adenomatous polyps. A polyp is a grossly vis-
ible protrusion from the mucosal surface and may be 
classified pathologically as a nonneoplastic hamartoma 
(juvenile polyp), a hyperplastic mucosal proliferation 
(hyperplastic polyp), or an adenomatous polyp. Only 
adenomas are clearly premalignant, and only a minor-
ity of such lesions becomes cancer. Adenomatous 
polyps may be found in the colons of ∼30% of middle-
aged and ∼50% of elderly people; however, <1% of 
polyps ever become malignant. Most polyps produce 
no symptoms and remain clinically undetected. Occult 
blood in the stool is found in <5% of patients with 
polyps.
A number of molecular changes are noted in adeno-
matous polyps, dysplastic lesions, and polyps contain-
ing microscopic foci of tumor cells (carcinoma in situ), 
which are thought to reflect a multistep process in the 
evolution of normal colonic mucosa to life-threatening 
invasive carcinoma. These developmental steps toward 
carcinogenesis include, but are not restricted to, point 
mutations in the K-ras protooncogene; hypomethyl-
ation of DNA, leading to gene activation; loss of DNA 
(allelic loss) at the site of a tumor-suppressor gene (the 
adenomatous polyposis coli [APC] gene) on the long 
arm of chromosome 5 (5q21); allelic loss at the site of 
a tumor-suppressor gene located on chromosome 18q 
(the deleted in colorectal cancer [DCC] gene); and 
allelic loss at chromosome 17p, associated with muta-
tions in the p53 tumor-suppressor gene. Thus, the 
altered proliferative pattern of the colonic mucosa, 
which results in progression to a polyp and then to 
carcinoma, may involve the mutational activation of 
an oncogene followed by and coupled with the loss of 
genes that normally suppress tumorigenesis. It remains 
uncertain whether the genetic aberrations always occur 
in a defined order. Based on this model, however, can-
cer is believed to develop only in those polyps in which 
most (if not all) of these mutational events take place.
Clinically, the probability of an adenomatous polyp 
becoming a cancer depends on the gross appearance 
of the lesion, its histologic features, and its size. 
Adenomatous polyps may be pedunculated (stalked) 
or sessile (flat-based). Cancers develop more fre-
quently in sessile polyps. Histologically, adenoma-
tous polyps may be tubular, villous (i.e., papillary), 
or tubulovillous. Villous adenomas, most of which 
are sessile, become malignant more than three times 
as often as tubular adenomas. The likelihood that any 
polypoid lesion in the large bowel contains invasive 
cancer is related to the size of the polyp, being negli-
gible (<2%) in lesions <1.5 cm, intermediate (2–10%) 
in lesions 1.5–2.5 cm, and substantial (10%) in lesions 
>2.5 cm in size.
Following the detection of an adenomatous polyp, 
the entire large bowel should be visualized endoscopi-
cally or radiographically, since synchronous lesions 
are noted in about one-third of cases. Colonoscopy 
should then be repeated periodically, even in the 
absence of a previously documented malignancy, since 
such patients have a 30–50% probability of develop-
ing another adenoma and are at a higher-than-average 
risk for developing a colorectal carcinoma. Adenoma-
tous polyps are thought to require >5 years of growth 
before becoming clinically significant; colonoscopy 
need not be carried out more frequently than every 
3 years.
Etiology and Risk Factors
Risk factors for the development of colorectal 
cancer are listed in Table 49-4.
Table 49-4
Risk Factors for the Development of 
Colorectal Cancer
Diet: Animal fat
Hereditary syndromes (autosomal dominant inheritance)
Polyposis coli
Nonpolyposis syndrome (Lynch syndrome)
Inflammatory bowel disease
Streptococcus bovis bacteremia
Ureterosigmoidostomy
? Tobacco use
 
CHAPTER 49
Gastrointestinal Tract Cancer
525
Diet
The etiology for most cases of large-bowel cancer 
appears to be related to environmental factors. The 
disease occurs more often in upper socioeconomic 
populations who live in urban areas. Mortality from 
colorectal cancer is directly correlated with per capita 
consumption of calories, meat protein, and dietary fat 
and oil as well as elevations in the serum cholesterol 
concentration and mortality from coronary artery dis-
ease. Geographic variations in incidence are unrelated 
to genetic differences, since migrant groups tend to 
assume the large-bowel cancer incidence rates of their 
adopted countries. Furthermore, population groups 
such as Mormons and Seventh Day Adventists, whose 
lifestyle and dietary habits differ somewhat from 
those of their neighbors, have significantly lower-than-
expected incidence and mortality rates for colorectal 
cancer. Colorectal cancer has increased in Japan since 
that nation has adopted a more “Western” diet. At least 
three hypotheses have been proposed to explain the 
relationship to diet, none of which is fully satisfactory.
Animal fats
One hypothesis is that the ingestion of animal fats found 
in red meats and processed meat leads to an increased 
proportion of anaerobes in the gut microflora, resulting 
in the conversion of normal bile acids into carcinogens. 
This provocative hypothesis is supported by several 
reports of increased amounts of fecal anaerobes in the 
stools of patients with colorectal cancer. Diets high 
in animal (but not vegetable) fats are also associated 
with high serum cholesterol, which is also associated 
with enhanced risk for the development of colorectal 
adenomas and carcinomas.
Insulin resistance
The large number of calories in Western diets cou-
pled with physical inactivity has been associated with 
a higher prevalence of obesity. Obese persons develop 
insulin resistance with increased circulating levels of 
insulin, leading to higher circulating concentrations of 
insulin-like growth factor type I (IGF-I). This growth 
factor appears to stimulate proliferation of the intestinal 
mucosa.
Fiber
Contrary to prior beliefs, the results of randomized tri-
als and case-controlled studies have failed to show 
any value for dietary fiber or diets high in fruits and 
vegetables in preventing the recurrence of colorectal 
adenomas or the development of colorectal cancer. The 
weight of epidemiologic evidence, however, implicates 
diet as being the major etiologic factor for colorec-
tal cancer, particularly diets high in animal fat and in 
calories.
Hereditary Factors and Syndromes
Up to 25% of patients with colorectal cancer have 
a family history of the disease, suggesting a hereditary 
predisposition. Inherited large-bowel cancers can be 
divided into two main groups: the well-studied but 
uncommon polyposis syndromes and the more com-
mon nonpolyposis syndromes (Table 49-5).
Table 49-5 
Hereditable (Autosomal Dominant) Gastrointestinal Polyposis Syndromes
Syndrome
Distribution  
of Polyps
Histologic  
Type
Malignant 
Potential
Associated Lesions
Familial adenomatous 
polyposis
Large intestine
Adenoma
Common
None
Gardner’s syndrome
Large and  
small intestines
Adenoma
Common
Osteomas, fibromas, lipomas,  
epidermoid cysts, ampullary cancers, 
congenital hypertrophy of retinal  
pigment epithelium
Turcot’s syndrome
Large intestine
Adenoma
Common
Brain tumors
Nonpolyposis  
syndrome  
(Lynch syndrome)
Large intestine  
(often proximal)
Adenoma
Common
Endometrial and ovarian tumors
Peutz-Jeghers  
syndrome
Small and large  
intestines,  
stomach
Hamartoma
Rare
Mucocutaneous pigmentation; tumors 
of the ovary, breast, pancreas,  
endometrium
Juvenile polyposis
Large and  
small intestines, 
stomach
Hamartoma,  
rarely progressing 
to adenoma
Rare
Various congenital abnormalities
SECTION IX
Neoplastic Diseases of the Gastrointestinal System
526
Polyposis coli
Polyposis coli (familial polyposis of the colon) is a rare 
condition characterized by the appearance of thousands 
of adenomatous polyps throughout the large bowel. It 
is transmitted as an autosomal dominant trait; the occa-
sional patient with no family history probably developed 
the condition due to a spontaneous mutation. Polypo-
sis coli is associated with a deletion in the long arm of 
chromosome 5 (including the APC [adenomatous 
polyposis coli] gene) in both neoplastic (somatic muta-
tion) and normal (germ-line mutation) cells. The loss 
of this genetic material (i.e., allelic loss) results in the 
absence of tumor-suppressor genes whose protein prod-
ucts would normally inhibit neoplastic growth. The 
presence of soft tissue and bony tumors, congenital 
hypertrophy of the retinal pigment epithelium, mesen-
teric desmoid tumors, and ampullary cancers in addition 
to the colonic polyps characterizes a subset of polypo-
sis coli known as Gardner’s syndrome. The appearance of 
malignant tumors of the central nervous system accom-
panying polyposis coli defines Turcot’s syndrome. The 
colonic polyps in all these conditions are rarely present 
before puberty but are generally evident in affected indi-
viduals by age 25. If the polyposis is not treated surgi-
cally, colorectal cancer will develop in almost all patients 
before age 40. Polyposis coli results from a defect in the 
colonic mucosa, leading to an abnormal proliferative pat-
tern and impaired DNA repair mechanisms. Once the 
multiple polyps are detected, patients should undergo 
a total colectomy. Medical therapy with nonsteroi-
dal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) such as sulindac 
and cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors such as celecoxib can 
decrease the number and size of polyps in patients with 
polyposis coli; however, this effect on polyps is only 
temporary, and NSAIDs are not proven to reduce the 
risk of cancer. Colectomy remains the primary therapy/
prevention. The offspring of patients with polyposis coli, 
who often are prepubertal when the diagnosis is made 
in the parent, have a 50% risk for developing this pre-
malignant disorder and should be carefully screened by 
annual flexible sigmoidoscopy until age 35. Proctosig-
moidoscopy is a sufficient screening procedure because 
polyps tend to be evenly distributed from cecum to anus, 
making more-invasive and expensive techniques such 
as colonoscopy or barium enema unnecessary. Testing 
for occult blood in the stool is an inadequate screening 
maneuver. An alternative method for identifying carriers 
is testing DNA from peripheral blood mononuclear cells 
for the presence of a mutated APC gene. The detection 
of such a germ-line mutation can lead to a definitive 
diagnosis before the development of polyps.
Hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer
Hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer (HNPCC), 
also known as Lynch syndrome, is another autosomal 
dominant trait. It is characterized by the presence of 
three or more relatives with histologically documented 
colorectal cancer, one of whom is a first-degree relative 
of the other two; one or more cases of colorectal 
cancer diagnosed before age 50 in the family; and 
colorectal cancer involving at least two generations. In 
contrast to polyposis coli, HNPCC is associated with an 
unusually high frequency of cancer arising in the proxi-
mal large bowel. The median age for the appearance of 
an adenocarcinoma is <50 years, 10–15 years younger 
than the median age for the general population. Despite 
having a poorly differentiated histologic appearance, the 
proximal colon tumors in HNPCC have a better prog-
nosis than sporadic tumors from patients of similar age. 
Families with HNPCC often include individuals with 
multiple primary cancers; the association of colorectal 
cancer with either ovarian or endometrial carcinomas 
is especially strong in women. It has been recom-
mended that members of such families undergo biennial 
colonoscopy beginning at age 25 years, with intermit-
tent pelvic ultrasonography and endometrial biopsy 
for afflicted women; such a screening strategy has not 
yet been validated. HNPCC is associated with germ-
line mutations of several genes, particularly hMSH2 on 
chromosome 2 and hMLH1 on chromosome 3. These 
mutations lead to errors in DNA replication and are 
thought to result in DNA instability because of defec-
tive repair of DNA mismatches resulting in abnormal 
cell growth and tumor development. Testing tumor 
cells through molecular analysis of DNA or immuno­
histochemical staining of paraffin-fixed tissue for 
“microsatellite instability” (sequence changes reflecting 
defective mismatch repair) in patients younger than age 
50 with colorectal cancer and a positive family ­history 
for colorectal or endometrial cancer may identify 
­probands with HNPCC.
Inflammatory Bowel Disease
(Chap. 17) Large-bowel cancer is increased in inci-
dence in patients with long-standing inflammatory 
bowel disease (IBD). Cancers develop more commonly 
in patients with ulcerative colitis than in those with 
granulomatous colitis, but this impression may result 
in part from the occasional difficulty of differentiating 
these two conditions. The risk of colorectal cancer in 
a patient with IBD is relatively small during the initial 
10 years of the disease, but then it appears to increase 
at a rate of ∼0.5–1% per year. Cancer may develop in 
8–30% of patients after 25 years. The risk is higher in 
younger patients with pancolitis.
Cancer surveillance in patients with IBD is unsatis-
factory. Symptoms such as bloody diarrhea, abdomi-
nal cramping, and obstruction, which may signal the 
appearance of a tumor, are similar to the complaints 
caused by a flare-up of the underlying disease. In 
 
CHAPTER 49
Gastrointestinal Tract Cancer
527
patients with a history of IBD lasting ≥15 years who 
continue to experience exacerbations, the surgical 
removal of the colon can significantly reduce the risk 
for cancer and also eliminate the target organ for the 
underlying chronic gastrointestinal disorder. The value 
of such surveillance techniques as colonoscopy with 
mucosal biopsies and brushings for less-symptomatic 
individuals with chronic IBD is uncertain. The lack of 
uniformity regarding the pathologic criteria that charac-
terize dysplasia and the absence of data that such sur-
veillance reduces the development of lethal cancers have 
made this costly practice an area of controversy.
Other High-Risk Conditions
Streptococcus bovis bacteremia
For unknown reasons, individuals who develop endo-
carditis or septicemia from this fecal bacterium have a 
high incidence of occult colorectal tumors and, possibly, 
upper gastrointestinal cancers as well. Endoscopic or 
radiographic screening appears advisable.
Tobacco use
Cigarette smoking is linked to the development of 
colorectal adenomas, particularly after >35 years of 
tobacco use. No biologic explanation for this association 
has yet been proposed.
Primary Prevention
Several orally administered compounds have been 
assessed as possible inhibitors of colon cancer. The most 
effective class of chemopreventive agents is aspirin and 
other NSAIDs, which are thought to suppress cell pro-
liferation by inhibiting prostaglandin synthesis. Regular 
aspirin use reduces the risk of colon adenomas and car-
cinomas as well as death from large-bowel cancer; such 
use also appears to diminish the likelihood for developing 
additional premalignant adenomas following treat-
ment for a prior colon carcinoma. This effect of aspi-
rin on colon carcinogenesis increases with the duration 
and dosage of drug use. Oral folic acid supplements and 
oral calcium supplements reduce the risk of adenoma-
tous polyps and colorectal cancers in case-controlled 
studies. The value of vitamin D as a form of chemo-
prevention is under study. Antioxidant vitamins such as 
ascorbic acid, tocopherols, and β-carotene are ineffec-
tive at reducing the incidence of subsequent adenomas 
in patients who have undergone the removal of a colon 
adenoma. Estrogen-replacement therapy has been asso-
ciated with a reduction in the risk of colorectal cancer 
in women, conceivably by an effect on bile acid synthe-
sis and composition or by decreasing synthesis of IGF-I. 
The otherwise unexplained reduction in colorectal 
cancer mortality rate in women may be a result of the 
widespread use of estrogen replacement in postmeno-
pausal individuals.
Screening
The rationale for colorectal cancer screening pro-
grams is that earlier detection of localized, superficial 
cancers in asymptomatic individuals will increase the 
surgical cure rate. Such screening programs are impor-
tant for individuals having a family history of the disease 
in first-degree relatives. The relative risk for develop-
ing colorectal cancer increases to 1.75 in such individu-
als and may be even higher if the relative was afflicted 
before age 60. The prior use of proctosigmoidoscopy 
as a screening tool was based on the observation that 
60% of early lesions are located in the rectosigmoid. For 
unexplained reasons, however, the proportion of large-
bowel cancers arising in the rectum has been decreas-
ing during the past several decades, with a correspond-
ing increase in the proportion of cancers in the more 
proximal descending colon. As such, the potential for 
rigid proctosigmoidoscopy to detect a sufficient num-
ber of occult neoplasms to make the procedure cost- 
effective has been questioned. Flexible, fiberoptic 
sigmoidoscopes permit trained operators to visualize 
the colon for up to 60 cm, which enhances the capabil-
ity for cancer detection. However, this technique still 
leaves the proximal half of the large bowel unscreened.
Most programs directed at the early detection of 
colorectal cancers have focused on digital rectal exami-
nations and fecal occult blood testing. The digital exam-
ination should be part of any routine physical evaluation 
in adults older than age 40 years, serving as a screening 
test for prostate cancer in men, a component of the pelvic 
examination in women, and an inexpensive maneuver 
for the detection of masses in the rectum. The devel-
opment of the Hemoccult test has greatly facilitated 
the detection of occult fecal blood. Unfortunately, 
even when performed optimally, the Hemoccult test 
has major limitations as a screening technique. About 
50% of patients with documented colorectal cancers 
have a negative fecal Hemoccult test, consistent with 
the intermittent bleeding pattern of these tumors. When 
random cohorts of asymptomatic persons have been 
tested, 2–4% have Hemoccult-positive stools. Colorec-
tal cancers have been found in <10% of these “test-
positive” cases, with benign polyps being detected in 
an additional 20–30%. Thus, a colorectal neoplasm will 
not be found in most asymptomatic individuals with 
occult blood in their stool. Nonetheless, persons found 
to have Hemoccult-positive stool routinely undergo 
further medical evaluation, including sigmoidoscopy, 
barium enema, and/or colonoscopy—procedures that 
are not only uncomfortable and expensive but also asso-
ciated with a small risk for significant complications. 
The added cost of these studies would appear justifiable 
SECTION IX
Neoplastic Diseases of the Gastrointestinal System
528
if the small number of patients found to have occult 
neoplasms because of Hemoccult screening could be 
shown to have an improved prognosis and prolonged 
survival. Prospectively controlled trials showed a sta-
tistically significant reduction in mortality rate from 
colorectal cancer for individuals undergoing annual 
screening. However, this benefit only emerged after 
>13 years of follow-up and was extremely expensive 
to achieve, since all positive tests (most of which were 
false-positive) were followed by colonoscopy. More-
over, these colonoscopic examinations quite likely pro-
vided the opportunity for cancer prevention through the 
removal of potentially premalignant adenomatous polyps 
since the eventual development of cancer was reduced 
by 20% in the cohort undergoing annual screening.
Screening techniques for large-bowel cancer in 
asymptomatic persons remain unsatisfactory. Compli-
ance with any screening strategy within the general 
population is poor. At present, the American Cancer 
Society suggests fecal Hemoccult screening annually and 
flexible sigmoidoscopy every 5 years beginning at age 
50 for asymptomatic individuals having no colorectal 
cancer risk factors. The American Cancer Society 
has also endorsed a “total colon examination” (i.e., 
colonoscopy or double-contrast barium enema) every 
10 years as an alternative to Hemoccult testing with 
periodic flexible sigmoidoscopy. Colonoscopy has been 
shown to be superior to double-contrast barium enema 
and also to have a higher sensitivity for detecting vil-
lous or dysplastic adenomas or cancers than the strategy 
employing occult fecal blood testing and flexible 
sigmoidoscopy. Whether colonoscopy performed every 
10 years beginning after age 50 will prove to be cost-
effective and whether it may be supplanted as a screen-
ing maneuver by sophisticated radiographic techniques 
(“virtual colonoscopy”) remains unclear. More effec-
tive techniques for screening are needed, perhaps tak-
ing advantage of the molecular changes that have been 
described in these tumors. Analysis of fecal DNA for 
multiple mutations associated with colorectal cancer is 
being tested.
Clinical Features
Presenting symptoms
Symptoms vary with the anatomic location of the 
tumor. Since stool is relatively liquid as it passes through 
the ileocecal valve into the right colon, cancers arising 
in the cecum and ascending colon may become quite 
large without resulting in any obstructive symptoms or 
noticeable alterations in bowel habits. Lesions of the 
right colon commonly ulcerate, leading to chronic, 
insidious blood loss without a change in the appearance 
of the stool. Consequently, patients with tumors of the 
ascending colon often present with symptoms such as 
fatigue, palpitations, and even angina pectoris and are 
found to have a hypochromic, microcytic anemia indic-
ative of iron deficiency. Since the cancer may bleed 
intermittently, a random fecal occult blood test may be 
negative. As a result, the unexplained presence of iron-
deficiency anemia in any adult (with the possible excep-
tion of a premenopausal, multiparous woman) mandates 
a thorough endoscopic and/or radiographic visualiza-
tion of the entire large bowel (Fig. 49-1).
Since stool becomes more formed as it passes into 
the transverse and descending colon, tumors arising 
there tend to impede the passage of stool, resulting in 
the development of abdominal cramping, occasional 
obstruction, and even perforation. Radiographs of the 
abdomen often reveal characteristic annular, constricting 
lesions (“apple-core” or “napkin-ring”) (Fig. 49-2).
Cancers arising in the rectosigmoid are often associ-
ated with hematochezia, tenesmus, and narrowing of 
the caliber of stool; anemia is an infrequent finding. 
While these symptoms may lead patients and their phy-
sicians to suspect the presence of hemorrhoids, the 
development of rectal bleeding and/or altered bowel 
habits demands a prompt digital rectal examination and 
proctosigmoidoscopy.
Staging, prognostic factors, and patterns  
of spread
The prognosis for individuals having colorectal cancer 
is related to the depth of tumor penetration into the 
bowel wall and the presence of both regional lymph 
Figure 49-1 
Double-contrast air-barium enema revealing a sessile 
tumor of the cecum in a patient with iron-deficiency anemia 
and guaiac-positive stool. The lesion at surgery was a stage II 
adenocarcinoma.
 
CHAPTER 49
Gastrointestinal Tract Cancer
529
node involvement and distant metastases. These vari-
ables are incorporated into the staging system intro-
duced by Dukes and applied to a TNM classification 
method, in which T represents the depth of tumor pen-
etration, N the presence of lymph node involvement, 
and M the presence or absence of distant metastases 
(Fig. 49-3). Superficial lesions that do not involve 
regional lymph nodes and do not penetrate through the 
submucosa (T1) or the muscularis (T2) are designated 
as stage I (T1–2N0M0) disease; tumors that penetrate 
through the muscularis but have not spread to lymph 
nodes are stage II disease (T3N0M0); regional lymph 
node involvement defines stage III (TXN1M0) disease; 
and metastatic spread to sites such as liver, lung, or bone 
indicates stage IV (TXNXM1) disease. Unless gross evi-
dence of metastatic disease is present, disease stage can-
not be determined accurately before surgical resection 
and pathologic analysis of the operative specimens. It is 
not clear whether the detection of nodal metastases by 
special immunohistochemical molecular techniques has 
the same prognostic implications as disease detected by 
routine light microscopy.
Most recurrences after a surgical resection of a large-
bowel cancer occur within the first 4 years, making 
5-year survival a fairly reliable indicator of cure. The 
likelihood for 5-year survival in patients with colorec-
tal cancer is stage-related (Fig. 49-3). That likelihood 
has improved during the past several decades when 
similar surgical stages have been compared. The most 
plausible explanation for this improvement is more 
thorough intraoperative and pathologic staging. In par-
ticular, more exacting attention to pathologic detail has 
revealed that the prognosis following the resection of a 
colorectal cancer is not related merely to the presence 
or absence of regional lymph node involvement. Prog-
nosis may be more precisely gauged by the number of 
involved lymph nodes (one to three lymph nodes versus 
four or more lymph nodes) and the number of nodes 
Figure 49-2 
Annular, constricting adenocarcinoma of the descending 
colon. This radiographic appearance is referred to as an 
“apple-core” lesion and is always highly suggestive of 
malignancy.
Staging of colorectal cancer
Stage at
presentation
Mucosa
Serosa
Fat
Lymph nodes
Muscularis
mucosa
Muscularis
propria
Submucosa
Stage
I
II
T3
Through
muscularis
70–85%
31%
25%
IV
M
Distant
metastases
<5%
20%
15%
T2
Not through
muscularis
>90%
T1
No deeper
than
submucosa
>95%
23%
34%
III
N2
 ≥4 lymph node
metastases
25–60%
N1
1–3 lymph node
metastases
50–70%
26%
26%
Colon
Rectal
Extent of tumor
5-year survival
Figure 49-3 
Staging and prognosis for patients with colorectal cancer.
SECTION IX
Neoplastic Diseases of the Gastrointestinal System
530
examined. A minimum of 12 sampled lymph nodes is 
thought necessary to accurately define tumor stage, and 
the more nodes examined the better. Other predic-
tors of a poor prognosis after a total surgical resection 
include tumor penetration through the bowel wall into 
pericolic fat, poorly differentiated histology, perforation 
and/or tumor adherence to adjacent organs (increas-
ing the risk for an anatomically adjacent recurrence), 
and venous invasion by tumor (Table 49-6). Regard-
less of the clinicopathologic stage, a preoperative eleva-
tion of the plasma carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) 
level predicts eventual tumor recurrence. The presence 
of aneuploidy and specific chromosomal deletions, such 
as allelic loss in chromosome 18q (involving the DCC 
gene) in tumor cells, appears to predict a higher risk for 
metastatic spread, particularly in patients with stage II 
(T3N0M0) disease. Conversely, the detection of mic-
rosatellite instability in tumor tissue indicates a more 
favorable outcome. In contrast to most other cancers, 
the prognosis in colorectal cancer is not influenced by 
the size of the primary lesion when adjusted for nodal 
involvement and histologic differentiation.
Cancers of the large bowel generally spread to 
regional lymph nodes or to the liver via the portal 
venous circulation. The liver represents the most fre-
quent visceral site of metastasis; it is the initial site of 
distant spread in one-third of recurring colorectal can-
cers and is involved in more than two-thirds of such 
patients at the time of death. In general, colorectal can-
cer rarely spreads to the lungs, supraclavicular lymph 
nodes, bone, or brain without prior spread to the liver. 
A major exception to this rule occurs in patients having 
primary tumors in the distal rectum, from which tumor 
cells may spread through the paravertebral venous 
plexus, escaping the portal venous system and thereby 
reaching the lungs or supraclavicular lymph nodes with-
out hepatic involvement. The median survival after 
the detection of distant metastases has ranged in the 
past from 6–9 months (hepatomegaly, abnormal liver 
chemistries) to 24–30 months (small liver nodule ini-
tially identified by elevated CEA level and subsequent 
CT scan), but effective systemic therapy is improving 
the prognosis.
Efforts to use gene expression profiles to identify 
patients at risk of recurrence or those particularly likely 
to benefit from adjuvant therapy have not yet yielded 
practice-changing results. Despite a burgeoning litera-
ture examining a host of prognostic factors, pathologic 
stage at diagnosis is the best predictor of long-term 
prognosis. Patients with lymphovascular invasion and 
high preoperative CEA levels are likely to have a more 
aggressive clinical course.
Treatment	
Colorectal Cancer
Total resection of tumor is the optimal treatment when 
a malignant lesion is detected in the large bowel. An 
evaluation for the presence of metastatic disease, 
including a thorough physical examination, chest radio-
graph, biochemical assessment of liver function, and 
measurement of the plasma CEA level, should be per-
formed before surgery. When possible, a colonoscopy of 
the entire large bowel should be performed to identify 
synchronous neoplasms and/or polyps. The detection 
of metastases should not preclude surgery in patients 
with tumor-related symptoms such as gastrointestinal 
bleeding or obstruction, but it often prompts the use of 
a less radical operative procedure. At the time of lapa-
rotomy, the entire peritoneal cavity should be exam-
ined, with thorough inspection of the liver, pelvis, and 
hemidiaphragm and careful palpation of the full length 
of the large bowel. Following recovery from a complete 
resection, patients should be observed carefully for  
5 years by semiannual physical examinations and yearly 
blood chemistry measurements. If a complete colo-
noscopy was not performed preoperatively, it should 
be carried out within the first several postoperative 
months. Some authorities favor measuring plasma CEA 
levels at 3-month intervals because of the sensitivity of 
this test as a marker for otherwise undetectable tumor 
recurrence. Subsequent endoscopic or radiographic 
surveillance of the large bowel, probably at triennial 
intervals, is indicated, since patients who have been 
cured of one colorectal cancer have a 3–5% probability 
of developing an additional bowel cancer during their 
lifetime and a >15% risk for the development of adeno-
matous polyps. Anastomotic (“suture-line”) recurrences 
are infrequent in colorectal cancer patients, provided 
the surgical resection margins are adequate and free 
of tumor. The value of periodic CT scans of the abdo-
men, assessing for an early, asymptomatic indication of 
tumor recurrence, is an area of uncertainty, with some 
Table 49-6 
Predictors of Poor Outcome Following 
Total Surgical Resection of Colorectal 
Cancer
Tumor spread to regional lymph nodes
Number of regional lymph nodes involved
Tumor penetration through the bowel wall
Poorly differentiated histology
Perforation
Tumor adherence to adjacent organs
Venous invasion
Preoperative elevation of CEA titer (>5 ng/mL)
Aneuploidy
Specific chromosomal deletion (e.g., allelic loss on  
chromosome 18q)
Abbreviation: CEA, carcinoembryonic antigen.
 
CHAPTER 49
Gastrointestinal Tract Cancer
531
experts recommending the test be performed annually 
for the first 3 postoperative years.
Radiation therapy to the pelvis is recommended 
for patients with rectal cancer because it reduces the 
20–25% probability of regional recurrences follow-
ing complete surgical resection of stage II or III tumors, 
especially if they have penetrated through the serosa. 
This alarmingly high rate of local disease recurrence is 
believed to be due to the fact that the contained ana-
tomic space within the pelvis limits the extent of the 
resection and because the rich lymphatic network of 
the pelvic side wall immediately adjacent to the rectum  
facilitates the early spread of malignant cells into  
surgically inaccessible tissue. The use of sharp rather 
than blunt dissection of rectal cancers (total mesorectal 
excision) appears to reduce the likelihood of local disease 
recurrence to ∼10%. Radiation therapy, either pre- or 
postoperatively, reduces the likelihood of pelvic recur-
rences but does not appear to prolong survival. Combining  
postoperative radiation therapy with 5-fluorouracil-
based chemotherapy lowers local recurrence rates and 
improves overall survival. Preoperative radiotherapy is 
indicated for patients with large, potentially unresect-
able rectal cancers; such lesions may shrink enough to 
permit subsequent surgical removal. Radiation therapy 
is not effective in the primary treatment of colon cancer.
Systemic therapy for patients with colorectal cancer 
has become more effective. 5-FU remains the back-
bone of treatment for this disease. Partial responses 
are obtained in 15–20% of patients. The probability of 
tumor response appears to be somewhat greater for 
patients with liver metastases when chemotherapy is 
infused directly into the hepatic artery, but intraarte-
rial treatment is costly and toxic and does not appear 
to appreciably prolong survival. The concomitant 
administration of folinic acid (leucovorin) improves the 
efficacy of 5-FU in patients with advanced colorectal 
cancer, presumably by enhancing the binding of 5-FU 
to its target enzyme, thymidylate synthase. A threefold 
improvement in the partial response rate is noted when 
folinic acid is combined with 5-FU; however, the effect 
on survival is marginal, and the optimal dose schedule 
remains to be defined. 5-FU is generally administered 
intravenously but may also be given orally in the form 
of capecitabine (Xeloda) with seemingly similar efficacy.
Irinotecan (CPT-11), a topoisomerase 1 inhibitor, 
prolongs survival when compared to supportive care  
in patients whose disease has progressed on 5-FU.  
Furthermore, the addition of irinotecan to 5-FU and 
leucovorin (LV) improves response rates and survival of 
patients with metastatic disease. The FOLFIRI regimen is 
as follows: irinotecan, 180 mg/m2 as a 90-min infusion 
on day 1; LV, 400 mg/m2 as a 2-h infusion during irinote-
can administration; immediately followed by 5-FU bolus, 
400 mg/m2, and 46-h continuous infusion of 2.4–3 g/m2 
every 2 weeks. Diarrhea is the major side effect from 
irinotecan. Oxaliplatin, a platinum analogue, also 
improves the response rate when added to 5-FU and LV 
as initial treatment of patients with metastatic disease.  
The FOLFOX regimen is the following: 2-h infusion 
of LV (400 mg/m2 per day) followed by a 5-FU bolus 
(400 mg/m2 per day) and 22-h infusion (1200 mg/m2) 
every 2 weeks, together with oxaliplatin, 85 mg/m2 as 
a 2-h infusion on day 1. Oxaliplatin frequently causes a 
dose-dependent sensory neuropathy that often resolves 
following the cessation of therapy. FOLFIRI and FOLFOX 
are equal in efficacy. In metastatic disease, these regi-
mens may produce median survivals of 2 years.
Monoclonal antibodies are also effective in patients 
with advanced colorectal cancer. Cetuximab (Erbitux) 
and panitumumab (Vectibix) are directed against the 
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), a transmem-
brane glycoprotein involved in signaling pathways 
affecting growth and proliferation of tumor cells. Both 
cetuximab and panitumumab, when given alone, have 
been shown to benefit a small proportion of previously 
treated patients, and cetuximab appears to have thera-
peutic synergy with such chemotherapeutic agents as 
irinotecan, even in patients previously resistant to this  
drug; this suggests that cetuximab can reverse cellular 
resistance to cytotoxic chemotherapy. The antibodies are 
not effective in the subset of colon tumors that contain 
mutated K-ras. The use of both cetuximab and panitu-
mumab can lead to an acne-like rash, with the develop-
ment and severity of the rash being correlated with the 
likelihood of antitumor efficacy. Inhibitors of the EGFR 
tyrosine kinase such as erlotinib (Tarceva) do not appear 
to be effective in colorectal cancer.
Bevacizumab (Avastin) is a monoclonal antibody 
directed against the vascular endothelial growth fac-
tor (VEGF) and is thought to act as an anti-angiogenesis  
agent. The addition of bevacizumab to irinotecan- 
containing combinations and to FOLFOX initially 
appeared to improve the outcome observed with che-
motherapy alone, but subsequent studies have been 
less convincing. The use of bevacizumab can lead to 
hypertension, proteinuria, and an increased likelihood 
of thromboembolic events.
Patients with solitary hepatic metastases without 
clinical or radiographic evidence of additional tumor 
involvement should be considered for partial liver 
resection, because such procedures are associated with 
5-year survival rates of 25–30% when performed on 
selected individuals by experienced surgeons.
The administration of 5-FU and LV for 6 months after 
resection of tumor in patients with stage III disease 
leads to a 40% decrease in recurrence rates and 30% 
improvement in survival. The likelihood of recurrence 
SECTION IX
Neoplastic Diseases of the Gastrointestinal System
532
has been further reduced when oxaliplatin has been 
combined with 5-FU and LV (e.g., FOLFOX); unexpect-
edly, the addition of irinotecan to 5-FU and LV as well 
as the addition of either bevacizumab or cetuximab to 
FOLFOX did not enhance outcome. Patients with stage 
II tumors do not appear to benefit applicably from adju-
vant therapy with the use of such treatment generally 
restricted to those patients having biologic character-
istics (e.g., perforated tumors, Ty lesions, lymphovascu-
lar invasion) that place them at higher than usual risk 
for recurrence. In rectal cancer, the delivery of preop-
erative or postoperative combined modality therapy 
(5-FU plus radiation therapy) reduces the risk of recur-
rence and increases the chance of cure for patients with 
stages II and III tumors, with the preoperative approach 
being better tolerated. The 5-FU acts as a radiosensi-
tizer when delivered together with radiation therapy. 
Life-extending adjuvant therapy is used in only about 
half of patients older than age 65 years. This age bias is 
completely inappropriate as the benefits and likely the 
tolerance of adjuvant therapy in patients aged 65+ years 
appear similar to those seen in younger individuals.
Tumors of the Small Intestine
Small-bowel tumors comprise <3% of gastrointestinal 
neoplasms. Because of their rarity, a correct diagnosis 
is often delayed. Abdominal symptoms are usually vague 
and poorly defined, and conventional radiographic studies 
of the upper and lower intestinal tract often appear 
normal. Small-bowel tumors should be considered 
in the differential diagnosis in the following situations: 
(1) recurrent, unexplained episodes of crampy abdomi-
nal pain; (2) intermittent bouts of intestinal obstruction, 
especially in the absence of IBD or prior abdominal sur-
gery; (3) intussusception in the adult; and (4) evidence 
of chronic intestinal bleeding in the presence of nega-
tive conventional contrast radiographs. A careful small-
bowel barium study is the diagnostic procedure of 
choice; the diagnostic accuracy may be improved by 
infusing barium through a nasogastric tube placed into 
the duodenum (enteroclysis).
Benign Tumors
The histology of benign small-bowel tumors is difficult 
to predict on clinical and radiologic grounds alone. The 
symptomatology of benign tumors is not distinctive, 
with pain, obstruction, and hemorrhage being the most 
frequent symptoms. These tumors are usually discovered 
during the fifth and sixth decades of life, more often 
in the distal rather than the proximal small intestine. 
The most common benign tumors are adenomas, leio-
myomas, lipomas, and angiomas.
Adenomas
These tumors include those of the islet cells and Brunner’s 
glands as well as polypoid adenomas. Islet cell adenomas are 
occasionally located outside the pancreas; the associated 
syndromes are discussed in Chap. 52. Brunner’s gland 
adenomas are not truly neoplastic but represent a hyper-
trophy or hyperplasia of submucosal duodenal glands. 
These appear as small nodules in the duodenal mucosa 
that secrete a highly viscous alkaline mucus. Most often, 
this is an incidental radiographic finding not associated 
with any specific clinical disorder.
Polypoid adenomas
About 25% of benign small-bowel tumors are polyp-
oid adenomas (Table 49-5). They may present as single 
polypoid lesions or, less commonly, as papillary villous 
adenomas. As in the colon, the sessile or papillary form 
of the tumor is sometimes associated with a coexist-
ing carcinoma. Occasionally, patients with Gardner’s 
syndrome develop premalignant adenomas in the small 
bowel; such lesions are generally in the duodenum. 
Multiple polypoid tumors may occur throughout the 
small bowel (and occasionally the stomach and col-
orectum) in the Peutz-Jeghers syndrome. The polyps 
are usually hamartomas (juvenile polyps) having a low 
potential for malignant degeneration. Mucocutaneous 
melanin deposits as well as tumors of the ovary, breast, 
pancreas, and endometrium are also associated with this 
autosomal dominant condition.
Leiomyomas
These neoplasms arise from smooth-muscle components 
of the intestine and are usually intramural, affecting 
the overlying mucosa. Ulceration of the mucosa may 
cause gastrointestinal hemorrhage of varying severity. 
Cramping or intermittent abdominal pain is frequently 
encountered.
Lipomas
These tumors occur with greatest frequency in the distal 
ileum and at the ileocecal valve. They have a character-
istic radiolucent appearance and are usually intramural 
and asymptomatic, but on occasion cause bleeding.
Angiomas
While not true neoplasms, these lesions are important 
because they frequently cause intestinal bleeding. They 
may take the form of telangiectasia or hemangiomas. 
Multiple intestinal telangiectasias occur in a non­
hereditary form confined to the gastrointestinal tract 
or as part of the hereditary Osler-Rendu-Weber 
syndrome. Vascular tumors may also take the form of 
 
CHAPTER 49
Gastrointestinal Tract Cancer
533
isolated hemangiomas, most commonly in the jejunum. 
Angiography, especially during bleeding, is the best 
procedure for evaluating these lesions.
Malignant Tumors
While rare, small-bowel malignancies occur in patients 
with long-standing regional enteritis and celiac sprue 
as well as in individuals with AIDS. Malignant tumors 
of the small bowel are frequently associated with fever, 
weight loss, anorexia, bleeding, and a palpable abdominal 
mass. After ampullary carcinomas (many of which arise 
from biliary or pancreatic ducts), the most frequently 
occurring small-bowel malignancies are adenocarcinomas, 
lymphomas, carcinoid tumors, and leiomyosarcomas.
Adenocarcinomas
The most common primary cancers of the small bowel 
are adenocarcinomas, accounting for ∼50% of malignant 
tumors. These cancers occur most often in the distal 
duodenum and proximal jejunum, where they tend to 
ulcerate and cause hemorrhage or obstruction. Radio-
logically, they may be confused with chronic duodenal 
ulcer disease or with Crohn’s disease if the patient has 
long-standing regional enteritis. The diagnosis is best 
made by endoscopy and biopsy under direct vision. 
Surgical resection is the treatment of choice.
Lymphomas
Lymphoma in the small bowel may be primary or 
secondary. A diagnosis of a primary intestinal lymphoma 
requires histologic confirmation in a clinical setting in 
which palpable adenopathy and hepatosplenomegaly are 
absent and no evidence of lymphoma is seen on chest 
radiograph, CT scan, or peripheral blood smear or on 
bone marrow aspiration and biopsy. Symptoms referable 
to the small bowel are present, usually accompanied by 
an anatomically discernible lesion. Secondary lymphoma 
of the small bowel consists of involvement of the intes-
tine by a lymphoid malignancy extending from involved 
retroperitoneal or mesenteric lymph nodes.
Primary intestinal lymphoma accounts for ∼20% of 
malignancies of the small bowel. These neoplasms are 
non-Hodgkin’s lymphomas; they usually have a diffuse, 
large-cell histology and are of T cell origin. Intestinal 
lymphoma involves the ileum, jejunum, and duodenum, 
in decreasing frequency—a pattern that mirrors the rela-
tive amount of normal lymphoid cells in these anatomic 
areas. The risk of small-bowel lymphoma is increased in 
patients with a prior history of malabsorptive conditions 
(e.g., celiac sprue), regional enteritis, and depressed 
immune function due to congenital immunodeficiency 
syndromes, prior organ transplantation, autoimmune 
disorders, or AIDS.
The development of localized or nodular masses 
that narrow the lumen results in periumbilical pain 
(made worse by eating) as well as weight loss, vomiting, 
and occasional intestinal obstruction. The diagnosis 
of small-bowel lymphoma may be suspected from the 
appearance on contrast radiographs of patterns such as 
infiltration and thickening of mucosal folds, mucosal 
nodules, areas of irregular ulceration, or stasis of contrast 
material. The diagnosis can be confirmed by surgical 
exploration and resection of involved segments. Intesti-
nal lymphoma can occasionally be diagnosed by peroral 
intestinal mucosal biopsy, but since the disease mainly 
involves the lamina propria, full-thickness surgical 
biopsies are usually required.
Resection of the tumor constitutes the initial treat-
ment modality. While postoperative radiation therapy 
has been given to some patients following a total resec-
tion, most authorities favor short-term (three cycles) 
systemic treatment with combination chemotherapy. 
The frequent presence of widespread intraabdomi-
nal disease at the time of diagnosis and the occasional 
multicentricity of the tumor often make a total resec-
tion impossible. The probability of sustained remission 
or cure is ∼75% in patients with localized disease but is 
∼25% in individuals with unresectable lymphoma. In 
patients whose tumors are not resected, chemotherapy 
may lead to bowel perforation.
A unique form of small-bowel lymphoma, diffusely 
involving the entire intestine, was first described in 
oriental Jews and Arabs and is referred to as immunopro-
liferative small intestinal disease (IPSID), Mediterranean lym-
phoma, or α heavy chain disease. This is a B cell tumor. 
The typical presentation includes chronic diarrhea and 
steatorrhea associated with vomiting and abdominal 
cramps; clubbing of the digits may be observed. A curious 
feature in many patients with IPSID is the presence in 
the blood and intestinal secretions of an abnormal IgA 
that contains a shortened α heavy chain and is devoid 
of light chains. It is suspected that the abnormal α 
chains are produced by plasma cells infiltrating the 
small bowel. The clinical course of patients with IPSID 
is generally one of exacerbations and remissions, with 
death frequently resulting from either progressive 
malnutrition and wasting or the development of an 
aggressive lymphoma. The use of oral antibiotics such as 
tetracycline appears to be beneficial in the early phases 
of the disorder, suggesting a possible infectious etiol-
ogy. Combination chemotherapy has been administered 
during later stages of the disease, with variable results. 
Results are better when antibiotics and chemotherapy 
are combined.
Carcinoid tumors
Carcinoid tumors arise from argentaffin cells of the 
crypts of Lieberkühn and are found from the distal 
SECTION IX
Neoplastic Diseases of the Gastrointestinal System
534
duodenum to the ascending colon, areas embryologi-
cally derived from the midgut. More than 50% of intes-
tinal carcinoids are found in the distal ileum, with most 
congregating close to the ileocecal valve. Most intesti-
nal carcinoids are asymptomatic and of low malignant 
potential, but invasion and metastases may occur, lead-
ing to the carcinoid syndrome (Chap. 52).
Leiomyosarcomas
Leiomyosarcomas often are >5 cm in diameter and 
may be palpable on abdominal examination. Bleed-
ing, obstruction, and perforation are common. Such 
tumors should be analyzed for the expression of mutant 
c-kit receptor (defining GIST), and in the presence of 
metastatic disease, justifying treatment with imatinib 
mesylate (Gleevec) or, in imatinib-refractory patients, 
sunitinib (Sutent).
Cancers of the Anus
Cancers of the anus account for 1–2% of the malignant 
tumors of the large bowel. Most such lesions arise in the 
anal canal, the anatomic area extending from the ano-
rectal ring to a zone approximately halfway between 
the pectinate (or dentate) line and the anal verge. 
Carcinomas arising proximal to the pectinate line (i.e., 
in the transitional zone between the glandular mucosa 
of the rectum and the squamous epithelium of the dis-
tal anus) are known as basaloid, cuboidal, or cloacogenic 
tumors; about one-third of anal cancers have this histo-
logic pattern. Malignancies arising distal to the pectinate 
line have squamous histology, ulcerate more frequently, 
and constitute ∼55% of anal cancers. The prognosis for 
patients with basaloid and squamous cell cancers of the 
anus is identical when corrected for tumor size and the 
presence or absence of nodal spread.
The development of anal cancer is associated with 
infection by human papillomavirus, the same organ-
ism etiologically linked to cervical cancer. The virus 
is sexually transmitted. The infection may lead to anal 
warts (condyloma acuminata), which may progress 
to anal intraepithelial neoplasia and on to squamous 
cell carcinoma. The risk for anal cancer is increased 
among homosexual males, presumably related to anal 
intercourse. Anal cancer risk is increased in both men 
and women with AIDS, possibly because their immu-
nosuppressed state permits more severe papillomavirus 
infection. Anal cancers occur most commonly in mid-
dle-aged persons and are more frequent in women than 
men. At diagnosis, patients may experience bleeding, 
pain, sensation of a perianal mass, and pruritus.
Radical surgery (abdominal-perineal resection with 
lymph node sampling and a permanent colostomy) was 
once the treatment of choice for this tumor type. The 
5-year survival rate after such a procedure was 55–70% 
in the absence of spread to regional lymph nodes and 
<20% if nodal involvement was present. An alterna-
tive therapeutic approach combining external beam 
radiation therapy with concomitant chemotherapy has 
resulted in biopsy-proven disappearance of all tumor 
in >80% of patients whose initial lesion was <3 cm 
in size. Tumor recurrences develop in <10% of these 
patients, meaning that ∼70% of patients with anal 
cancers can be cured with nonoperative treatment. 
Surgery should be reserved for the minority of individ-
uals who are found to have residual tumor after being 
managed initially with radiation therapy combined 
with chemotherapy.
 Brian I. Carr 
535
 hePatOCellular CarCinOma 
 incidEncE 
 
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the 
most common malignancies worldwide. The 
annual global incidence is approximately 1 million 
cases, with a male to female ratio of approximately 4:1 
(1:1 without cirrhosis to 9:1 in many high-incidence 
countries). The incidence rate equals the death rate. In 
the United States, approximately 22,000 new cases are 
diagnosed annually, with 18,000 deaths. The death rates 
in males in low-incidence countries such as the United 
States are 1.9 per 100,000 per year; in intermediate areas 
such as Austria and South Africa, they range from 5.1–20; 
and in high-incidence areas such as in the Orient (China 
and Korea) as high as 23.1–150 per 100,000 per year 
 ( Table 50-1 ) . The incidence of HCC in the United 
States is approximately 3 per 100,000 persons, with sig-
nifi cant gender, ethnic, and geographic variations. These 
numbers are rapidly increasing and may be an underesti-
mate. Approximately 4 million chronic hepatitis C virus 
(HCV) carriers are in the United States alone. Approxi-
mately 10% of them or 400,000 are likely to develop 
cirrhosis. Approximately 5% or 20,000 of these may 
develop HCC annually. Add to this the two other com-
mon predisposing factors—hepatitis B virus (HBV) and 
chronic alcohol consumption—and 60,000 new HCC 
cases annually seem possible. Future advances in HCC 
survival will likely depend in part on immunization strat-
egies for HBV (and HCV) and earlier diagnosis by 
screening of patients at risk of HCC development. 
 Current directions 
 With the U.S. HCV epidemic, HCC is increasing in most 
states, and obesity-associated liver disease (nonalcoholic ste-
atohepatitis [NASH]) is increasingly recognized as a cause. 
 TUMORS OF THE LIVER AND 
BILIARY TREE 
 ChaPter 50 
 EpidEmiology 
There are two general types of epidemiologic 
studies of HCC—those of country-based inci-
dence rates ( Table 50-1 ) and those of migrants. 
Endemic hot spots occur in areas of China and sub-
Saharan Africa, which are associated both with high 
endemic hepatitis B carrier rates as well as mycotoxin 
contamination of foodstuffs (afl atoxin B 1 ), stored grains, 
drinking water, and soil. Environmental factors are 
important, for example, Japanese in Japan have a higher 
Table 50-1
 agE-adJUstEd incidEncE ratEs For 
hEpatocEllUlar carcinoma 
pErsons pEr 100,000 pEr yEar
coUntry
malE
FEmalE
Argentina
6.0
2.5
Brazil, Recife
9.2
8.3
Brazil, Sao Paulo
3.8
2.6
Mozambique
112.9
30.8
South Africa, Cape: Black
26.3
8.4
South Africa, Cape: White
1.2
0.6
Senegal
25.6
9.0
Nigeria
15.4
3.2
Gambia
33.1
12.6
Burma
25.5
8.8
Japan
7.2
2.2
Korea
13.8
3.2
China, Shanghai
34.4
11.6
India, Bombay
4.9
2.5
India, Madras
2.1
0.7
Great Britain
1.6
0.8
France
6.9
1.2
Italy, Varese
7.1
2.7
Norway
1.8
1.1
Spain, Navarra
7.9
4.7
SECTION IX
Neoplastic Diseases of the Gastrointestinal System
536
incidence than those living in Hawaii, who in turn have 
a higher incidence than those living in California.
Etiologic Factors
Chemical carcinogens
Causative agents for HCC have been studied 
along two general lines. First are agents identified 
as carcinogenic in experimental animals (particu-
larly rodents) that are thought to be present in the human 
environment (Table 50-2). Second is the association of 
HCC with various other clinical conditions. Probably the 
best-studied and most potent ubiquitous natural chemical 
carcinogen is a product of the Aspergillus fungus, called 
aflatoxin B1. This mold and aflatoxin product can be 
found in a variety of stored grains in hot, humid places, 
where peanuts and rice are stored in unrefrigerated 
conditions. Aflatoxin contamination of foodstuffs corre-
lates well with incidence rates in Africa and to some extent 
in China. In endemic areas of China, even farm animals 
such as ducks have HCC. The most potent carcinogens 
appear to be natural products of plants, fungi, and bacteria, 
such as bush trees containing pyrrolizidine alkaloids as well 
as tannic acid and safrole. Pollutants such as pesticides and 
insecticides are known rodent carcinogens.
Hepatitis
Both case-control and cohort studies have shown 
a strong association between chronic hepatitis B 
carrier rates and increased incidence of HCC. 
In Taiwanese male postal carriers who were hepatitis B 
surface antigen (HBsAg)-positive, a 98-fold greater risk 
for HCC was found compared to HBsAg-negative 
individuals. The incidence of HCC in Alaskan natives is 
markedly increased related to a high prevalence of HBV 
infection. HBV-based HCC may involve rounds of 
hepatic destruction with subsequent proliferation and not 
necessarily frank cirrhosis. The increase in Japanese HCC 
incidence rates in the last three decades is thought to be 
from hepatitis C. A large-scale World Health Organiza-
tion (WHO)-sponsored intervention study is currently 
underway in Asia involving HBV vaccination of the 
newborn. HCC in African blacks is not associated with 
severe cirrhosis but is poorly differentiated and very 
aggressive. Despite uniform HBV carrier rates among the 
South African Bantu, there is a ninefold difference in 
HCC incidence between Mozambicans living along the 
coast and inland. These differences are attributed to the 
additional exposure to dietary aflatoxin B1 and other 
carcinogenic mycotoxins. A typical interval between 
HCV-associated transfusion and subsequent HCC is 
approximately 30 years. HCV-associated HCC patients 
tend to have more frequent and advanced cirrhosis, but in 
HBV-associated HCC, only half the patients have cirrhosis; 
the remainder having chronic active hepatitis (Chap. 40).
Other etiologic conditions
The 75–85% association of HCC with underly-
ing cirrhosis has long been recognized, more 
typically with macronodular cirrhosis in South-
east Asia, but also with micronodular cirrhosis (alcohol) 
in Europe and the United States (Chap. 42). It is still 
not clear whether cirrhosis itself is a predisposing factor 
to the development of HCC or whether the underlying 
causes of the cirrhosis are actually the carcinogenic 
factors. However, ∼20% of U.S. patients with HCC do 
not have underlying cirrhosis. Several underlying condi-
tions are associated with an increased risk for cirrhosis-
associated HCC (Table 50-2), including hepatitis, 
alcohol, autoimmune chronic active hepatitis, crypto-
genic cirrhosis, and NASH. A less common association is 
with primary biliary cirrhosis and several metabolic diseases 
including hemochromatosis, Wilson’s disease, α1-anti­trypsin 
deficiency, tyrosinemia, porphyria cutanea tarda, glyco-
genesis types 1 and 3, citrullinemia. and orotic aciduria. 
The etiology of HCC in those 20% of patients who 
have no cirrhosis is currently unclear, and their HCC 
natural history is not well-defined.
Current directions
Many patients have multiple etiologies, and the interac-
tions of either hepatitis or alcohol and smoking, or with 
aflatoxins, are just beginning to be explored.
Clinical Features
Symptoms
These include abdominal pain, weight loss, weak-
ness, abdominal fullness and swelling, jaundice, 
and nausea (Table 50-3). Presenting signs 
Table 50-2 
Factors Associated With an Increased Risk 
of Developing HCC
Common
Unusual
Cirrhosis from any cause
Primary biliary cirrhosis
Hepatitis B or C  
chronic infection
Hemochromatosis
Ethanol chronic  
consumption
α1-Antitrypsin deficiency
NASH/NAFL
Glycogen storage diseases
Aflatoxin B1 or other 
mycotoxins
Citrullinemia
Porphyria cutanea tarda
Hereditary tyrosinemia
Wilson’s disease
Abbreviations: NAFL, nonalcoholic fatty liver; NASH, nonalcoholic 
steatohepatitis.
 
CHAPTER 50
Tumors of the Liver and Biliary Tree 
537
and symptoms differ somewhat between high- and 
low-incidence areas. In high-risk areas, especially in 
South African blacks, the most common symptom is 
abdominal pain; by contrast, only 40–50% of Chinese 
and Japanese patients present with abdominal pain. 
Abdominal swelling may occur as a consequence of 
ascites due to the underlying chronic liver disease or 
may be due to a rapidly expanding tumor. Occasionally, 
central necrosis or acute hemorrhage into the peritoneal 
cavity leads to death. In countries with an active sur-
veillance program, HCC tends to be identified at an 
earlier stage, when symptoms may be due only to the 
underlying disease. Jaundice is usually due to obstruc-
tion of the intrahepatic ducts from underlying liver dis-
ease. Hematemesis may occur due to esophageal varices 
from the underlying portal hypertension. Bone pain is 
seen in 3–12% of patients, but necropsies show patho-
logic bone metastases in ∼20% of patients. However, 
25% of patients may be asymptomatic.
Physical signs
Hepatomegaly is the most common physical sign, 
occurring in 50–90% of the patients. Abdominal bruits 
are noted in 6–25%, and ascites occurs in 30–60% of 
patients. Ascites should be examined by cytology. Sple-
nomegaly is mainly due to portal hypertension. Weight 
loss and muscle wasting are common, particularly with 
rapidly growing or large tumors. Fever is found in 
10–50% of patients, from unclear cause. The signs of 
chronic liver disease may often be present, including 
jaundice, dilated abdominal veins, palmar erythema, 
gynecomastia, testicular atrophy, and peripheral edema. 
Budd-Chiari syndrome can occur due to HCC invasion 
of the hepatic veins, with tense ascites and a large tender 
liver (Chap. 42).
Paraneoplastic syndromes
Most paraneoplastic syndromes in HCC are biochemical 
abnormalities without associated clinical consequences. 
They include hypoglycemia (also caused by end-stage 
liver failure), erythrocytosis, hypercalcemia, hypercho-
lesterolemia, dysfibrinogenemia, carcinoid syndrome, 
increased thyroxin-binding globulin, changes in sec-
ondary sex characteristics (gynecomastia, testicular atro-
phy, and precocious puberty), and porphyria cutanea 
tarda. Mild hypoglycemia occurs in rapidly growing 
HCC as part of terminal illness, and profound hypo-
glycemia may occur, although the cause is unclear. 
Erythrocytosis occurs in 3–12% of patients and hyper-
cholesterolemia in 10–40%. A high percent of patients 
have thrombocytopenia or leukopenia, resulting from 
portal hypertension, and not from cancer infiltration of 
bone marrow, as in other tumor types.
Staging
Multiple clinical staging systems for HCC have been 
described. A widely used one has been the American 
Joint Commission for Cancer (AJCC)/tumor-node-
metastasis (TNM) classification. However, the Cancer 
of the Liver Italian Program (CLIP) system is now 
popular as it takes the cirrhosis into account, based on 
the Okuda system (Table 50-4). Other staging sys-
tems have been proposed, and a consensus is needed. 
They are all based on combining the prognostic fea-
tures of liver damage with those of tumor aggressive-
ness and include systems from Spain (Barcelona Clinic 
Liver Cancer [BCLC]), Japan, Hong Kong, and others 
(Chinese University Prognostic Index [CUPI], Japan 
Integrated Staging [JIS], and SLiDe, which stands for S, 
Table 50-3 
Hepatocellular Carcinoma Clinical 
Presentation (n = 547)
Symptom
Patient # (%)
No symptom
129(24)
Abdominal pain
219(40)
Other (workup of anemia and various  
diseases)
64(12)
Routine physical exam finding, elevated LFTs
129(24)
Weight loss
112(20)
Appetite loss
59 (11)
Weakness/malaise
83(15)
Jaundice
30(5)
Routine CT scan screening of known  
cirrhosis
92(17)
Cirrhosis symptoms (ankle swelling, 
abdominal bloating, increased girth,  
pruritus, GI bleed)
98(18)
Diarrhea
7 (1)
Tumor rupture
1
Patient Characteristics
Mean age (yr)
56 ± 13
Male:Female
3:1
Ethnicity
White
72 %
Middle Eastern
10 %
Asian
13 %
African American
5 %
Cirrhosis
81 %
No cirrhosis
19 %
Tumor Characteristics
Hepatic tumor numbers
1
20 %
2
25 %
3 or more
65 %
Portal vein invasion
75 %
Unilobar
25 %
Bilobar
75 %
Abbreviations: GI, gastrointestinal; LFT, liver function test.
SECTION IX
Neoplastic Diseases of the Gastrointestinal System
538
stage; Li, liver damage; De, des-γ-carboxy prothrombin). 
The best prognosis is for stage I, solitary tumors of less 
than 2-cm diameter without vascular invasion. Adverse 
prognostic features include ascites, jaundice, vascular 
invasion, and elevated α-fetoproteins (AFPs). Vascular 
invasion in particular has profound effects on progno-
sis and may be microscopic or macroscopic (visible on 
CT scans). Most large tumors have microscopic vascular 
invasion, so full staging can usually be made only after 
surgical resection. Stage III disease contains a mixture 
of lymph node–positive and -negative tumors. Stage III 
patients with positive lymph node disease have a poor 
prognosis, and few patients survive 1 year. The prog-
nosis of stage IV is poor after either resection or trans-
plantation and 1-year survival is rare. A working staging 
system based entirely on clinical grounds that incor-
porates the contribution of the underlying liver 
disease was originally developed by Okuda et al. 
(Table 50-4). Patients with Okuda stage III have a dire 
prognosis because they usually cannot be curatively 
resected, and the condition of their liver typically pre-
cludes chemotherapy.
New directions
Consensus is needed on staging. These systems will 
soon be upended by proteomics.
Table 50-4
CLIP and Okuda Staging Systems for 
Hepatocellular Carcinoma
CLIP Classification
Points
Variables
0
1
2
 i. Tumor number
 
Hepatic replacement by 
tumor (%)
 ii. Child-Pugh score
Single
<50
A
Multiple
<50
B
–
<50
C
iii. α Fetoprotein level 
(ng/mL)
iv. Portal vein thrombosis 
(CT)
<400
No
≥400
Yes
–
–
CLIP stages (score = sum of points): CLIP 0, 0 points; 
CLIP 1, 1 point; CLIP 2, 2 points; CLIP 3, 3 points.
Okuda Classification
Tumor 
extenta
Ascites
Albumin 
(g/L)
Bilirubin  
(mg/dl)
≥50%  <50
(+)     (−)
+  (−)
(+)  (−)
≤3  >3
(+)  (-)
≥3  <3
(+)  (−)
Okuda stages: stage 1, all (−); stage 2, 1 or 2 (+); stage 3, 
3 or 4 (+)
Abbreviations: CLIP, Cancer of the Liver Italian Program.
aExtent of liver occupied by tumor.
APPROACH TO THE
PATIENT	
Hepatocellular Carcinoma
History and Physical  The history is impor-
tant in evaluating putative predisposing factors, includ-
ing a history of hepatitis or jaundice, blood transfusion, 
or use of intravenous drugs. A family history of HCC or 
hepatitis should be sought and a detailed social history 
taken to include job descriptions for industrial exposure 
to possible carcinogenic drugs as well as contraceptive  
hormones. Physical examination should include assess-
ing stigmata of underlying liver disease such as jaun-
dice, ascites, peripheral edema, spider nevi, palmar  
erythema, and weight loss. Evaluation of the abdomen 
for hepatic size, masses or ascites, hepatic nodular-
ity and tenderness, and splenomegaly is needed, as is 
assessment of overall performance status and psycho-
social evaluation.
Serologic Assays  AFP is a serum tumor marker 
for HCC; however, it is only increased in approximately one-
half of U.S. patients. The lens culinaris agglutinin-reactive 
fraction of AFP (AFP-L3) assay is thought to be more 
specific. The other widely used assay is that for des-γ-
carboxy prothrombin (DCP), a protein induced by vita-
min K absence (PIVKA-2). This protein is increased in as 
many as 80% of HCC patients but may also be elevated 
in patients with vitamin K deficiency; it is always ele-
vated after Coumadin use. It may predict for portal vein 
invasion. Both AFP-L3 and DCP are FDA-approved. Many 
other assays have been developed, such as glypican-3, 
but none have greater aggregate sensitivity and speci-
ficity. In a patient presenting with either a new hepatic 
mass or other indications of recent hepatic decompen-
sation, carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), vitamin B12, 
AFP, ferritin, PIVKA-2, and anti-mitochondrial Ab should 
be measured, and standard liver function tests should 
be performed, including prothrombin time (PT), par-
tial thromboplastin time (PTT), albumin, transaminases, 
γ-glutamyl transpeptidase, and alkaline phosphatase. 
Decreases in platelet count and white blood cell count 
may reflect portal hypertension and associated hyper-
splenism. Hepatitis A, B, and C serology should be mea-
sured. If HBV or HCV serology is positive, quantitative 
measurements of HBV DNA or HCV RNA are needed.
New 
Directions  Newer biomarkers are being 
evaluated, especially tissue- and serum-based genomics 
profiling.
Radiology  An ultrasound examination of the 
liver is an excellent screening tool. The two character-
istic vascular abnormalities are hypervascularity of the 
tumor mass (neovascularization or abnormal tumor-
feeding arterial vessels) and thrombosis by tumor inva-
sion of otherwise normal portal veins. To determine 
tumor size and extent and the presence of portal vein 
 
CHAPTER 50
Tumors of the Liver and Biliary Tree 
539
invasion accurately, a helical/triphasic CT scan of the 
abdomen and pelvis, with fast-contrast bolus technique 
should be performed to detect the vascular lesions typi-
cal of HCC. Portal vein invasion is normally detected as 
an obstruction and expansion of the vessel. A chest 
CT is used to exclude metastases. MRI can also pro-
vide detailed information, especially with the newer 
contrast agents. Ethiodol (Lipiodol) is an ethiodized oil 
emulsion retained by liver tumors that can be delivered 
by hepatic artery injection (5–15 mL) for CT imaging 
1 week later. For small tumors, Ethiodol injection is very 
helpful before biopsy because the histologic presence 
of the dye constitutes proof that the needle biopsied 
the mass under suspicion. A prospective comparison 
of triphasic CT, gadolinium-enhanced MRI, ultrasound, 
and fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography 
(FDG-PET) showed similar results for CT, MRI, and ultra-
sound; PET imaging was unsuccessful.
New Directions  The altered tumor vascularity that 
is a consequence of molecularly targeted therapies  
is the basis for newer imaging techniques including 
contrast-enhanced ultrasound (CEUS) and dynamic MRI.
Pathologic Diagnosis  Histologic proof of 
the presence of HCC is obtained through a core liver 
biopsy of the liver mass under ultrasound guidance, as 
well as random biopsy of the underlying liver. Bleeding 
risk is increased compared to other cancers because 
(1) the tumors are hypervascular, and (2) patients often 
have thrombocytopenia and decreased liver-dependent 
clotting factors. Bleeding risk is further increased in the 
presence of ascites. Tracking of tumor has an uncom-
mon problem. Fine-needle aspirates can provide suffi-
cient material for diagnosis of cancer, but core biopsies 
are preferred. Tissue architecture allows the distinc-
tion between HCC and adenocarcinoma. Laparoscopic 
approaches can also be used. For patients suspected 
of having portal vein involvement, a core biopsy of the 
portal vein may be performed safely. If positive, this is 
regarded as an exclusion criterion for transplantation for 
HCC.
New Directions  Immunohistochemistry has become 
mainstream. Prognostic subgroupings are being defined 
based on growth signaling pathway proteins and geno-
typing strategies. Furthermore, molecular profiling of the 
underlying liver has provided evidence for a “field-effect”  
of cirrhosis in generating recurrent or new HCCs after  
primary resection.
Screening High-Risk Populations
Screening has not been shown to save lives. Prospective 
studies in high-risk populations showed that ultrasound 
was more sensitive than AFP elevations. An Italian 
study in patients with cirrhosis identified a yearly HCC 
incidence of 3% but showed no increase in the rate of 
detection of potentially curable tumors with aggressive 
screening. Prevention strategies including universal vac-
cination against hepatitis are more likely to be effective 
than screening efforts. Despite absence of formal guide-
lines, most practitioners obtain 6-monthly AFP and CT 
(or ultrasound) when following high-risk patients (HBV 
carriers, HCV cirrhosis, family history of HCC).
Current directions
Cost-benefit analysis is not yet convincing, even though 
screening is intuitively sound. However, studies from 
areas of high HBV carrier rates have shown a survival 
benefit for screening as a result of earlier stage at 
diagnosis. Gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase appears use-
ful for detecting small tumors.
Treatment	
Hepatocellular Carcinoma
Most HCC patients have two liver diseases, cirrhosis and 
HCC, each of which is an independent cause of death. 
The presence of cirrhosis usually places constraints on 
resection surgery, ablative therapies, and chemotherapy. 
Thus patient assessment and treatment planning has 
to take the severity of the nonmalignant liver disease 
into account. The clinical management choices for HCC 
can be complex (Fig. 50-1, Tables 50-5 and 50-6). The 
natural history of HCC is highly variable. Patients pre-
senting with advanced tumors (vascular invasion, symp-
toms, extrahepatic spread) have a median survival of  
∼4 months, with or without treatment. Treatment results 
from the literature are difficult to interpret. Survival is 
not always a measure of the efficacy of therapy because  
of the adverse effects on survival of the underlying  
liver disease. A multidisciplinary team, including a  
hepatologist, interventional radiologist, surgical oncolo-
gist, transplant surgeon, and medical oncologist, is 
important for the comprehensive management of HCC 
patients.
Stages I and II HCC  Early-stage tumors are 
successfully treated using various techniques, includ-
ing surgical resection, local ablation (thermal or radiofre-
quency [RFA]), and local injection therapies (Table 50-6).  
Because the majority of patients with HCC suffer from 
a field defect in the cirrhotic liver, they are at risk for 
subsequent multiple primary liver tumors. Many will 
also have significant underlying liver disease and may 
not tolerate major surgical loss of hepatic parenchyma, 
and they may be eligible for orthotopic liver transplant 
(OLTX). Living related donor transplants have increased 
in popularity resulting in absence of waiting for a trans-
plant. An important principle in treating early-stage 
SECTION IX
Neoplastic Diseases of the Gastrointestinal System
540
HCC is to use liver-sparing treatments and to focus on 
treatment of both the tumor and the cirrhosis.
Surgical Excision  The risk of major hepatectomy 
is high (5–10% mortality rate) due to the underlying liver 
disease and the potential for liver failure, but acceptable 
in selected cases. Preoperative portal vein occlusion can 
sometimes be performed to cause atrophy of the HCC-
involved lobe and compensatory hypertrophy of the 
noninvolved liver, permitting safer resection. Intraop-
erative ultrasound (US) is useful for planning the surgi-
cal approach. The US can image the proximity of major 
vascular structures that may be encountered during the 
dissection. In cirrhotic patients, any major liver surgery 
can result in liver failure. The Child-Pugh classification of 
liver failure is still a reliable prognosticator for tolerance 
of hepatic surgery and only Child A patients should be 
considered for surgical resection. Child B and C patients 
with stages I and II HCC should be referred for OLTX if 
appropriate, as well as patients with ascites or a recent 
history of variceal bleeding. Although open surgical 
excision is the most reliable, the patient may be better 
served with a laparoscopic approach to resection, using 
RFA or percutaneous ethanol injection (PEI). No ade-
quate comparisons of these different techniques have 
been undertaken and the choice of treatment is usually 
based on physician skill.
HEPATOCELLULAR CARCINOMA TREATMENT ALGORITHM
Living donor
Transplant
Suitable donor
UNOS criteria
UNOS list
(Cadaveric doner)
yes
no
Neoadjuvant therapy
RFA/TACE/90Yttrium
OLTX
TACE/90Yttrium/
New agents
Multifocal
>5 cm
Child’s A/B
No metastases
Palliative care/ 
Hormonal therapies
New agents
Child’s C cirrhosis
Bilirubin ≥2
Metastases
Resection candidate
Resection PEI/RFA
Non-cirrhotic
Child’s A cirrhosis
Single lesion
No metastases
Transplant candidate
Transplant evaluation
1 lesion <5 cm
3 lesions all less than 3 cm
Child’s A/B/C
No gross vascular invasion
Not for surgery
Medical evaluation
Comorbid factors
>3 lesions or any >6 cm
Gross vascular invasion
LN(+) or metastasis
HCC diagnosed
Figure 50-1 
Hepatocellular carcinoma treatment algorithm. Treatment 
approach to patients with hepatocellular carcinoma. The 
initial clinical evaluation is aimed at assessing the extent of 
the tumor and the underlying functional compromise of the 
liver by cirrhosis. Patients are classified as having resectable 
disease, unresectable disease, or as transplantation candidates. 
LN, lymph node; OLTX, orthotopic liver transplantation; PEI, 
percutaneous ethanol injection; RFA, radio­frequency abla-
tion; TACE, transarterial chemoembolization; UNOS, United 
Network for Organ Sharing. Child’s A/B/C refers to the Child-
Pugh classification of liver failure.
Table 50-5
Treatment Options for Hepatocellular 
Carcinoma
Surgery
Resection
Liver transplantation
Local Ablative Therapies
Cryosurgery
Radiofrequency ablation (RFA)
Percutaneous ethanol injection (PEI)
Regional Therapies: Hepatic Artery Transcatheter 
Treatments
Transarterial chemotherapy
Transarterial embolization
Transarterial chemoembolization
Transarterial drug-eluting beads
Transarterial radiotherapies:
90Yttrium microspheres
131Iodine - Ethiodol
Conformal External-Beam Radiation
Systemic therapies
Molecularly targeted therapies (sorafenib, etc.)
Chemotherapy
Immunotherapy
Hormonal therapy + growth control
Supportive Therapies
 
CHAPTER 50
Tumors of the Liver and Biliary Tree 
541
Local 
Ablation 
Strategies  Radiofrequency 
ablation (RFA) uses heat to ablate tumors. The maximum 
size of the probe arrays allows for a 7-cm zone of necro-
sis, which would be adequate for a 3- to 4-cm tumor. 
The heat reliably kills cells within the zone of necrosis. 
Treatment of tumors close to the main portal pedicles 
can lead to bile duct injury and obstruction. This limits 
the location of tumors that are anatomically suited for 
this technique. RFA can be performed percutaneously  
with CT or ultrasound guidance, or at the time of  
laparoscopy with ultrasound guidance.
Local Injection Therapy  Numerous agents have 
been used for local injection into tumors, most com-
monly, ethanol (PEI). The relatively soft HCC within the 
hard background cirrhotic liver allows for injection of 
large volumes of ethanol into the tumor without diffu-
sion into the hepatic parenchyma or leakage out of the 
liver. PEI causes direct destruction of cancer cells, but it 
is not selective for cancer and will destroy normal cells 
in the vicinity. However, it usually requires multiple 
injections (average three), in contrast to one for RFA. The 
maximum size of tumor reliably treated is 3 cm, even 
with multiple injections.
Current Directions  Resection and RFA each obtain 
similar results.
Liver Transplantation (OLTX)  A viable option 
for stages I and II tumors in the setting of cirrhosis 
is OLTX, with survival approaching that for noncan-
cer cases. OLTX for patients with a single lesion ≤5 cm 
or three or fewer nodules, each ≤3 cm (Milan crite-
ria), resulted in excellent tumor-free survival (≥70% at  
5 years). For advanced HCC, OLTX has been abandoned 
due to high tumor recurrence rates. Priority scoring for 
OLTX previously led to HCC patients waiting too long 
for their OLTX, resulting in some tumors becoming too 
advanced during the patient’s wait for a donated liver. 
A variety of therapies were used as a “bridge” to OLTX, 
including RFA, polyethylenimine, and transcatheter arte-
rial chemoembolization (TACE). It seems clear that these 
pretransplant treatments allow patients to remain on 
the waiting list longer, giving them greater opportuni-
ties to be transplanted. What remains unclear, however, 
is whether this translates into prolonged survival after 
transplant. Further, it is not known whether patients  
who have had their tumor(s) treated preoperatively  
follow the recurrence pattern predicted by their tumor 
status at the time of transplant (i.e., post–local ablative 
therapy), or if they follow the course set by their tumor 
parameters present before such treatment. The United 
Network for Organ Sharing (UNOS) point system for 
priority scoring of OLTX recipients now includes addi-
tional points for patients with HCC. The success of living 
related donor liver transplantation programs has also 
led to patients receiving transplantation earlier for HCC 
and often with greater than minimal tumors.
Current Directions  Expanded criteria for larger 
HCCs beyond the Milan criteria (one lesion <5 cm 
or three lesions, each <3 cm) are being increasingly 
accepted by various UNOS areas for OLTX with satisfac-
tory longer-term survival. Furthermore, downstaging 
HCCs by medical therapy (TACE) is increasingly recog-
nized as acceptable treatment before OLTX.
Adjuvant Therapy  The role of adjuvant chemo-
therapy for patients after resection or OLTX remains 
Table 50-6
Some Randomized Clinical Trials Involving Transhepatic Artery Chemoembolization (TACE) for 
Hepatocellular Carcinoma
Author
Year
Agents 1
Agents 2
Survival Effect
Kawaii
1992
Doxorubicin + Embo
Embo
No
Chang
1994
Cisplatin + Embo
Embo
No
Hatanaka
1995
Cisplatin, Doxorubicin + Embo
Same + Lipiodol
No
Uchino
1993
Cisplatin, Doxorubicin + oral FU
Same + Tamoxifen
No
Lin
1988
Embo
Embo + IV FU
No
Yoshikawa
1994
Epirubicin + Ethiodol
Epirubicin
No
Pelletier
1990
Doxorubicin + Gelfoam
None
No
Trinchet
1995
Cisplatin + Gelfoam
None
No
Bruix
1998
Coils and Gelfoam
None
No
Pelletier
1998
Cisplatin + Ethiodol
None
No
Trinchet
1995
Cisplatin + Gelfoam
None
No
Lo
2002
Cisplatin + Ethiodol
None
Yes
Llovet
2002
Doxorubicin + Ethiodol
None
Yes
Abbreviations: Embo, embolization; FU, 5-fluorouracil.
SECTION IX
Neoplastic Diseases of the Gastrointestinal System
542
unclear. Both adjuvant and neoadjuvant approaches 
have been studied, but no clear advantage in disease-
free or overall survival has been found. However, a 
meta-analysis of several trials revealed a significant 
improvement in disease-free and overall survival. 
Although analysis of postoperative adjuvant systemic 
chemotherapy trials demonstrated no disease-free or 
overall survival advantage, single studies of TACE and 
neoadjuvant 131I-Ethiodol showed enhanced survival 
post-resection.
Current Directions  A large adjuvant trial examin-
ing resection with or without sorafenib (discussed later) 
is in progress.
Stages III and IV HCC  Fewer surgical options 
exist for stage III tumors involving major vascular  
structures. In patients without cirrhosis, a major hepa-
tectomy is feasible, although prognosis is poor. Patients 
with Child’s A cirrhosis may be resected, but a lobec-
tomy is associated with significant morbidity and  
mortality rates, and long-term prognosis is poor. Nev-
ertheless, a small percentage of patients will achieve 
long-term survival, justifying an attempt at resection 
when feasible. Because of the advanced nature of these 
tumors, even successful resection can be followed by 
rapid recurrence. These patients are not considered can-
didates for transplantation because of the high tumor 
recurrence rates, unless their tumors can first be down-
staged with neoadjuvant therapy. Decreasing the size of 
the primary tumor allows for less surgery, and the delay 
in surgery allows for extrahepatic disease to manifest on 
imaging studies and avoid unhelpful OLTX. The progno-
sis is poor for stage IV tumors, and no surgical treatment 
is recommended.
Systemic Chemotherapy  A large number of 
controlled and uncontrolled clinical studies have been 
performed with most of the major classes of cancer  
chemotherapy. No single agent or combination of 
agents given systemically reproducibly leads to even a 
25% response rate or has any effect on survival.
Regional 
Chemotherapy  In contrast to the 
dismal results of systemic chemotherapy, a variety of 
agents given via the hepatic artery have activity for 
HCC confined to the liver (Table 50-6). Two randomized 
controlled trials have shown a survival advantage for 
TACE in a selected subset of patients. One used doxo-
rubicin and the other used cisplatin. Despite the fact 
that increased hepatic extraction of chemotherapy has 
been shown for very few drugs, some drugs such as 
cisplatin, doxorubicin, mitomycin C, and possibly neo-
carzinostatin, produce substantial objective responses 
when administered regionally. Few data are available on 
continuous hepatic arterial infusion for HCC, although 
pilot studies with cisplatin have shown encouraging 
responses. Because the reports have not usually strati-
fied responses or survival based on TNM staging, it is 
difficult to know long-term prognosis in relation to 
tumor extent. Most of the studies on regional hepatic 
arterial chemotherapy also use an embolizing agent 
such as Ethiodol, gelatin sponge particles (Gelfoam), 
starch (Spherex), or microspheres. Two products are  
composed of microspheres of defined size ranges—
Embospheres (Biospheres) and Contour SE—using par-
ticles of 40–120, 100–300, 300–500, and 500–1000 μm 
in size. The optimal diameter of the particles for TACE 
has yet to be defined. Consistently higher objective 
response rates are reported for arterial administration 
of drugs together with some form of hepatic artery 
occlusion compared with any form of systemic chemo-
therapy to date. The widespread use of some form of 
embolization in addition to chemotherapy has added 
to its toxicities. These include a frequent, but transient 
fever, abdominal pain, and anorexia (all in >60% of 
patients). In addition, >20% of patients have increased 
ascites or transient elevation of transaminases. Cystic 
artery spasm and cholecystitis are also not uncommon. 
However, higher responses have also been obtained. 
The hepatic toxicities associated with embolization may 
be ameliorated by the use of degradable starch micro-
spheres, with 50–60% response rates. Two randomized 
studies of TACE vs. placebo showed a survival advan-
tage for treatment (Table 50-6). In addition, it is not 
clear that formal oncologic CT response criteria are ade-
quate for HCC. A loss of vascularity on CT without size 
change may be an index of loss of viability and thus of 
response to TACE. A major problem that TACE trials have 
had in showing a survival advantage is that many HCC 
patients die of their underlying cirrhosis, not the tumor. 
However, improving quality of life is a legitimate goal of 
regional therapy.
New Therapies  The major finding has been a sur-
vival advantage for oral sorafenib (Nexavar) vs. placebo 
controls in two randomized trials, leading to its approval 
by the FDA. However, tumor responses were negligible, 
and the survival in the treatment arm in Asians was 
below the placebo arm in the Western trial (Table 50-7). 
Furthermore, prolonged survival has been reported in 
phase II trials using newer agents, such as bevacizumab 
plus erlotinib. Several forms of radiation therapy have 
been used in the treatment of HCC, including external 
beam radiation and conformal radiation therapy. Radia-
tion hepatitis remains a dose-limiting problem. The pure 
beta emitter 90Yttrium attached to either glass or resin 
microspheres has been assessed in phase II trials of 
HCC and has encouraging survival effects with minimal 
toxicities. Randomized trials have yet to be performed. 
Vitamin K has been assessed in clinical trials at high 
 
CHAPTER 50
Tumors of the Liver and Biliary Tree 
543
dosage for its HCC-inhibitory actions. This idea is based  
on the characteristic biochemical defect in HCC of  
elevated plasma levels of immature prothrombin (DCP 
or PIVKA-2), due to a defect in the activity of prothrom-
bin carboxylase, a vitamin K-dependent enzyme. Two 
vitamin K randomized controlled trials from Japan show 
decreased tumor occurrence.
Current Directions  A number of new treatments 
are being evaluated for HCC (Table 50-8). These include 
the biologicals, such as Raf kinase and vascular endo-
thelial growth factor (VEGF) inhibitors; 90Yttrium looks 
promising 
without 
chemotherapy 
toxicities, 
and  
vitamin K2 appears to prevent recurrences post-resection. 
The bottleneck of liver donors for OLTX is at last  
widening with increasing use of living donors, and  
criteria for OLTX for larger HCCs are slowly expanding. 
Patient participation in clinical trials assessing new ther-
apies is encouraged (www.clinicaltrials.gov).
Summary (Table 50-5)
The most common modes of patient 
presentation
1.	 A patient with known history of hepatitis, jaundice, 
or cirrhosis, with an abnormality on US or CT scan, 
or rising AFP or DCP (PIVKA-2)
2.	 A patient with an abnormal liver function test as part 
of a routine examination
3.	 Radiologic workup for liver transplant for cirrhosis 
4.	 Symptoms of HCC including cachexia, abdominal 
pain, or fever
History and physical examination
1.	 Clinical jaundice, asthenia, itching (scratches), tremors, 
or disorientation
2.	 Hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, ascites, peripheral edema, 
skin signs of liver failure
Clinical evaluation
1.	 Blood tests: full blood count (splenomegaly), liver 
function tests, ammonia levels, electrolytes, AFP 
and DCP (PIVKA-2), Ca2+ and Mg2+; hepatitis B, 
C, and D serology (and quantitative HBV DNA 
or HCV RNA, if either is positive); neurotensin 
(specific for fibrolamellar HCC)
2.	 Triphasic dynamic helical (spiral) CT scan of liver 
(if inadequate, then follow with an MRI); chest CT 
scan; upper and lower gastrointestinal endoscopy 
(for varices, bleeding, ulcers); and brain scan (only if 
symptoms suggest)
3.	 Core biopsy: of the tumor and separate biopsy of the 
underlying liver
Therapy (Tables 50-5 and 50-6)
1.	 HCC <2 cm: RFA, PEI, or resection
2.	 HCC >2 cm, no vascular invasion: liver resection, 
RFA, or OLTX
Table 50-7 
Targeted Therapies in HCC: Trials
Phase III
Target
Survival (mo)
Sorafenib vs placebo
Raf, VEGFR, 
PDGFR
10.7 vs. 7.9
Sorafenib vs placebo 
(Asians)
Raf, WGFR,  
PDGFR
6.5 vs. 4.2
Phase II
Sorafenib
9
Sorafenib (Asians)
5
Sunitinib
9.8, 8 (2 trials)
Bevacizumab
VEGF
12.4
Bevacizumab plus 
erlotinib
VEGF plus  
EGFR
15.6
Bevacizumab plus 
capecitabine
8
Erlotinib
EGFR
13, 10.7 (2 trials)
Linifanib
VEGFR, PDGF
9.7
Brivanib
VEGFR, FGFR
10
Abbreviations: EGFR, epidermal growth factor receptor; FGFR, 
fibroblast growth factor receptor; PDGF, platelet-derived growth 
factor; PDGFR, platelet-derived growth factor receptor; Raf, rapidly 
accelerated fibrosarcoma; VEGF, vascular endothelial growth factor; 
VEGFR, vascular endothelial growth factor receptor.
Table 50-8 
Some Novel Medical Treatments for 
Hepatocellular Carcinoma
EGF receptor antagonists: erlotinib, gefitinib, lapatinib, 
cetuximab, brivanib
Multikinase antagonists: sorafenib, sunitinib
VEGF antagonist: bevacizumab
VEGFR antagonist: ABT-869 (linifanib)
mTOR antagonists: sirolimus, temsirolimus, everolimus
Proteasome inhibitors: bortezomib
Vitamin K
131I – Ethiodol (lipiodol)
131I – Ferritin
90Yttrium microspheres (TheraSphere, SIR-spheres)
166Holmium, 188Rhenium
Three-dimensional conformal radiation
Proton beam high-dose radiotherapy
Gamma knife, CyberKnife
New targets: inhibitors of cyclin dependent kinases (Cdk) 
and caspases
Abbreviations: EGF, epidermal growth factor; VEGF, vascular endo-
thelial growth factor; VEGFR vascular endothelial growth factor 
receptor.
SECTION IX
Neoplastic Diseases of the Gastrointestinal System
544
3.	 Multiple unilobar tumors or tumor with vascular 
invasion: TACE or sorafenib
4.	 Bilobar tumors, no vascular invasion: TACE with 
OLTX for patients with tumor response
5.	 Extrahepatic HCC or elevated bilirubin: sorafenib or 
bevacizumab plus erlotinib (combination agent trials 
are in progress)
Other Primary Liver Tumors
Fibrolamellar HCC (FL-HCC)
This rarer variant of HCC has a quite different biology 
than adult-type HCC. None of the known HCC caus-
ative factors seem important here. It is typically a disease 
of younger adults, often teenagers and predominantly 
females. It is AFP-negative, but patients typically have 
elevated blood neurotensin levels, normal liver func-
tion tests, and no cirrhosis. Radiology is similar for 
HCC, except that characteristic adult-type portal vein 
invasion is less common. Although it is often multi­
focal in the liver, and therefore not resectable, metas-
tases are common, especially to lungs and locoregional 
lymph nodes, but survival is often much better than 
with adult-type HCC. Resectable tumors are associated 
with 5-year survival ≥50%. Patients often present with a 
huge liver or unexplained weight loss, fever, or elevated 
liver function tests on routine evaluations. These huge 
masses suggest quite slow growth for many tumors. 
Surgical resection is the best management option, even 
for metastases, as these tumors respond much less well 
to chemotherapy than adult-type HCC. Although sev-
eral series of OLTX for FL-HCC have been reported, 
the patients seem to die from tumor recurrences, with 
a 2- to 5-year lag compared with OLTX for adult-type 
HCC. Anecdotal responses to gemcitabine plus cisplatin-
TACE are reported.
Epithelioid hemangioendothelioma 
(EHE)
This rare vascular tumor of adults is also usually mul-
tifocal and can also be associated with prolonged sur-
vival, even in the presence of metastases, which are 
commonly in the lung. There is usually no underlying 
cirrhosis. Histologically, these tumors are usually of bor-
derline malignancy and express factor VIII, confirming 
their endothelial origin. OLTX may produce prolonged 
survival.
Cholangiocarcinoma (CCC)
CCC typically refers to mucin-producing adenocar-
cinomas (different from HCC) that arise from the 
bile ducts. They are grouped by their anatomic site of 
origin, as intrahepatic, hilar (central, ∼65% of CCCs), 
and peripheral (or distal, ∼30% of CCCs). They arise on 
the basis of cirrhosis less frequently than HCC, except-
ing primary biliary cirrhosis. Nodular tumors arising 
at the bifurcation of the common bile duct are called 
Klatskin tumors and are often associated with a collapsed 
gallbladder, a finding that mandates visualization of the 
entire biliary tree. The approach to management of 
central and peripheral CCC is quite different. Incidence 
is increasing. Although most CCCs have no obvious 
cause, a number of predisposing factors have been iden-
tified. Predisposing diseases include primary sclerosing 
cholangitis (10–20% of primary sclerosing cholangitis 
[PSC] patients), an autoimmune disease, and liver fluke 
in Asians, especially Opisthorchis viverrini and Clonorchis 
sinensis. CCC seems also to be associated with any cause 
of chronic biliary inflammation and injury, with alco-
holic liver disease, choledocholithiasis, choledochal cysts 
(10%), and Caroli’s disease (a rare inherited form of bile 
duct ectasia). CCC most typically presents as painless 
jaundice, often with pruritus or weight loss. Diagnosis 
is made by biopsy, percutaneously for peripheral liver 
lesions, or more commonly via endoscopic retrograde 
cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) under direct vision 
for central lesions. The tumors often stain positively for 
cytokeratins 7, 8, and 19 and negatively for cyto­keratin 
20. However, histology alone cannot usually distinguish 
CCC from metastases from colon or pancreas primary 
tumors. Serologic tumor markers appear to be non-
specific, but CEA, CA 19–9, and CA-125 are often 
elevated in CCC patients and are useful for following 
response to therapy. Radiologic evaluation typically 
starts with ultrasound, which is very useful in visual-
izing dilated bile ducts, and then proceeds with either 
MRI or magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatogra-
phy (MRCP) or helical CT scans. Invasive cholangio-
pancreatography (ERCP) is then needed to define the 
biliary tree and obtain a biopsy or is needed therapeu-
tically to decompress an obstructed biliary tree with 
internal stent placement. If that fails, then percutaneous 
biliary drainage will be needed, with the biliary drain-
age flowing into an external bag. Central tumors often 
invade the porta hepatis, and locoregional lymph node 
involvement by tumor is frequent.
Treatment	
Cholangiocarcinoma
Hilar CCC is resectable in ∼30% of patients and usually 
involves bile duct resection and lymphadenectomy.  
Typical survival is approximately 24 months, with recur-
rences being mainly in the operative bed but with ∼30% 
in the lungs and liver. Distal CCC, which involves the main 
ducts, is normally treated by resection of the extrahe-
patic bile ducts, often with pancreaticoduodenectomy. 
 
CHAPTER 50
Tumors of the Liver and Biliary Tree 
545
Survival is similar. Due to the high rates of locoregional 
recurrences or positive surgical margins, many patients 
receive postoperative adjuvant radiotherapy. Its effect 
on survival has not been assessed. Intraluminal brachy-
radiotherapy has also shown some promise. However, 
photodynamic therapy enhanced survival in one study. 
In this technique, sodium porfimer is injected intrave-
nously and then subjected to intraluminal red light laser 
photoactivation. OLTX has been assessed for treatment 
of unresectable CCC. Five-year survival was ∼20%, so 
enthusiasm waned. However, neoadjuvant radiotherapy 
with sensitizing chemotherapy has shown better sur-
vival rates for CCC treated by OLTX and is currently used 
by UNOS for perihilar CCC, size <3 cm with neither intra-
hepatic or extrahepatic metastases. Multiple chemo-
therapeutic agents have been assessed for activity and 
survival in unresectable CCC. Most have been inactive. 
However, both systemic and hepatic arterial gemcitabine  
have shown promising results. The combination of  
cisplatin plus gemcitabine has produced a survival 
advantage compared with gemcitabine alone and is con-
sidered standard therapy for unresectable CCC.
Gallbladder cancer (GB Ca)
GB Ca has an even worse prognosis than CCC, and 
with typical survival ∼6 months or less. Women are 
affected much more commonly than men (4:1), unlike 
HCC or CCC, and GB Ca occurs more frequently 
than CCC. Most patients have a history of anteced-
ent gallstones, but very few patients with gallstones 
develop GB Ca (∼0.2%). It presents similarly to CCC 
and is often diagnosed unexpectedly during gallstone 
or cholecystitis surgery. Presentation is typically that of 
chronic cholecystitis, chronic right upper quadrant pain 
and weight loss. Useful but nonspecific serum markers 
include CEA and CA 19-9. CT scans or MRCP typi-
cally reveal a gallbladder mass. The mainstay of treatment 
is surgical, either simple or radical cholecystectomy for 
stages I or II disease, respectively. Survival rates are near 
100% at 5 years for stage I, and range from 60–90% at 
5 years for stage II. More advanced GB Ca has worse 
survival, and many patients are unresectable. Adjuvant 
radiotherapy, used in the presence of local lymph 
node disease, has not been shown to enhance survival. 
Chemotherapy is not useful in advanced or metastatic 
GB Ca.
Carcinoma of the ampulla of Vater
This tumor arises within 2 cm of the distal end of the 
common bile duct and is mainly (90%) an adeno­
carcinoma. Locoregional lymph nodes are commonly 
involved (50%), and the liver is the most frequent site 
for metastases. The most common clinical presentation 
is jaundice, and many patients also have pruritus, weight 
loss, and epigastric pain. Initial evaluation is performed 
with an abdominal ultrasound to assess vascular involve-
ment, biliary dilation, and liver lesions. This is followed 
by a CT scan, or MRI and especially MRCP. The most 
effective therapy is resection by pylorus-sparing pancre-
aticoduodenectomy, an aggressive procedure resulting 
in better survival rates than with local resection. Sur-
vival rates are ∼25% at 5 years in operable patients with 
involved lymph nodes and ∼50% in patients without 
involved nodes. Unlike CCC, approximately 80% of 
patients are thought to be resectable at diagnosis. Adju-
vant chemotherapy or radiotherapy has not been shown 
to enhance survival. For metastatic tumors, chemother-
apy is currently experimental.
Tumors metastatic to the liver
These are predominantly from colon, pancreas, and 
breast primary tumors but can originate from any organ 
primary. Ocular melanomas are prone to liver metasta-
sis. Tumor spread to the liver normally carries a poor 
prognosis for that tumor type. Colorectal and breast 
hepatic metastases were previously treated with contin-
uous hepatic arterial infusion chemotherapy. However, 
more effective systemic drugs for each of these two 
cancers, especially the addition of oxaliplatin to colorec-
tal cancer regimens, have reduced the use of hepatic 
artery infusion therapy. In a large randomized study 
of systemic versus infusional plus systemic chemother-
apy for resected colorectal metastases to the liver, the 
patients receiving infusional therapy had no survival 
advantage, mainly due to extrahepatic tumor spread. 
90Yttrium resin beads are approved in the United States 
for treatment of colorectal hepatic metastases. The role 
of this modality, either alone or in combination with 
chemotherapy, is being evaluated in many centers. Pal-
liation my be obtained from chemoembolization, PEI, 
or RFA.
Benign liver tumors
Three common benign tumors occur and all are found 
predominantly in women. They are hemangiomas, ade-
nomas, and focal nodular hyperplasia (FNH). FNH is 
typically benign, and usually no treatment is needed. 
Hemangiomas are the most common and are entirely 
benign. Treatment is unnecessary unless their expan-
sion causes symptoms. Adenomas are associated with 
contraceptive hormone use. They can cause pain and 
can bleed or rupture, causing acute problems. Their 
main interest for the physician is a low potential for 
malignant change and a 30% risk of bleeding. For this 
reason, considerable effort has gone into differentiating 
SECTION IX
Neoplastic Diseases of the Gastrointestinal System
546
these three entities radiologically. On discovery of a 
liver mass, patients are usually advised to stop taking 
sex steroids, as adenoma regression may then occasion-
ally occur. Adenomas can often be large masses ranging 
from 8–15 cm. Due to their size and definite, but low, 
malignant potential and potential for bleeding, adeno-
mas are typically resected. The most useful diagnostic 
differentiating tool is a triphasic CT scan performed 
with HCC fast bolus protocol for arterial-phase imag-
ing, together with subsequent delayed venous-phase 
imaging. Adenomas usually do not appear on the basis 
of cirrhosis, although both adenomas and HCCs are 
intensely vascular on the CT arterial phase and both 
can exhibit hemorrhage (40% of adenomas). How-
ever, adenomas have smooth, well-defined edges, 
and enhance homogeneously, especially in the portal 
venous phase on delayed images, when HCCs no 
longer enhance. FNHs exhibit a characteristic cen-
tral scar that is hypovascular on the arterial-phase and 
hypervascular on the delayed-phase CT images. MRI is 
even more sensitive in depicting the characteristic cen-
tral scar of FNH.
 Irene Chong  I   David Cunningham 
547
 Pancreatic cancer is the fourth leading cause of can-
cer death in the United States and is associated with a 
poor prognosis. Endocrine tumors affecting the pancreas 
are discussed in  Chap. 52 . Infi ltrating ductal adenocar-
cinomas, the subject of this chapter, account for the 
vast majority of cases and arise most frequently in the 
head of pancreas. At the time of diagnosis 85–90% of 
patients have inoperable or metastatic disease, which is 
refl ected in the 5-year survival rate of only 5% for all 
stages combined. An improved 5-year survival of up to 
20% may be achieved when the tumor is detected at 
an early stage and when complete surgical resection is 
accomplished. 
 ePideMiology 
 Pancreatic cancer represents 3% of all newly diagnosed 
malignancies in the United States. The most common 
age group at diagnosis is 60–79 years for both sexes. 
Pancreatic cancer will be diagnosed in approximately 
43,140 patients and account for 36,800 deaths in 2010. 
Over the past 30 years, 5-year survival rates have not 
improved substantially. 
 riSK FactorS 
 Cigarette smoking may be the cause of up to 20–25% 
of all pancreatic cancers and is the most common envi-
ronmental risk factor for this disease. Other risk factors 
are not well established due to inconsistent results from 
epidemiological studies, but include chronic pancreatitis 
and diabetes. It is diffi cult to evaluate whether these 
conditions are causally related, or develop as a conse-
quence of cancer. Alcohol does not appear to be a risk 
factor unless excess consumption gives rise to chronic 
pancreatitis. 
 PANCREATIC CANCER 
 cHaPter 51 
 genetic conSiderationS 
Pancreatic cancer is associated with a number of well-
defi ned molecular hallmarks. The most frequent 
genetic aberrations comprise  KRAS mutations, 
mostly affecting codon 12, which are observed in 60–75% 
of pancreatic cancers. The tumor-suppressor genes  p16, 
p53, and  SMAD4 are frequently inactivated; the  p16 gene 
locus on chromosome 9p21 is deleted in up to 95% of 
tumors, the  p53 gene is inactivated by mutation or deleted 
in 50–70% of tumors, and the  SMAD4 gene is deleted in 
55% of pancreatic tumors. Furthermore,  SMAD4 gene 
inactivation is associated with poorer survival in patients 
with surgically resected pancreatic adenocarcinoma. 
IGF-1R and focal adhesion kinase ( FAK ) interact to 
promote cell proliferation and survival, and their simul-
taneous inhibition synergistically inhibits pancreatic cell 
growth. Overexpression and/or aberrant activation of 
 c-Src is frequently observed, which results in cell adhe-
sion, enhanced migration, invasion, and cell prolif-
eration. Survivin is overexpressed in more than 80% of 
pancreatic tumors, which results in resistance to apopto-
sis, and genomic sequencing has identifi ed  PALB2 as a 
susceptibility gene for pancreatic cancer. 
 Up to 16% of pancreatic cancers are thought to be 
inherited. This occurs in three separate clinical settings: 
(1) familial multi-organ cancer syndromes, (2) geneti-
cally driven chronic diseases, and (3) familial pancreatic 
cancer with as yet unidentifi ed genetic abnormali-
ties, which comprise the largest proportion of inher-
ited pancreatic cancer. The familial multi-organ cancer 
syndromes consist of Peutz-Jeghers syndrome, familial 
atypical multiple mole melanoma (FAMMM), familial 
breast-ovarian cancer associated with germ-line muta-
tions in  BRCA1 and  BRCA2 , hereditary nonpolyposis 
colorectal cancer (HNPCC), familial adenomatous pol-
yposis (FAP), and Li-Fraumeni syndrome. Peutz-Jeghers, 
associated with mutations in the  STK11 gene, carries the 
highest lifetime risk of pancreatic cancer with a relative 
SECTION IX
Neoplastic Diseases of the Gastrointestinal System
548
risk of approximately 132-fold above that of the general 
population. Genetically driven chronic causes of pancre-
atic cancer include hereditary pancreatitis, cystic fibrosis, 
and ataxia telangiectasia. The absolute number of affected 
first-degree relatives is also correlated with increased 
cancer risk, and patients with at least two first-degree 
relatives with pancreatic cancer should be considered to 
have familial pancreatic cancer until proven otherwise.
Screening and Early Detection
Screening is not routinely recommended as putative 
tumor markers such as Ca 19-9 and CEA have insuffi-
cient sensitivity, and computed tomography (CT) has 
inadequate resolution to detect pancreatic dysplasia. 
Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) is a more promising 
screening tool, and preclinical efforts are focused on 
identifying biomarkers that may detect pancreatic cancer 
at an early stage. Consensus practice recommendations 
based largely on expert opinion have chosen a threshold 
of >tenfold increased risk for developing pancreatic can-
cer to select individuals who may benefit from screening. 
This includes family members with ≥3 first-degree rela-
tives with pancreatic cancer, and patients with FAMMM, 
Peutz-Jeghers syndrome, or hereditary pancreatitis.
Clinical Features
Clinical Presentation
Obstructive jaundice occurs frequently when the cancer is 
located in the head of pancreas. This may be accompanied 
by symptoms of abdominal discomfort, pruritus, lethargy, 
and weight loss. Less common presenting features include 
epigastric pain, backache, new-onset diabetes mellitus, and 
acute pancreatitis caused by pressure effects on the pancre-
atic duct. Nausea and vomiting, resulting from gastroduo-
denal obstruction, may also be a symptom of this disease.
Physical Signs
Patients can present with jaundice and cachexia, and 
scratch marks may be present. Of patients with operable 
tumors 25% have a palpable gallbladder (Courvoisier’s 
sign). Physical signs related to the development of distant 
metastases include hepatomegaly, ascites, left supracla-
vicular lymphadenopathy (Virchow’s node), and perium-
bilical lymphadenopathy (Sister Mary Joseph’s nodes).
Diagnosis
Diagnostic Imaging
Patients who present with clinical features suggestive 
of pancreatic cancer undergo imaging to confirm the 
presence of a tumor, and to establish whether the mass 
is likely to be inflammatory or malignant in nature. 
Other imaging objectives include the local and distant 
staging of the tumor, which will determine resectabil-
ity and provide prognostic information. Dual phase, 
contrast-enhanced spiral CT is the imaging modality of 
choice (Fig. 51-1). It provides accurate visualization 
of surrounding viscera, vessels, and lymph nodes, thus 
determining tumor resectability. Intestinal infiltration, 
and liver and lung metastases are also reliably depicted 
on CT. There is no advantage of magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI) over CT in predicting tumor resectabil-
ity, but selected cases may benefit from MRI to charac-
terize the nature of small indeterminate liver lesions and 
to evaluate the cause of biliary dilatation when no obvi-
ous mass is seen on CT. Endoscopic retrograde chol-
angiopancreatography (ERCP) is useful for revealing 
small pancreatic lesions, identifying stricture or obstruc-
tion in pancreatic or common bile ducts, and facilitat-
ing stent placement (Fig. 51-2). Magnetic resonance 
Figure 51-1
Coronal CT showing pancreatic cancer and dilated intra-
hepatic and pancreatic ducts (arrows).
Figure 51-2 
ERCP showing contrast in dilated pancreatic duct (arrows).
 
CHAPTER 51
Pancreatic Cancer
549
cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) is a noninvasive 
method for accurately depicting the level and degree of 
bile and pancreatic duct dilatation. EUS is highly sensi-
tive in detecting lesions less than 3 cm in size, and is 
useful as a local staging tool for assessing vascular inva-
sion and lymph node involvement. Fluorodeoxyglucose 
positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) should be 
considered before surgery or radical chemoradiother-
apy (CRT), as it is superior to conventional imaging in 
detecting distant metastases.
Tissue Diagnosis and Cytology
Preoperative confirmation of malignancy is not always 
necessary in patients with radiological appearances con-
sistent with operable pancreatic cancer. However, EUS-
guided fine-needle aspiration is the technique of choice 
when there is any doubt, and also for use in patients 
who require neoadjuvant treatment. It has an accuracy 
of approximately 90% and has a smaller risk of intraperi-
toneal dissemination compared with the percutaneous 
route. Percutaneous biopsy of the pancreatic primary or 
liver metastases is only acceptable in patients with inop-
erable or metastatic disease. ERCP is a useful method for 
obtaining ductal brushings, but the diagnostic value of 
pancreatic juice sampling is only in the order of 25–30%.
Serum Markers
Tumor-associated carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA 19-9) 
is elevated in approximately 70–80% of patients with 
pancreatic carcinoma, but is not recommended as a 
routine diagnostic or screening test as its sensitivity and 
specificity are inadequate for accurate diagnosis. Pre-
operative CA 19-9 levels correlate with tumor stage, 
and postresection CA 19-9 level has prognostic value. 
It is an indicator of asymptomatic recurrence in patients 
with completely resected tumors and is used as a bio-
marker of response in patients with advanced disease 
undergoing chemotherapy. A number of studies have 
established a high pretreatment CA 19-9 level as an 
independent prognostic factor.
Staging
The American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) 
tumor-node-metastasis (TNM) staging of pancre-
atic cancer takes into account the location and size of 
the tumor, the involvement of lymph nodes, and dis-
tant metastasis. This information is then combined to 
assign a stage (Fig. 51-3). From a practical standpoint, 
patients are grouped according to whether the cancer is 
resectable, locally advanced (unresectable, but without 
distant spread), or metastatic.
Treatment	
Pancreatic Cancer
Resectable Disease  Approximately 10% of 
patients present with localized nonmetastatic disease 
that is potentially suitable for surgical resection. Approx-
imately 30% of patients have R1 resection (microscopic 
residual disease) following surgery. Those who undergo 
R0 resection (no microscopic or macroscopic residual 
tumor), and who receive adjuvant treatment have the 
best chance of cure, with an estimated median survival 
of 20–23 months and a 5-year survival of approximately 
20%. Outcomes are more favorable in patients with 
small (<3 cm), well-differentiated tumors, and lymph 
node-negative disease.
Patients should have surgery in dedicated pancre-
atic centers that have lower postoperative morbidity 
and mortality rates. The standard surgical procedure for 
patients with tumors of the pancreatic head or uncinate 
process is a pylorus-preserving pancreaticoduodenec-
tomy (modified Whipple’s procedure). The procedure  
of choice for tumors of the pancreatic body and tail  
is a distal pancreatectomy, which routinely includes 
splenectomy.
Postoperative treatment, either chemotherapy or 
CRT, improves long-term outcomes in this group of 
patients. Adjuvant chemotherapy, comprising six cycles 
of fluorouracil (5FU) and folinic acid (FA) or gemcitabine, 
is common practice in Europe based on data from three 
randomized controlled trials (Table 51-1): Results from 
the European Study Group for Pancreatic Cancer 1 trial 
(ESPAC-1) revealed a median survival improvement from 
14.7 months with surgery alone to 20.1 months with 
surgery plus adjuvant 5FU/FA, and patients did not ben-
efit from CRT in this study. The Charité Onkologie trial 
(CONKO 001) found that the use of gemcitabine after 
complete resection significantly delayed the develop-
ment of recurrent disease compared with surgery alone. 
The ESPAC-3 trial, which investigated the benefit of 
adjuvant 5FU/FA versus gemcitabine, revealed no sur-
vival difference between the two drugs. However, the 
safety profile of adjuvant gemcitabine, with respect to 
the incidence of stomatitis and diarrhea, was superior to 
5FU/FA.
A different treatment strategy using adjuvant 5FU 
based CRT following gemcitabine as advocated by the 
Radiation Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG) 97-04 trial 
is preferred in the United States. This approach may be 
most beneficial in patients with bulky tumors involving 
the pancreatic head and in patients with R1 resection.
Inoperable Locally Advanced Disease  
Approximately 30% of patients present with locally 
advanced unresectable but nonmetastatic pancreatic 
carcinoma. The median survival with gemcitabine is  
9 months, and patients who respond to or achieve  
SECTION IX
Neoplastic Diseases of the Gastrointestinal System
550
Figure 51-3 
Staging of pancreatic cancer, and survival according to stage. (Illustration by Stephen Millward.)
 
CHAPTER 51
Pancreatic Cancer
551
stable disease after 3–6 months of gemcitabine may 
derive benefit from consolidation radiotherapy.
Metastatic Disease  Approximately 60% of 
patients with pancreatic cancer present with metastatic 
disease. Patients with poor performance status do not 
benefit from chemotherapy. Gemcitabine is the stan-
dard treatment with a median survival of 6 months and 
a 1-year survival rate of only 20%. The toxicities associ-
ated with gemcitabine need to be weighed against the 
potential benefits of treatment.
Adding other drugs to gemcitabine to improve out-
come has been generally unsuccessful with the exception  
of erlotinib, an oral HER1/EGFR tyrosine kinase 
inhibitor. The combination of erlotinib with gemcitabine 
resulted in an improved 1-year survival compared 
with gemcitabine alone (23% versus 17%, p = 0.023) 
(Table 51-2). Capecitabine, an oral fluoropyrimidine, 
has been combined with gemcitabine (GEM-CAP) in a 
phase III trial that showed an improvement in response  
rate and progression-free survival over single-agent 
gemcitabine, but no survival benefit. However, pooling 
of two other randomized controlled trials with this trial 
in a meta-analysis resulted in a survival advantage with 
GEM-CAP.
A trial in good performance status patients with 
metastatic pancreatic cancer showed improved survival  
with the combination of 5FU/FA, irinotecan and  
oxaliplatin (FOLFIRINOX) compared with gemcitabine, 
but with increased toxicity. Nab-paclitaxel (Abraxane), an 
albumin bound nano-particle formulation of paclitaxel, 
given with gemcitabine also shows promising activity.
Future Directions
The early detection and future treatment of pancreatic 
cancer relies on an improved understanding of molec-
ular pathways involved in the development of this 
disease. This will ultimately lead to the discovery of 
novel agents, and the identification of patient groups 
who are likely to benefit most from targeted therapy.
Table 51-1 
Phase III Studies of Adjuvant Chemotherapy in Resected Pancreatic Cancer
Survival
Study
Comparator Arm
Patient Number
PFS/DFS (months)
Median survival (months)
ESPAC 1 Neoptolemos 
et al. (2004)
Chemotherapy (Folinic  
acid + bolus 5FU) vs No 
chemotherapy
550
PFS 15.3 vs 9.4.  
(p = 0.02)
20.1 vs 14.7 (HR 0.71, 95% 
CI 0.55 to 0.92, p = 0.009)
CONKO 001  
Oettle et al. (2007)
Gemcitabine vs  
Observation
368
Median DFS 13.4 vs 
6.9 (p < 0.001)
22.1 vs 20.2 (p = 0.06)
ESPAC 3 Neoptolemos 
et al. (2010)
5FU/LV vs Gemcitabine
1088
23 vs 23.6 (HR 0.94, 95% CI 
0.81 to 1.08, p = 0.39)
Abbreviations: CI, confidence interval; CONKO, Charite ONKOlogie; DFS, disease-free survival; ESPAC, European Study Group for Pancreatic 
Cancer; 5FU, fluorouracil; HR, hazard ratio; LV, leucovorin; PFS, progression-free survival.
Table 51-2
Selected Phase III Studies Evaluating Chemotherapy Treatment in Advanced Pancreatic Cancer
Survival
Study
Comparator Arm
Patient 
Number
PFS (months)
Median survival (months)
Moore M et al. (2007)
Gemcitabine vs  
Gemcitabine + erlotinib
569
3.55 vs 3.75 (HR 0.77, 
95% CI 0.64 to 0.92, 
p = 0.004)
5.91 vs 6.24 (HR 0.82, 95% CI 
0.69 to 0.99, p = 0.038)
GEM-CAP Cunningham 
et al. (2009)
Gemcitabine vs  
Gemcitabine + 
capecitabine (GEM-CAP)
533
3.8 vs 5.3 (HR 0.78, 
95% CI 0.66 to 0.93, 
p = 0.004)
6.2 vs 7.1 (HR 0.86, 95% CI 
0.72 to 1.02, p = 0.08)
GEM-CAP meta-analysis 
Cunningham et al. 
(2009)
Gemcitabine vs GEM-CAP
935
Overall survival in favor of 
GEM-CAP (HR 0.86, 95% CI 
0.75 to 0.98, p = 0.02)
 Robert T. Jensen 
552
 GeneraL FeaTures oF 
GasTroinTesTinaL (Gi) 
neuroendoCrine Tumors 
 Gastrointestinal neuroendocrine tumors (NETs) are 
tumors derived from the diffuse neuroendocrine system 
of the GI tract; that system is composed of amine- and 
acid-producing cells with different hormonal profi les, 
depending on the site of origin. The tumors histori-
cally are divided into carcinoid tumors and pancreatic 
endocrine tumors (PETs), although recent pathologic 
classifi cations have proposed that they all be classifi ed as 
gastrointestinal NETs. In this chapter the term  carcinoid 
tumor is retained because it is widely used. These tumors 
originally were classifi ed as APUDomas (for  a mine 
 p recursor  u ptake and  d ecarboxylation), as were pheo-
chromocytomas, melanomas, and medullary thyroid 
carcinomas, because they share certain cytochemical fea-
tures as well as various pathologic, biologic, and molec-
ular features ( Table 52-1 ). It was originally proposed 
that APUDomas had a similar embryonic origin from 
neural crest cells, but it is now known the peptide-
secreting cells are not of neuroectodermal origin. Nev-
ertheless, the concept of APUDomas is useful because 
the tumors from the cells have important similarities as 
well as some differences ( Table 52-1 ). In this section, 
the areas of similarity between PETs and carcinoids 
will be discussed together and areas in which there are 
important differences will be discussed separately. 
 CLassiFiCaTion/PaTHoLoGy/Tumor 
BioLoGy oF neTs 
 NETs generally are composed of monotonous sheets 
of small round cells with uniform nuclei, and mitoses 
are uncommon. They can be identifi ed tentatively on 
 ENDOCRINE TUMORS OF THE 
GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT AND PANCREAS 
 CHaPTer 52 
routine histology; however, these tumors are now rec-
ognized principally by their histologic staining patterns 
due to shared cellular proteins. Historically, silver stain-
ing was used, and tumors were classifi ed as showing an 
argentaffi n reaction if they took up and reduced silver 
or as being argyrophilic if they did not reduce it. More 
recently immunocytochemical localization of chromo-
granins (A, B, C), neuron-specifi c enolase, and synap-
tophysin, which are all neuroendocrine cell markers, 
is used ( Table 52-1 ). Chromogranin A is currently the 
most widely used. 
 Ultrastructurally, these tumors possess electron-dense 
neurosecretory granules and frequently contain small 
clear vesicles that correspond to synaptic vesicles of 
neurons. NETs synthesize numerous peptides, growth 
factors, and bioactive amines that may be ectopically 
secreted, giving rise to a specifi c clinical syndrome 
( Table 52-2 ). The diagnosis of the specifi c syndrome 
requires the clinical features of the disease ( Table 52-2 ) 
and cannot be made from the immunocytochemistry 
results alone. The presence or absence of a specifi c clinical 
syndrome also cannot be predicted from the immuno-
cytochemistry alone ( Table 52-1 ). Furthermore, patho-
logists cannot distinguish between benign and malignant 
NETs unless metastases or invasion is present. 
 Carcinoid tumors frequently are classifi ed accord-
ing to their anatomic area of origin (i.e., foregut, 
midgut, hindgut) because tumors with similar areas 
of origin share functional manifestations, histochem-
istry, and secretory products ( Table 52-3 ). Foregut 
tumors generally have a low serotonin (5-HT) content; 
are argentaffi n-negative but argyrophilic; occasion-
ally secrete adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) or 
5-hydroxytryptophan (5-HTP), causing an atypical car-
cinoid syndrome ( Fig. 52-1 ); are often multihormonal; 
and may metastasize to bone. They uncommonly pro-
duce a clinical syndrome due to the secreted products. 
 
CHAPTER 52
Endocrine Tumors of the Gastrointestinal Tract and Pancreas
553
Midgut carcinoids are argentaffin-positive, have a high 
serotonin content, most frequently cause the typical car-
cinoid syndrome when they metastasize (Table 52-3, 
Fig. 52-1), release serotonin and tachykinins (substance P, 
neuropeptide K, substance K), rarely secrete 5-HTP or 
ACTH, and less commonly metastasize to bone. Hind-
gut carcinoids (rectum, transverse and descending colon) 
are argentaffin-negative, are often argyrophilic, rarely 
contain serotonin or cause the carcinoid syndrome 
(Fig. 52-1, Table 52-3), rarely secrete 5-HTP or ACTH, 
contain numerous peptides, and may metastasize to bone.
Pancreatic endocrine tumors can be classified into 
nine well-established specific functional syndromes 
(Table 52-2), five possible specific functional syn-
dromes (PETs secreting calcitonin, renin, luteinizing 
hormone, erythropoietin, or insulin-like growth factor 
II) (Table 52-2), and nonfunctional PETs (pancreatic 
polypeptide-secreting tumors; PPomas). Other func-
tional hormonal syndromes due to nonpancreatic tumors 
(usually intraabdominal in location) have been described 
only rarely and are not included in Table 52-2. They 
include secretion of glucagon-like peptide-2 (GLP-2) 
that causes intestinal villus hypertrophy (enterogluca-
gonomas), secretion of GLP-1 that causes hypoglycemia 
and delayed transit, and intestinal and ovarian tumors 
secreting peptide tyrosine tyrosine (PYY) that result in 
altered motility and constipation. Each of the functional 
syndromes listed in Table 52-2 is associated with symp-
toms due to the specific hormone released. In contrast, 
nonfunctional PETs release no products that cause a 
specific clinical syndrome. “Nonfunctional” is a misno-
mer in the strict sense because those tumors frequently 
ectopically secrete a number of peptides (pancreatic 
polypeptide [PP], chromogranin A, ghrelin, neurotensin, 
α subunits of human chorionic gonadotropin, neuron-
specific enolase); however, they cause no specific clini-
cal syndrome. The symptoms caused by nonfunctional 
PETs are entirely due to the tumor per se.
Table 52-1
General Characteristics of Gastrointestinal Neuroendocrine Tumors (Carcinoids, Pancreatic 
Endocrine Tumors [PETs])
A.  Share general neuroendocrine cell markers (identification used for diagnosis)
  1.  Chromogranins (A, B, C) are acidic monomeric soluble proteins found in the large secretory granules. Chromogranin  
A is the most widely used.
 
 2.  Neuron-specific enolase (NSE) is the γ-γ dimer of the enzyme enolase and is a cytosolic marker of neuroendocrine 
differentiation.
 
 3.  Synaptophysin is an integral membrane glycoprotein of 38,000 molecular weight found in small vesicles of neurons and 
neuroendocrine tumors.
B.  Pathologic similarities
 
 1.  All are APUDomas showing amine precursor uptake and decarboxylation.
 
 2.  Ultrastructurally they have dense-core secretory granules (>80 nm).
 
 3.  Histologically, generally appear similar with few mitoses and uniform nuclei.
 
 4.  Frequently synthesize multiple peptides/amines, which can be detected immunocytochemically but may not be 
secreted.
 
 5.  Presence or absence of clinical syndrome or type cannot be predicted by immunocytochemical studies.
 
 6.  Histologic classifications increasingly predictive of biologic behavior. Only invasion or metastases establish malignancy.
C.  Similarities of biologic behavior
 
 1.  Generally slow growing, but a proportion are aggressive.
 
 2.  Secrete biologically active peptides/amines, which can cause clinical symptoms.
 
 3.  Generally have high densities of somatostatin receptors, which are used for both localization and treatment.
D.  Similarities/differences in molecular abnormalities
 
 1.  Similarities
a.  Uncommon—alterations in common oncogenes (ras, jun, fos, etc).
b.  Uncommon—alterations in common tumor-suppressor genes (p53, retinoblastoma).
c.  Alterations at MEN 1 locus (11q13) and p16INK4a (9p21) occur in a proportion (10–45%).
d.  Methylation of various genes occurs in 40–87% (ras-associated domain family I, p14, p16, O6 methyl guanosine 
methyltransferases, retinoic acid receptor β)
 
 2.  Differences
a.  PETs—loss of 1p (21%), 3p (8–47%), 3q (8–41%), 11q (21–62%), 6q (18–68%). Gains at 17q (10–55%),  
7q (16–68%), 4q (33%).
b.  Carcinoids—loss of 18q (38–67%) >18p (33–43%) >9p, 16q21(21–23%). Gains at 17q, 19p (57%), 4q (33%),  
14q (20%).
Abbreviation: MEN 1, multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1.
SECTION IX
Neoplastic Diseases of the Gastrointestinal System
554
Table 52-2 
Gastrointestinal Neuroendocrine Tumor Syndrome
Name
Biologically 
Active 
Peptide(s) 
Secreted
Incidence 
(New 
Cases/106 
Population/
Year)
Tumor  
Location
Malignant, %
Associated 
with MEN 
1, %
Main Symptoms/
Signs
I. Established Specific Functional Syndrome
A. Carcinoid tumor
Carcinoid  
syndrome
Serotonin,  
possibly 
tachykinins, 
motilin,  
prostaglandins
0.5–2
Midgut (75–87%)
Foregut (2–33%)
Hindgut (1–8%)
Unknown (2–15%)
95–100
Rare
Diarrhea (32–84%)
Flushing (63–75%)
Pain (10–34%)
Asthma (4–18%)
Heart disease 
(11–41%)
B. Pancreatic endocrine tumor
Zollinger-Ellison 
syndrome
Gastrin
0.5–1.5
Duodenum (70%)
Pancreas (25%)
Other sites (5%)
60–90
20–25
Pain (79–100%)
Diarrhea (30–75%)
Esophageal symp-
toms (31–56%)
Insulinoma
Insulin
1–2
Pancreas (>99%)
<10
4–5
Hypoglycemic 
symptoms (100%)
VIPoma 
(Verner- 
Morrison  
syndrome, 
pancreatic 
cholera, 
WDHA)
Vasoactive 
intestinal  
peptide
0.05–0.2
Pancreas (90%, 
adult)
Other (10%, 
neural, adrenal, 
periganglionic)
40–70
6
Diarrhea (90–100%)
Hypokalemia  
(80–100%)
Dehydration (83%)
Glucagonoma
Glucagon
0.01–0.1
Pancreas (100%)
50–80
1–20
Rash (67–90%)
Glucose intolerance 
(38–87%)
Weight loss  
(66–96%)
Somatostati-
noma
Somatostatin
Rare
Pancreas (55%)
Duodenum/ 
jejunum (44%)
>70
45
Diabetes mellitus 
(63–90%)
Cholelithiases 
(65–90%)
Diarrhea (35–90%)
GRFoma
Growth  
hormone–  
releasing  
hormone
Unknown
Pancreas (30%)
Lung (54%)
Jejunum (7%)
Other (13%)
>60
16
Acromegaly (100%)
ACTHoma
ACTH
Rare
Pancreas (4–16% 
all ectopic 
Cushing’s)
>95
Rare
Cushing’s  
syndrome (100%)
PET causing 
carcinoid  
syndrome
Serotonin, 
?tachykinins
Rare  
(43 cases)
Pancreas (<1% 
all carcinoids)
60–88
Rare
Same as carcinoid 
syndrome above
PET causing 
hypercalcemia
PTHrP
Others 
unknown
Rare
Pancreas (rare 
cause of  
hypercalcemia)
84
Rare
Abdominal pain 
due to hepatic 
metastases
II. Possible Specific Functional Syndrome
PET secreting 
calcitonin
Calcitonin
Rare
Pancreas (rare 
cause of hyper-
calcitonemia)
>80
16
Diarrhea (50%)
PET secreting 
renin
Renin
Rare
Pancreas
Unknown
No
Hypertension
(continued )
 
CHAPTER 52
Endocrine Tumors of the Gastrointestinal Tract and Pancreas
555
PET secreting 
luteinizing 
hormone
Luteinizing  
hormone
Rare
Pancreas
Unknown
No
Anovulation,  
virilization 
(female); reduced 
libido (male)
PET secreting 
erythropoietin
Erythropoietin
Rare
Pancreas
100
No
Polycythemia
PET secreting 
IF-II
Insulin-like 
growth growth 
factor II
Rare
Pancreas
Unknown
No
Hypoglycemia
III. No Functional Syndrome
PPoma/­
nonfunctional
None
1–2
Pancreas (100%)
>60
18–44
Weight loss  
(30–90%)
Abdominal mass 
(10–30%)
Pain (30–95%)
Abbreviations: ACTH, adrenocorticotropic hormone; GRFoma, growth hormone-releasing factor secreting pancreatic endocrine tumor; 
IF-II, insulin-like growth factor 2; MEN, multiple endocrine neoplasia; PET, pancreatic endocrine tumor; PPoma, tumor secreting pancreatic 
polypeptide; PTHrP, parathyroid hormone–related peptide; VIPoma, tumor secreting vasoactive intestinal peptide; WDHA, watery diarrhea, 
hypokalemia, and achlorhydria syndrome.
Table 52-2 
Gastrointestinal Neuroendocrine Tumor Syndrome (continued)
Name
Biologically 
Active 
Peptide(s) 
Secreted
Incidence 
(New 
Cases/106 
Population/
Year)
Tumor  
Location
Malignant, %
Associated 
with MEN 
1, %
Main Symptoms/
Signs
Carcinoid tumors can occur in almost any GI tissue 
(Table 52-3); however, at present most (70%) have their 
origin in one of three sites: bronchus, jejunoileum, or 
colon/rectum. In the past, carcinoid tumors most fre-
quently were reported in the appendix (i.e., 40%); how-
ever, the bronchus/lung, rectum, and small intestine 
are now the most common sites. Overall, the GI tract 
is the most common site for these tumors, accounting 
for 64%, with the respiratory tract a distant second at 
28%. Both race and sex can affect the frequency as well as 
the distribution of carcinoid tumors. African Americans 
have a high incidence of carcinoids, and rectal carci-
noids are the most common. Females have a lower inci-
dence of small-intestinal and pancreatic carcinoids.
The term pancreatic endocrine tumor, although widely 
used and therefore retained here, is also a misnomer, 
strictly speaking, because these tumors can occur either 
almost entirely in the pancreas (insulinomas, gluca-
gonomas, nonfunctional PETs, PETs causing hypercal-
cemia) or at both pancreatic and extrapancreatic sites 
(gastrinomas, VIPomas [vasoactive intestinal peptide], 
somatostatinomas, GRFomas [growth hormone–releasing 
factor]). PETs are also called islet cell tumors; how-
ever, the use of this term is discouraged because it is not 
established that they originate from the islets and many 
can occur at extrapancreatic sites.
A number of new classification systems have been 
proposed for both carcinoids and PETs. In the World 
Health Organization (WHO) classification it has been 
proposed that these tumors all be classified as GI neu-
roendocrine tumors (including carcinoids and PETs), 
which divides them into three general categories: 
(1a) well-differentiated NETs, (1b) well-differentiated 
neuroendocrine carcinomas that have low-grade malig-
nancy, and (2) poorly differentiated neuroendocrine 
carcinomas that are usually small cell neuroendocrine 
carcinomas of high-grade malignancy. The term 
carcinoid is synonymous with well-differentiated NETs 
(1a). This classification is further divided on the basis 
of tumor location and biology. In addition, for the first 
time a standard TNM (tumor, node, metastasis) classi-
fication and grading system has been proposed for GI 
neuroendocrine tumors. The new WHO classification 
and the TNM classification and grading system were 
proposed to facilitate the comparison and evaluation of 
clinical, pathologic, and prognostic features and results 
of treatment in GI NETs from different studies. These 
classification systems may provide important prognostic 
information that can guide treatment (Table 52-4).
The exact incidence of carcinoid tumors or PETs var-
ies according to whether only symptomatic tumors or all 
tumors are considered. The incidence of clinically sig-
nificant carcinoids is 7–13 cases/million population per 
year, whereas any malignant carcinoids at autopsy are 
reported in 21–84 cases/million population per year. 
The incidence of GI NETs is approximately 25–50 cases 
SECTION IX
Neoplastic Diseases of the Gastrointestinal System
556
per million in the United States, which makes them 
less common than adenocarcinomas of the GI tract. 
However, their incidence has increased sixfold in the last 
30 years. Clinically significant PETs have a prevalence 
of 10 cases/million population, with insulinomas, gastri-
nomas, and nonfunctional PETs having an incidence of 
0.5–2 cases/million population per year (Table 52-2). 
VIPomas are two to eight times less common, glucagono-
mas are 17 to 30 times less common, and somatostatino-
mas are the least common. In autopsy studies 0.5–1.5% of 
all cases have a PET; however, in less than 1 in 1000 cases 
was a functional tumor thought to occur.
Both carcinoid tumors and PETs commonly show 
malignant behavior (Tables 52-2 and 52-3). With PETs, 
except for insulinomas in which <10% are malignant, 
50–100% in different series are malignant. With carci-
noid tumors the percentage showing malignant behavior 
varies in different locations. For the three most com-
mon sites of occurrence, the incidence of metastases 
varies greatly from jejunoileum (58%) > lung/bronchus 
(6%) > rectum (4%) (Table 52-3). With both carcinoid 
tumors and PETs, a number of factors, summarized in 
Table 52-4, are important prognostic factors in deter-
mining survival and the aggressiveness of the tumor. 
Patients with PETs (excluding insulinomas) generally 
have a poorer prognosis than do patients with GI NETs 
(carcinoids). The presence of liver metastases is the single 
most important prognostic factor in single and multi-
variate analyses for both carcinoid tumors and PETs. 
Particularly important in the development of liver metas-
tases is the size of the primary tumor. For example, with 
small-intestinal carcinoids, which are the most common 
cause of the carcinoid syndrome due to metastatic disease 
in the liver (Table 52-2), metastases occur in 15–25% if 
the tumor diameter is <1 cm, 58–80% if it is 1–2 cm 
in diameter, and >75% if it is >2 cm in diameter. Simi-
lar data exist for gastrinomas and other PETs in which 
the size of the primary tumor is an independent predic-
tor of the development of liver metastases. The presence 
of lymph node metastases; the depth of invasion; the 
rapid rate of growth; various histologic features (differ-
entiation, mitotic rates, growth indices, vessel density, 
vascular endothelial growth factor [VEGF], and CD10 
Table 52-3
Carcinoid Tumor Location, Frequency 
of Metastases, and Association With the 
Carcinoid Syndrome
Location  
(% of Total)
Incidence of 
Metastases
Incidence 
of 
Carcinoid 
Syndrome
Foregut
Esophagus
Stomach
Duodenum
Pancreas
Gallbladder
Bronchus, 
lung,  
trachea
<0.1
4.6
2.0
0.7
0.3
27.9
—
10
—
71.9
17.8
5.7
—
9.5
3.4
20
5
13
Midgut
Jejunum
Ileum
Meckel’s 
diverticulum
Appendix
Colon
Liver
Ovary
Testis
1.8
14.9
0.5
4.8
8.6
0.4
1.0
<0.1
{58.4
—
38.8
51
32.
2 32
—
9
9
13
<1
5
—
50
50
Hindgut
Rectum
13.6
3.9
—
Source: Location is from the PAN-SEER data (1973–1999), and inci-
dence of metastases from the SEER data (1992–1999), reported by 
IM Modlin et al: Cancer 97:934, 2003. Incidence of carcinoid 
syndrome is from 4349 cases studied from 1950–1971, reported by 
JD Godwin: Cancer 36:560, 1975.
Carcinoid tumor cell
Tryptophan
Tryptophan hydroxylase
Aromatic L-amino acid
decarboxylase
Monoamine oxidase
Aldehyde dehydrogenase
Secretion
Excretion
Excretion
Hydroxytryptophan
(5-HTP)
Serotonin
(5-HT)
5-HT stored in
secretory granules
5-HT in blood
Typical
Typical
Atypical
5-Hydroxyindolacetic acid
(5-HIAA)
5-HIAA filtered
by kidney
5-HIAA in urine
Normal or slightly
higher 5-HT in urine
5-HTP
5-HT filtered
by kidney
Platelet
 Kidney
5-HT uptake
and storage
Figure 52-1 
Synthesis, secretion, and metabolism of serotonin (5-HT) 
in patients with typical and atypical carcinoid syndromes. 
5-HIAA, 5-hydroxyindolacetic acid.
 
CHAPTER 52
Endocrine Tumors of the Gastrointestinal Tract and Pancreas
557
metalloproteinase expression); necrosis; presence of cyto-
keratin; elevated serum alkaline phosphatase levels; older 
age; advanced stages in WHO, TNM, or grading 
classification systems; and flow cytometric results such 
as the presence of aneuploidy are all important prog-
nostic factors for the development of metastatic disease 
(Table 52-4). For patients with carcinoid tumors, addi-
tional associations with a worse prognosis include the 
development of the carcinoid syndrome (especially the 
development of carcinoid heart disease), male sex, the 
presence of a symptomatic tumor or greater increases 
in a number of tumor markers (5-hydroxyindolacetic 
acid [5-HIAA], neuropeptide K, chromogranin A), and 
the presence of various molecular features. With PETs 
or gastrinomas, which have been the best studied PET 
long-term, a worse prognosis is associated with female 
sex, overexpression of the Ha-ras oncogene or p53, the 
absence of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN 1), 
higher levels of various tumor markers (i.e., chromogranin 
A, gastrin), and various molecular features (Table 52-4).
A number of diseases due to various genetic disor-
ders are associated with an increased incidence of neu-
roendocrine tumors (Table 52-5). Each one is caused 
by a loss of a possible tumor-suppressor gene. The most 
important is MEN 1, which is an autosomal dominant 
disorder due to a defect in a 10-exon gene on 11q13, 
which encodes for a 610-amino-acid nuclear protein, 
menin. Patients with MEN 1 develop hyperparathy-
roidism due to parathyroid hyperplasia in 95–100% of 
cases, PETs in 80–100%, pituitary adenomas in 54–80%, 
adrenal adenomas in 27–36%, bronchial carcinoids 
in 8%, thymic carcinoids in 8%, gastric carcinoids in 
13–30% of patients with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, 
skin tumors (angiofibromas [88%], collagenomas [72%]), 
central nervous system (CNS) tumors (meningiomas 
[<8%]), and smooth-muscle tumors (leiomyomas, leio-
myosarcomas [1–7%]). Among patients with MEN 1, 
80–100% develop nonfunctional PETs (most are micro-
scopic with 0–13% large/symptomatic), functional 
PETs occur in 20–80% in different series with a mean 
of 54% developing Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, 18% 
insulinomas, 3% glucagonomas, 3% VIPomas, and <1% 
GRFomas or somatostatinomas. MEN 1 is present in 
20–25% of all patients with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, 
4% of patients with insulinomas, and a low percentage 
(<5%) of patients with the other PETs.
Three phacomatoses associated with neuroendo-
crine tumors are von Hippel–Lindau disease (VHL), 
Table 52-4
Prognostic Factors in Neuroendocrine Tumors
I. Both carcinoid tumors and PETs
Presence of liver metastases (p < .001)
Extent of liver metastases (p < .001)
Presence of lymph node metastases (p < .001)
Depth of invasion (p < .001)
Rapid rate of tumor growth
Elevated serum alkaline phosphatase levels (p = .003)
Primary tumor site (p < .001)
Primary tumor size (p < .005)
Various histologic features
Tumor differentiation (p < .001)
High growth indices (high Ki–67 index, PCNA expression)
High mitotic counts (p < .001)
Necrosis present
Presence of cytokeratin 19 (p < .02)
Vascular or perineural invasion
Vessel density (low microvessel density, increased 
lymphatic density)
High CD10 metalloproteinase expression (in series 
with all grades of NETs)
Flow cytometric features (i.e., aneuploidy)
High VEGF expression (in low-grade or well- 
differentiated NETs only)
WHO, TNM, and grading classification
Presence of a pancreatic NET rather than GI NET 
associated with poorer prognosis (p = .0001)
Older age (p < .01)
 II. Carcinoid tumors
Presence of carcinoid syndrome
Laboratory results (urinary 5-HIAA levels [p < .01], plasma 
neuropeptide K [p < .05], serum chromogranin A [p < .01])
Presence of a second malignancy
Male sex (p < .001)
Mode of discovery (incidental > symptomatic)
Molecular findings (TGF-α expression [p < .05], chr 16q 
LOH or gain chr 4p [p < .05])
WHO, TNM, and grading classification
Molecular findings (gain in chr 14, loss of 3p13 [ileal  
carcinoid], upregulation of Hoxc6)
III. PETs
Ha-ras oncogene or p53 overexpression
Female gender
MEN 1 syndrome absent
Presence of nonfunctional tumor (some studies, not all)
WHO, TNM, and grading classification
Laboratory findings (increased chromogranin A in some 
studies; gastrinomas—increased gastrin level)
Molecular findings: increased HER2/neu expression (p = .032), 
chr 1q, 3p, 3q, or 6q LOH (p = .0004), EGF receptor 
overexpression (p = .034), gains in chr 7q, 17q, 17p, 20q; 
alterations in the VHL gene (deletion, methylation)
Abbreviations: 5-HIAA, 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid; chr, chromosome; EGF, epidermal growth factor; Ki-67, proliferation-associated nuclear 
antigen recognized by Ki-67 monoclonal antibody; LOH, loss of heterozygosity; MEN, multiple endocrine neoplasia; NET, neuroendocrine 
tumors; PCNA, proliferating cell nuclear antigen; PET, pancreatic endocrine tumor;  TGF-α, transforming growth factor α; TNM, tumor, node, 
metastasis; VEGF, vascular endothelial growth factor; WHO, World Health Organization.
SECTION IX
Neoplastic Diseases of the Gastrointestinal System
558
von Recklinghausen’s disease (neurofibromatosis type 1 
[NF-1]), and tuberous sclerosis (Bourneville’s disease) 
(Table 52-5). VHL is an autosomal dominant disorder 
due to defects on chromosome 3p25, which encodes 
for a 213-amino-acid protein that interacts with the 
elongin family of proteins as a transcriptional regula-
tor. In addition to cerebellar hemangioblastomas, renal 
cancer, and pheochromocytomas, 10–17% develop 
a PET. Most are nonfunctional, although insulino-
mas and VIPomas have been reported. Patients with 
NF-1 (von Recklinghausen’s disease) have defects 
in a gene on chromosome 17q11.2 that encodes for 
a 2845-amino-acid protein, neurofibromin, which 
functions in normal cells as a suppressor of the ras sig-
naling cascade. Up to 10% of these patients develop 
an upper GI carcinoid tumor, characteristically in 
the periampullary region (54%). Many are classified 
as somatostatinomas because they contain somatosta-
tin immunocytochemically; however, they uncom-
monly secrete somatostatin and rarely produce a clinical 
somatostatinoma syndrome. NF-1 has rarely been asso-
ciated with insulinomas and Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. 
NF-1 accounts for 48% of all duodenal somatostastino-
mas and 23% of all ampullary carcinoid tumors. Tuberous 
sclerosis is caused by mutations that alter either the 
1164-amino-acid protein hamartin (TSC1) or the 
1807-amino-acid protein tuberin (TSC2). Both hamartin 
and tuberin interact in a pathway related to phosphati-
dylinositol 3-kinases and mTor signaling cascades. A 
few cases including nonfunctional and functional PETs 
(insulinomas and gastrinomas) have been reported in 
these patients (Table 52-5).
In contrast to most common nonendocrine tumors, 
such as carcinoma of the breast, colon, lung, or stom-
ach, in neither PETs nor carcinoid tumors have alter-
ations in common oncogenes (ras, myc, fos, src, jun) or 
common tumor-suppressor genes (p53, retinoblastoma 
susceptibility gene) been found to be generally impor-
tant in their molecular pathogenesis (Table 52-1). 
Alterations that may be important in their pathogenesis 
include changes in the MEN 1 gene, p16/MTS1 tumor-
suppressor gene, and DPC 4/Smad 4 gene; amplification 
of the HER-2/neu protooncogene; alterations in tran-
scription factors (Hoxc6 [GI carcinoids]), growth factors, 
and their receptor expression; methylation of a number 
of genes that probably results in their inactivation; and 
deletions of unknown tumor-suppressor genes as well as 
gains in other unknown genes (Table 52-1). Compara-
tive genomic hybridization, genome-wide allelotyping 
studies, and genome-wide single-nucleotide polymor-
phism analyses have shown that chromosomal losses and 
gains are common in PETs and carcinoids, but they dif-
fer between these two NETs and some have prognostic 
significance (Table 52-4). Mutations in the MEN 1 gene 
are probably particularly important. There is loss of het-
erozygosity at the MEN 1 locus on chromosome 11q13 in 
93% of sporadic PETs (i.e., in patients without MEN 1) 
and in 26–75% of sporadic carcinoid tumors. Mutations 
in the MEN 1 gene are reported in 31–34% of sporadic 
gastrinomas. The presence of a number of these molecu-
lar alterations (PET or carcinoid) correlates with tumor 
growth, tumor size, and disease extent or invasiveness 
and may have prognostic significance.
Carcinoid Tumors and Carcinoid 
Syndrome
Characteristics of the Most 
Common GI Carcinoid Tumors
Appendiceal carcinoids
Appendiceal carcinoids occur in 1 in every 200–300 
appendectomies, usually in the appendiceal tip. Most 
Table 52-5
Genetic Syndromes Associated With an Increased Incidence of Neuroendocrine Tumors (NETs) 
(Carcinoids or Pancreatic Endocrine Tumors [PETs])
Syndrome
Location of Gene Mutation and  
Gene Product
NETs Seen/Frequency
Multiple endocrine 
neoplasia type 1 
(MEN 1)
11q13 (encodes 610-amino-acid  
protein, menin)
80–100% develop PETs (microscopic), 20–80%  
(clinical): (nonfunctional > gastrinoma > insulinoma)
Carcinoids: gastric (13–30%), bronchial/thymic (8%)
von Hippel–Lindau 
disease
3q25 (encodes 213-amino-acid protein)
12–17% develop PETs (almost always nonfunctional)
von Recklinghausen’s 
disease (neurofibro-
matosis 1 [NF-1])
17q11.2 (encodes 2485-amino-acid  
protein, neurofibromin)
0–10% develop PETs, primarily duodenal  
somatostatinomas (usually nonfunctional)
Rarely insulinoma, gastrinoma
Tuberous sclerosis
9q34 (TSCI) (encodes 1164-amino-acid 
protein, hamartin) 16p13 (TSC2) (encodes 
1807-amino-acid protein, tuberin)
Uncommonly develop PETs (nonfunctional and  
functional [insulinoma, gastrinoma])
 
CHAPTER 52
Endocrine Tumors of the Gastrointestinal Tract and Pancreas
559
(i.e., >90%) are <1 cm in diameter without metas-
tases in older studies, but more recently 2–35% have 
had metastases (Table 52-3). In the SEER data of 
1570 appendiceal carcinoids, 62% were localized, 27% 
had regional metastases, and 8% had distant metastases. 
Approximately 50% between 1 and 2 cm metastasized 
to lymph nodes. Their percentage of the total number 
of carcinoids decreased from 43.9% (1950–1969) to 
2.4% (1992–1999).
Small-intestinal carcinoids
Small-intestinal carcinoids account for approximately 
one-third of all small-bowel tumors in various surgi-
cal series. These are frequently multiple; 70–80% are 
present in the ileum, and 70% within 6 cm (24 in.) of 
the ileocecal valve. Forty percent are <1 cm in diam-
eter, 32% are 1–2 cm, and 29% are >2 cm. Between 
35 and 70% are associated with metastases (Table 52-3). 
They characteristically cause a marked fibrotic reaction, 
which can lead to intestinal obstruction. Distant metas-
tases occur to liver in 36–60%, to bone in 3%, and to 
lung in 4%. As discussed previously, tumor size is an 
important variable in the frequency of metastases. How-
ever, even a proportion of small carcinoid tumors of the 
small intestine (<1 cm) have metastases in 15–25% of 
cases, whereas the proportion increases to 58–100% for 
tumors 1–2 cm in diameter. Carcinoids also occur in 
the duodenum, with 31% having metastases. No duo-
denal tumor <1 cm in two series metastasized, whereas 
33% of those >2 cm had metastases. Small-intestinal 
carcinoids are the most common cause (60–87%) of the 
carcinoid syndrome and are discussed in a later section 
(Table 52-6).
Rectal carcinoids
Rectal carcinoids represent 1–2% of all rectal tumors. 
They are found in approximately 1 in every 2500 proc-
toscopies. Nearly all occur between 4 and 13 cm above 
the dentate line. Most are small, with 66–80% being <1 cm 
in diameter, and rarely metastasize (5%). Tumors 
between 1 and 2 cm can metastasize in 5–30%, and 
those >2 cm, which are uncommon, in >70%.
Bronchial carcinoids
Bronchial carcinoids account for 1–2% of primary lung 
tumors. The frequency of bronchial carcinoids has 
increased more than fivefold over the last 30 years. A 
number of different classifications of bronchial carci-
noid tumors have been proposed. In some studies, lung 
NETs are classified into four categories: typical carci-
noid (also called bronchial carcinoid tumor, Kulchitsky 
cell carcinoma I [KCC-I]), atypical carcinoid (also 
called well-differentiated neuroendocrine carcinoma 
[KC-II]), intermediate small cell neuroendocrine car-
cinoma, and small cell neuroendocarcinoma (KC-III). 
Another proposed classification includes three categories 
of lung NETs: benign or low-grade malignant (typi-
cal carcinoid), low-grade malignant (atypical carci-
noid), and high-grade malignant (poorly differentiated 
carcinoma of the large cell or small cell type). The 
WHO classification includes four general categories: 
typical carcinoid, atypical carcinoid, large cell neuro-
endocrine carcinoma, and small cell carcinoma. These 
different categories of lung NETs have different prog-
noses, varying from excellent for typical carcinoid to 
poor for small cell neuroendocrine carcinomas. The 
occurrence of large cell and small cell lung carcinoids, 
but not typical or atypical lung carcinoids, is related to 
tobacco use.
Gastric carcinoids
Gastric carcinoids account for 3 of every 1000 gastric 
neoplasms. Three different subtypes of gastric carci-
noids are proposed to occur. Each originates from gas-
tric enterochromaffin-like cells (ECL cells), one of the 
six types of gastric neuroendocrine cells, in the gastric 
mucosa. Two subtypes are associated with hypergas-
trinemic states, either chronic atrophic gastritis (type I) 
(80% of all gastric carcinoids) or Zollinger-Ellison 
syndrome, which is almost always a part of the MEN 1 
syndrome (type II) (6% of all cases). These tumors gen-
erally pursue a benign course, with type I uncommonly 
Table 52-6
Clinical Characteristics in Patients With 
Carcinoid Syndrome
At 
Presentation
During Course 
of Disease
Symptoms/signs
Diarrhea
32–73%
68–84%
Flushing
23–65%
63–74%
Pain
10%
34%
Asthma/wheezing
4–8%
3–18%
Pellagra
2%
5%
None
12%
22%
Carcinoid heart 
disease present
11%
14–41%
Demographics
Male
46–59%
46–61%
Age
Mean
57 yrs
52–54 yrs
Range
25–79 yrs
9–91 yrs
Tumor location
Foregut
5–9%
2–33%
Midgut
78–87%
60–87%
Hindgut
1–5%
1–8%
Unknown
2–11%
2–15%
SECTION IX
Neoplastic Diseases of the Gastrointestinal System
560
(<10%) associated with metastases, whereas type II 
tumors are slightly more aggressive with 10–30% 
associated with metastases. They are usually mul-
tiple and small and infiltrate only to the submucosa. 
The third subtype of gastric carcinoid (type III) 
(sporadic) occurs without hypergastrinemia (14–25% of 
all gastric carcinoids) and has an aggressive course, with 
54–66% developing metastases. Sporadic carcinoids are 
usually single, large tumors; 50% have atypical histol-
ogy, and they can be a cause of the carcinoid syndrome. 
Gastric carcinoids as a percentage of all carcinoids are 
increasing in frequency (1.96% [1969–1971], 3.6% 
[1973–1991], 5.8% [1991–1999]).
Carcinoid Tumors without the 
Carcinoid Syndrome
The age of patients at diagnosis ranges from 10 to 
93 years, with a mean age of 63 years for the small 
intestine and 66 years for the rectum. The presenta-
tion is diverse and is related to the site of origin and the 
extent of malignant spread. In the appendix, carcinoid 
tumors usually are found incidentally during surgery 
for suspected appendicitis. Small-intestinal carcinoids in 
the jejunoileum present with periodic abdominal pain 
(51%), intestinal obstruction with ileus/invagination 
(31%), an abdominal tumor (17%), or GI bleeding 
(11%). Because of the vagueness of the symptoms, 
the diagnosis usually is delayed approximately 2 years 
from onset of the symptoms, with a range up to 
20 years. Duodenal, gastric, and rectal carcinoids are 
most frequently found by chance at endoscopy. The 
most common symptoms of rectal carcinoids are 
melena/bleeding (39%), constipation (17%), and diar-
rhea (12%). Bronchial carcinoids frequently are discov-
ered as a lesion on a chest radiograph, and 31% of the 
patients are asymptomatic. Thymic carcinoids present as 
anterior mediastinal masses, usually on chest radiograph 
or CT scan. Ovarian and testicular carcinoids usually 
present as masses discovered on physical examination or 
ultrasound. Metastatic carcinoid tumor in the liver fre-
quently presents as hepatomegaly in a patient who may 
have minimal symptoms and nearly normal liver func-
tion test results.
Carcinoid Tumors with Systemic 
Symptoms Due to Secreted 
Products
Carcinoid tumors immunocytochemically can contain 
numerous GI peptides: gastrin, insulin, somatostatin, 
motilin, neurotensin, tachykinins (substance K, substance 
P, neuropeptide K), glucagon, gastrin-releasing peptide, 
vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP), pancreatic polypep-
tide (PP), ghrelin, other biologically active peptides 
(ACTH, calcitonin, growth hormone), prostaglandins, 
and bioactive amines (serotonin). These substances may 
or may not be released in sufficient amounts to cause 
symptoms. In various studies of patients with carcinoid 
tumors, elevated serum levels of PP were found in 43%, 
motilin in 14%, gastrin in 15%, and VIP in 6%. Foregut 
carcinoids are more likely to produce various GI pep-
tides than are midgut carcinoids. Ectopic ACTH pro-
duction causing Cushing’s syndrome is seen increas-
ingly with foregut carcinoids (respiratory tract 
primarily) and in some series has been the most com-
mon cause of the ectopic ACTH syndrome, account-
ing for 64% of all cases. Acromegaly due to growth 
hormone–releasing factor release occurs with foregut 
carcinoids, as does the somatostatinoma syndrome, 
but rarely occurs with duodenal carcinoids. The most 
common systemic syndrome with carcinoid tumors is 
the carcinoid syndrome, which is discussed in detail in 
the next section.
Carcinoid Syndrome
Clinical features
The cardinal features from a number of series at pre-
sentation as well as during the disease course are shown 
in Table 52-6. Flushing and diarrhea are the two most 
common symptoms, occurring in up to 73% initially 
and in up to 89% during the course of the disease. The 
characteristic flush is of sudden onset; it is a deep red or 
violaceous erythema of the upper body, especially the 
neck and face, often associated with a feeling of warmth 
and occasionally associated with pruritus, lacrimation, 
diarrhea, or facial edema. Flushes may be precipitated 
by stress; alcohol; exercise; certain foods, such as cheese; 
or certain agents, such as catecholamines, pentagastrin, 
and serotonin reuptake inhibitors. Flushing episodes 
may be brief, lasting 2 to 5 min, especially initially, or 
may last hours, especially later in the disease course. 
Flushing usually is associated with metastastic midgut 
carcinoids but can also occur with foregut carcinoids. 
With bronchial carcinoids the flushes frequently are 
prolonged for hours to days, reddish in color, and asso-
ciated with salivation, lacrimation, diaphoresis, diarrhea, 
and hypotension. The flush associated with gastric car-
cinoids can also be reddish in color, but with a patchy 
distribution over the face and neck, although the classic 
flush seen with midgut carcinoids can also be seen with 
gastric carcinoids. It may be provoked by food and have 
accompanying pruritus.
Diarrhea is present in 32–73% initially and 68–84% at 
some time in the disease course. Diarrhea usually occurs 
with flushing (85% of cases). The diarrhea usually 
is described as watery, with 60% of patients having 
<1 L/d of diarrhea. Steatorrhea is present in 67%, 
and in 46% it is greater than 15 g/d (normal <7 g). 
 
CHAPTER 52
Endocrine Tumors of the Gastrointestinal Tract and Pancreas
561
Abdominal pain may be present with the diarrhea or 
independently in 10–34% of cases.
Cardiac manifestations occur in 11–20% initially of 
patients with carcinoid syndrome and in 17–56% (mean 
40%) at some time in the disease course. The cardiac 
disease is due to the formation of fibrotic plaques 
(composed of smooth-muscle cells, myofibroblasts, and 
elastic tissue) involving the endocardium, primarily on 
the right side, although lesions on the left side also occur 
occasionally, especially if a patent foramen ovale exists. 
The dense fibrous deposits are most commonly on the 
ventricular aspect of the tricuspid valve and less com-
monly on the pulmonary valve cusps. They can result 
in constriction of the valves, and pulmonic stenosis is 
usually predominant, whereas the tricuspid valve is often 
fixed open, resulting in regurgitation predominating. 
Overall, in patients with carcinoid heart disease, 97% 
have tricuspid insufficiency, 59% tricuspid stenosis, 50% 
pulmonary insufficiency, 25% pulmonary stenosis, and 
11% (0–25%) left-side lesions. Up to 80% of patients 
with cardiac lesions develop heart failure. Lesions on 
the left side are much less extensive, occur in 30% at 
autopsy, and most frequently affect the mitral valve.
Other clinical manifestations include wheezing or 
asthma-like symptoms (8–18%) and pellagra-like skin 
lesions (2–25%). A variety of noncardiac problems due 
to increased fibrous tissue have been reported, includ-
ing retroperitoneal fibrosis causing urethral obstruc-
tion, Peyronie’s disease of the penis, intraabdominal 
fibrosis, and occlusion of the mesenteric arteries or 
veins.
Pathobiology
Carcinoid syndrome occurred in 8% of 8876 patients 
with carcinoid tumors, with a rate of 1.4–18.4% in dif-
ferent studies. It occurs only when sufficient concen-
trations of products secreted by the tumor reach the 
systemic circulation. In 91% of cases this occurs after 
distant metastases to the liver. Rarely, primary gut 
carcinoids with nodal metastases with extensive retro-
peritoneal invasion, pancreatic carcinoids with retro-
peritoneal lymph nodes, or carcinoids of the lung or 
ovary with direct access to the systemic circulation can 
cause the carcinoid syndrome without hepatic metas-
tases. All carcinoid tumors do not have the same pro-
pensity to metastasize and cause the carcinoid syndrome 
(Table 52-3). Midgut carcinoids account for 60–67% of 
cases of carcinoid syndrome, foregut tumors for 2–33%, 
hindgut for 1–8%, and an unknown primary location 
for 2–15%.
One of the main secretory products of carcinoid 
tumors involved in the carcinoid syndrome is serotonin 
(5-hydroxytryptamine [5-HT]) (Fig. 52-1), which is 
synthesized from tryptophan. Up to 50% of dietary 
tryptophan can be used in this synthetic pathway by 
tumor cells, and this can result in inadequate supplies 
for conversion to niacin; hence, some patients (2.5%) 
develop pellagra-like lesions. Serotonin has numerous 
biologic effects, including stimulating intestinal secre-
tion with inhibition of absorption, stimulating increases 
in intestinal motility, and stimulating fibrogenesis. In 
various studies 56–88% of all carcinoid tumors were 
associated with serotonin overproduction; however, 
12–26% of the patients did not have the carcinoid 
syndrome. In one study platelet serotonin was ele-
vated in 96% of patients with midgut carcinoids, 43% 
with foregut tumors, and 0% with hindgut tumors. In 
90–100% of patients with the carcinoid syndrome there 
is evidence of serotonin overproduction. Serotonin is 
thought to be predominantly responsible for the diar-
rhea because of its effects on gut motility and intesti-
nal secretion, primarily through 5-HT3 and, to a lesser 
degree, 5-HT4 receptors. Serotonin receptor antago-
nists (especially 5-HT3 antagonists) relieve the diarrhea 
in many, but not all, patients. Additional studies suggest 
that prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) and tachykinins may be 
important mediators of the diarrhea in some patients. 
In one study, plasma tachykinin levels correlated with 
symptoms of both flushing and diarrhea. Serotonin 
does not appear to be involved in the flushing because 
serotonin receptor antagonists do not relieve flushing. 
In patients with gastric carcinoids the characteristic 
red, patchy pruritic flush probably is due to histamine 
release because H1- and H2-receptor antagonists can 
prevent it. Numerous studies have shown that tachy-
kinins are stored in carcinoid tumors and released during 
flushing. However, some studies have demonstrated 
that octreotide can relieve the flushing induced by pen-
tagastrin in these patients without altering the stimu-
lated increase in plasma substance P, suggesting that 
other mediators must be involved in the flushing. A 
correlation between plasma tachykinin levels, but not 
substance P levels, and flushing has been reported. Both 
histamine and serotonin may be responsible for the 
wheezing as well as the fibrotic reactions involving the 
heart, causing Peyronie’s disease and intraabdominal 
fibrosis. The exact mechanism of the heart disease has 
remained unclear, although increasing evidence sup-
ports a central role for serotonin. The valvular heart 
disease caused by the appetite-suppressant drug dexfen-
fluramine is histologically indistinguishable from that 
observed in carcinoid disease. Furthermore, ergot- 
containing dopamine receptor agonists used for Parkinson’s 
disease (pergolide, cabergoline) cause valvular heart dis-
ease that closely resembles that seen in the carcinoid 
syndrome. Metabolites of fenfluramine, as well as the 
dopamine receptor agonists, have high affinity for sero-
tonin receptor subtype 5-HT2B receptors, whose activa-
tion is known to cause fibroblast mitogenesis. Serotonin 
receptor subtypes 5-HT1B,1D,2A,2B normally are expressed 
in human heart valve interstitial cells. High levels of 
SECTION IX
Neoplastic Diseases of the Gastrointestinal System
562
5-HT2B receptors are known to occur in heart valves 
and occur in cardiac fibroblasts and cardiomyocytes. 
Studies of cultured interstitial cells from human cardiac 
valves have demonstrated that these valvulopathic drugs 
induce mitogenesis by activating 5-HT2B receptors and 
stimulating upregulation of transforming growth factor 
β and collagen biosynthesis. These observations sup-
port the conclusion that serotonin overproduction by 
carcinoid tumors is important in mediating the valvu-
lar changes, possibly by activating 5-HT2B receptors 
in the endocardium. Both the magnitude of serotonin 
overproduction and prior chemotherapy are important 
predictors of progression of the heart disease. Atrial 
natriuretic peptide (ANP) overproduction also has 
been reported in patients with cardiac disease, but its 
role in the pathogenesis is unknown. However, high 
plasma levels of ANP have a worse prognosis. Plasma 
connective tissue growth factor levels are elevated 
in many fibrotic conditions; elevated levels occur in 
patients with carcinoid heart disease and correlate with 
the presence of right-ventricular dysfunction and the 
extent of valvular regurgitation in patients with carci-
noid tumors.
Patients may develop either a typical or, rarely, an 
atypical carcinoid syndrome. In patients with the typi-
cal form, which characteristically is caused by a mid-
gut carcinoid tumor, the conversion of tryptophan 
to 5-HTP is the rate-limiting step (Fig. 52-1). Once 
5-HTP is formed, it is rapidly converted to 5-HT 
and stored in secretory granules of the tumor or in 
platelets. A small amount remains in plasma and is 
converted to 5-HIAA, which appears in large amounts 
in the urine. These patients have an expanded sero-
tonin pool size, increased blood and platelet sero-
tonin, and increased urinary 5-hydroxyindolacetic 
acid (5-HIAA). Some carcinoid tumors cause an atypi-
cal carcinoid syndrome that is thought to be due to 
a deficiency in the enzyme dopa decarboxylase; thus, 
5-HTP cannot be converted to 5-HT (serotonin), and 
5-HTP is secreted into the bloodstream (Fig. 52-1). In 
these patients, plasma serotonin levels are normal but 
urinary levels may be increased because some 5-HTP 
is converted to 5-HT in the kidney. Characteristically, 
urinary 5-HTP and 5-HT are increased, but urinary 
5-HIAA levels are only slightly elevated. Foregut car-
cinoids are the most likely to cause an atypical carci-
noid syndrome.
One of the most immediate life-threatening compli-
cations of the carcinoid syndrome is the development 
of a carcinoid crisis. This is more common in patients 
who have intense symptoms or have greatly increased 
urinary 5-HIAA levels (i.e., >200 mg/d). The crises 
may occur spontaneously or be provoked by stress, 
anesthesia, chemotherapy, or a biopsy. Patients develop 
intense flushing, diarrhea, abdominal pain, cardiac 
abnormalities including tachycardia, hypertension, or 
hypotension. If not adequately treated, this can be a 
terminal event.
Diagnosis of the Carcinoid 
Syndrome and Carcinoid Tumors
The diagnosis of carcinoid syndrome relies on measure-
ment of urinary or plasma serotonin or its metabolites 
in the urine. The measurement of 5-HIAA is used most 
frequently. False-positive elevations may occur if the 
patient is eating serotonin-rich foods such as bananas, 
pineapples, walnuts, pecans, avocados, or hickory nuts 
or is taking certain medications (cough syrup contain-
ing guaifenesin, acetaminophen, salicylates, serotonin 
reuptake inhibitors, or l-dopa). The normal range in 
daily urinary 5-HIAA excretion is 2–8 mg/d. Serotonin 
overproduction was noted in 92% of patients with car-
cinoid syndrome in one study, and in another study, 
5-HIAA had 73% sensitivity and 100% specificity for 
carcinoid syndrome.
Most physicians use only the urinary 5-HIAA excre-
tion rate; however, plasma and platelet serotonin levels, 
if available, may provide additional information. Platelet 
serotonin levels are more sensitive than urinary 5-HIAA 
but are not generally available. Because patients with 
foregut carcinoids may produce an atypical carcinoid 
syndrome, if this syndrome is suspected and the urinary 
5-HIAA is minimally elevated or normal, other urinary 
metabolites of tryptophan, such as 5-HTP and 5-HT, 
should be measured (Fig. 52-1).
Flushing occurs in a number of other diseases, 
including systemic mastocytosis, chronic myeloid leu-
kemia with increased histamine release, menopause, 
reactions to alcohol or glutamate, side effects of chlor-
propamide, calcium channel blockers, and nicotinic 
acid. None of these conditions cause increased urinary 
5-HIAA.
The diagnosis of carcinoid tumor can be suggested 
by the carcinoid syndrome, recurrent abdominal symp-
toms in a healthy-appearing individual, or the discov-
ery of hepatomegaly or hepatic metastases associated 
with minimal symptoms. Ileal carcinoids, which make 
up 25% of all clinically detected carcinoids, should be 
suspected in patients with bowel obstruction, abdominal 
pain, flushing, or diarrhea.
Serum chromogranin A levels are elevated in 
56–100% of patients with carcinoid tumors, and the 
level correlates with tumor bulk. Serum chromogranin 
A levels are not specific for carcinoid tumors because 
they are also elevated in patients with PETs and other 
neuroendocrine tumors. Plasma neuron-specific enolase 
levels are also used as a marker of carcinoid tumors but 
are less sensitive than chromogranin A, being increased 
in only 17–47% of patients.
 
CHAPTER 52
Endocrine Tumors of the Gastrointestinal Tract and Pancreas
563
Treatment	
Carcinoid Syndrome and Nonmetastatic 
Carcinoid Tumors
Carcinoid 
Syndrome  Treatment includes 
avoiding conditions that precipitate flushing, dietary 
supplementation with nicotinamide, treatment of heart 
failure with diuretics, treatment of wheezing with oral  
bronchodilators, and control of the diarrhea with anti­
diarrheal agents such as loperamide and diphenoxyl­
ate. If patients still have symptoms, serotonin receptor 
antagonists or somatostatin analogues (Fig. 52-2) are 
the drugs of choice.
There are 14 subclasses of serotonin receptors, and 
antagonists for many are not available. The 5-HT1 and 
5-HT2 receptor antagonists methylsergide, cyprohep­
tadine, and ketanserin have all been used to control 
Native
somatostatin
Lanreotide
Octreotide
111In-[DTPA-D-Phe1, Tyr3]-octreotide =
111In-pentetreotide; Octreoscan-111
90Y-[DOTA0-D-Phe1,
Tyr3]-octreotide
177Lu-[DOTA0-D-Phe1,
Tyr3]-octreotate
ALA GLY
LYS
LYS
LYS
ASN PHE
SER THR
THR
THR
TYR
THR
PHE
VAL
PHE
TRP
CYS
CYS
CYS
CYS
S
S
S
S
CYS
CYS
S
S
CYS
CYS
S
S
CYS
CYS
S
S
CYS
CYS
S
S
D-
βNAL
D-
PHE
D-
PHE
D-
TRP
LYS
PHE
THR
D-
TRP
LYS
TYR
THR
D-
TRP
LYS
TYR
THR
D-
TRP
LYS
TYR
THR
D-
TRP
HOOC-CH2
HOOC-CH2
CH2-CO
CH2-COOH
CH2-COOH
COOH
HOOC
NH
HOOC
N–(CH2)2–N–(CH2)2–N
D-
PHE
D-
PHE
THR
-ol
THR
-ol
THR
-ol
N
N
O
N
N
90Y
111In
COOH
HOOC
NH
HOOC
N
N
O
N
N
177Lu
Figure 52-2 
Structure of somatostatin and synthetic analogues used 
for diagnostic or therapeutic indications.
the diarrhea but usually do not decrease flushing. 
The use of methylsergide is limited because it can 
cause or enhance retroperitoneal fibrosis. Ketanserin 
diminishes diarrhea in 30–100% of patients. 5-HT3 
receptor antagonists (ondansetron, tropisetron, alos­
etron) can control diarrhea and nausea in up to 100% 
of patients and occasionally ameliorate the flush­
ing. A combination of histamine H1- and H2-receptor 
antagonists (i.e., diphenhydramine and cimetidine  
or ranitidine) may control flushing in patients with 
foregut carcinoids.
Synthetic analogues of somatostatin (octreotide,  
lanreotide) are now the most widely used agents to  
control the symptoms of patients with carcinoid syn­
drome (Fig. 52-2). These drugs are effective at reliev­
ing symptoms and decreasing urinary 5-HIAA levels 
in patients with this syndrome. Octreotide-LAR and 
lanreotide-SR/autogel (Somatuline) control symptoms 
in 74% and 68%, respectively, of patients with carci­
noid syndrome and show a biochemical response in 
51% and 39%. Patients with mild to moderate symp­
toms usually are treated initially with octreotide 100 μg 
SC every 8 h and begun on long-acting monthly depot 
forms (octreotide-LAR or lanreotide-autogel). Forty 
percent of patients escape control after a median time 
of 4 months, and the depot dosage may have to be  
increased as well as supplemented with the shorter- 
acting formulation, SC octreotide.
Carcinoid heart disease is associated with a decreased 
mean survival (3.8 years), and therefore it should be 
sought for and carefully assessed in all patients with 
carcinoid syndrome. Transthoracic echocardiography 
remains a key element in establishing the diagnosis 
of carcinoid heart disease and determining the extent 
and type of cardiac abnormalities. Treatment with 
diuretics and somatostatin analogues can reduce the 
negative hemodynamic effects and secondary heart  
failure. It remains unclear whether long-term treatment  
with these drugs will decrease the progression of car­
cinoid heart disease. Balloon valvuloplasty for stenotic 
valves or cardiac valve surgery may be required.
In patients with carcinoid crises, somatostatin ana­
logues are effective at both treating the condition and 
preventing their development during known precipitat­
ing events such as surgery, anesthesia, chemotherapy,  
and stress. It is recommended that octreotide 150–250 μg 
SC every 6 to 8 h be used 24–48 h before anesthesia and 
then continued throughout the procedure.
Currently, sustained-release preparations of both 
octreotide (octreotide-LAR [long-acting release], 10, 
20, 30 mg) and lanreotide (lanreotide-PR [prolonged 
release, lanreotide-autogel], 60, 90, 120 mg) are avail­
able and widely used because their use greatly facilitates 
long-term treatment. Octreotide-LAR (30 mg/month) 
SECTION IX
Neoplastic Diseases of the Gastrointestinal System
564
gives a plasma level ≥1 ng/mL for 25 days, whereas  
this requires three to six injections a day of the non- 
sustained-release form. Lanreotide autogel (Somatuline) 
is given every 4–6 weeks.
Short-term side effects occur in up to one-half of 
patients. Pain at the injection site and side effects related 
to the GI tract (59% discomfort, 15% nausea, diarrhea) are 
the most common. They are usually short-lived and do 
not interrupt treatment. Important long-term side effects 
include gallstone formation, steatorrhea, and deterioration 
in glucose tolerance. The overall incidence of gallstones/
biliary sludge in one study was 52%, with 7% having symp­
tomatic disease that required surgical treatment.
Interferon α is reported to be effective in controlling 
symptoms of the carcinoid syndrome either alone or com­
bined with hepatic artery embolization. With interferon α 
alone the response rate is 42%, and with interferon α with 
hepatic artery embolization, diarrhea was controlled for  
1 year in 43% and flushing was controlled in 86%.
Hepatic artery embolization alone or with chemo­
therapy (chemoembolization) has been used to control 
the symptoms of carcinoid syndrome. Embolization 
alone is reported to control symptoms in up to 76% of 
patients, and chemoembolization (5-fluorouracil, doxo­
rubicin, cisplatin, mitomycin) in 60–75% of patients. 
Hepatic artery embolization can have major side effects, 
including nausea, vomiting, pain, and fever. In two stud­
ies 5–7% of patients died from complications of hepatic 
artery occlusion.
Other drugs have been used successfully in small 
numbers of patients to control the symptoms of car­
cinoid syndrome. Parachlorophenylanine can inhibit 
tryptophan hydroxylase and therefore the conversion 
of tryptophan to 5-HTP. However, its severe side effects, 
including psychiatric disturbances, make it intolerable 
for long-term use. α-Methyldopa inhibits the conversion 
of 5-HTP to 5-HT, but its effects are only partial.
Peptide radioreceptor therapy (using radiotherapy 
with radiolabeled somatostatin analogues), the use of 
radiolabeled microspheres, and other methods for treat­
ment of advanced metastatic disease may facilitate con­
trol of the carcinoid syndrome and are discussed in a 
later section dealing with treatment of advanced disease.
Carcinoid 
Tumors 
(Nonmetastatic) 
Surgery is the only potentially curative therapy. Because 
with most carcinoids the probability of metastatic dis­
ease increases with increasing size, the extent of surgical 
resection is determined accordingly. With appendiceal 
carcinoids <1 cm, simple appendectomy was curative 
in 103 patients followed for up to 35 years. With rec­
tal carcinoids <1 cm, local resection is curative. With 
small-intestinal carcinoids <1 cm, there is not complete 
agreement. Because 15–69% of small-intestinal carci­
noids this size have metastases in different studies, some  
recommend a wide resection with en bloc resection of 
the adjacent lymph-bearing mesentery. If the carcinoid 
tumor is >2 cm for rectal, appendiceal, or small-intestinal  
carcinomas, a full cancer operation should be done. 
This includes a right hemicolectomy for appendiceal  
carcinoid, an abdominoperineal resection or low  
anterior resection for rectal carcinoids, and an en bloc 
resection of adjacent lymph nodes for small-intestinal 
carcinoids. For carcinoids 1–2 cm in diameter for appen­
diceal tumors, a simple appendectomy is proposed by 
some, whereas others favor a formal right hemicolec­
tomy. For rectal carcinoids 1–2 cm, it is recommended 
that a wide local full-thickness excision be performed.
With type I or II gastric carcinoids, which are usually 
<1 cm, endoscopic removal is recommended. In type I 
or II gastric carcinoids, if the tumor is >2 cm or if there 
is local invasion, some recommend total gastrectomy, 
whereas others recommend antrectomy in type I to 
reduce the hypergastrinemia, which led to regression of 
the carcinoids in a number of studies. For types I and II 
gastric carcinoids of 1–2 cm, there is no agreement, with 
some recommending endoscopic treatment followed 
by chronic somatostatin treatment and careful follow-
up and others recommending surgical treatment. With 
type III gastric carcinoids >2 cm, excision and regional 
lymph node clearance are recommended. Most tumors 
<1 cm are treated endoscopically.
Resection of isolated or limited hepatic metastases 
may be beneficial and will be discussed in a later section 
on treatment of advanced disease.
Pancreatic Endocrine Tumors
Functional PETs usually present clinically with symp-
toms due to the hormone-excess state. Only late in 
the course of the disease does the tumor per se cause 
prominent symptoms such as abdominal pain. In con-
trast, all the symptoms due to nonfunctional PETs 
are due to the tumor per se. The overall result of this 
is that some functional PETs may present with severe 
symptoms with a small or undetectable primary tumor, 
whereas nonfunctional tumors usually present late in the 
disease course with large tumors, which are frequently 
metastatic. The mean delay between onset of continu-
ous symptoms and diagnosis of a functional PET syn-
drome is 4–7 years. Therefore, the diagnoses frequently 
are missed for extended periods.
Treatment	
Pancreatic Endocrine Tumor
Treatment of PETs requires two different strategies. First, 
treatment must be directed at the hormone-excess 
 
CHAPTER 52
Endocrine Tumors of the Gastrointestinal Tract and Pancreas
565
state such as the gastric acid hypersecretion in gastri­
nomas or the hypoglycemia in insulinomas. Ectopic  
hormone secretion usually causes the presenting symp­
toms and can cause life-threatening complications.  
Second, with all the tumors except insulinomas, >50% 
are malignant (Table 52-2); therefore, treatment must 
also be directed against the tumor per se. Because in 
many patients these tumors are not surgically curable 
due to the presence of advanced disease at diagnosis, 
surgical resection for cure, which addresses both treat­
ment aspects, is often not possible.
Gastrinoma (Zollinger-Ellison 
syndrome) (ZES)
A gastrinoma is a neuroendocrine tumor that secretes 
gastrin; the resultant hypergastrinemia causes gastric 
acid hypersecretion (Zollinger-Ellison syndrome). The 
chronic hypergastrinemia results in marked gastric acid 
hypersecretion and growth of the gastric mucosa with 
increased numbers of parietal cells and proliferation of 
gastric ECL cells. The gastric acid hypersecretion char-
acteristically causes peptic ulcer disease, often refrac-
tory and severe, as well as diarrhea. The most common 
presenting symptoms are abdominal pain (70–100%), 
diarrhea (37–73%), and gastroesophageal reflux disease 
(GERD) (30–35%); 10–20% have diarrhea only. Although 
peptic ulcers may occur in unusual locations, most 
patients have a typical duodenal ulcer. Important obser-
vations that should suggest this diagnosis include peptic 
ulcer disease (PUD); with diarrhea; PUD in an unusual 
location or with multiple ulcers; PUD refractory to 
treatment or persistent; PUD associated with promi-
nent gastric folds; PUD associated with findings sugges-
tive of MEN 1 (endocrinopathy, family history of ulcer 
or endocrinopathy, nephrolithiases); and PUD without 
Helicobacter pylori present. H. pylori is present in >90% 
of idiopathic peptic ulcers but is present in <50% of 
patients with gastrinomas. Chronic unexplained diarrhea 
also should suggest gastrinoma.
Approximately 20–25% of patients with ZES have 
MEN 1, and in most cases hyperparathyroidism is pres-
ent before the gastrinoma. These patients are treated 
differently from those without MEN 1; therefore, MEN 
1 should be sought in all patients by family history and 
by measuring plasma ionized calcium and prolactin lev-
els and plasma hormone levels (parathormone, growth 
hormone).
Most gastrinomas (50–70%) are present in the duo-
denum, followed by the pancreas (20–40%) and other 
intraabdominal sites (mesentery, lymph nodes, biliary 
tract, liver, stomach, ovary). Rarely, the tumor may 
involve extraabdominal sites. In MEN 1 the gastrino-
mas are also usually in the duodenum (70–90%), fol-
lowed by the pancreas (10–30%), and are almost always 
multiple. About 60–90% of gastrinomas are malignant 
(Table 52-2) with metastatic spread to lymph nodes and 
liver. Distant metastases to bone occur in 12–30% of 
patients with liver metastases.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of ZES requires the demonstration of 
inappropriate fasting hypergastrinemia, usually by dem-
onstrating hypergastrinemia occurring with an increased 
basal gastric acid output (BAO) (hyperchlorhydria). 
More than 98% of patients with gastrinomas have fast-
ing hypergastrinemia, although in 40–60% the level may 
be elevated less than tenfold. Therefore, when the diag-
nosis is suspected, a fasting gastrin should be determined 
first. It is important to remember that potent gastric 
acid suppressant drugs such as proton pump inhibitors 
(omeprazole, esomeprazole, pantoprazole, lansopra-
zole, rabeprazole) can suppress acid secretion sufficiently 
to cause hypergastrinemia; because of their prolonged 
duration of action, these drugs have to be discontin-
ued for a week before the gastrin determination. With-
drawal of proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) should be 
performed carefully and is best done in consultation 
with GI units with experience in this area. The wide-
spread use of PPIs can confound the diagnosis of ZES 
by raising a false-positive diagnosis by causing hypergas-
trinemia in a patient being treated with idiopathic pep-
tic disease (without ZES) and lead to a false-negative 
diagnosis because at routine doses used to treat patients 
with idiopathic peptic disease, PPIs control symptoms 
in most ZES patients and thus mask the diagnosis. 
If ZES is suspected and the gastrin level is elevated, it 
is important to show that it is increased when gastric 
pH is ≤2.0 because physiologically hypergastrinemia 
secondary to achlorhydria (atrophic gastritis, pernicious 
anemia) is one of the most common causes of hyper-
gastrinemia. Nearly all gastrinoma patients have a fast-
ing pH ≤2 when off antisecretory drugs. If the fasting 
gastrin is >1000 pg/mL (increased tenfold) and the pH 
is ≤2.0, which occurs in 40–60% of patients with gastri-
noma, the diagnosis of ZES is established after the pos-
sibility of retained antrum syndrome has been ruled out 
by history. In patients with hypergastrinemia with fast-
ing gastrins <1000 pg/mL and gastric pH ≤2.0, other 
conditions, such as H. pylori infections, antral G-cell 
hyperplasia/hyperfunction, gastric outlet obstruction, 
and, rarely, renal failure, can masquerade as ZES. 
To establish the diagnosis in this group, a determina-
tion of BAO and a secretin provocative test should be 
done. In patients with ZES without previous gastric 
acid–reducing surgery, the BAO is usually (>90%) ele-
vated (i.e., >15 meq/h). The secretin provocative test 
is usually positive, with the criterion of a >120-pg/mL 
increase over the basal level having the highest sensitiv-
ity (94%) and specificity (100%).
SECTION IX
Neoplastic Diseases of the Gastrointestinal System
566
Treatment	
Gastrinomas
Gastric acid hypersecretion in patients with gastrinomas 
can be controlled in almost every case by oral gastric anti­
secretory drugs. Because of their long duration of action 
and potency, which allows dosing once or twice a day, the  
PPIs (H+,K+-ATPase inhibitors) are the drugs of choice. 
Histamine H2-receptor antagonists are also effective, 
although more frequent dosing (q 4–8 h) and high doses 
are required. In patients with MEN 1 with hyperparathy­
roidism, correction of the hyperparathyroidism increases 
the sensitivity to gastric antisecretory drugs and decreases 
the basal acid output. Long-term treatment with PPIs (>15 
years) has proved to be safe and effective, without develop­
ment of tachyphylaxis. Although patients with ZES, espe­
cially those with MEN 1, more frequently develop gastric 
carcinoids, no data suggest that the long-term use of PPIs 
increases this risk in these patients. With long-term PPI use 
in ZES patients, vitamin B12 deficiency can develop; thus, 
vitamin B12 levels should be assessed during follow-up.
With the increased ability to control acid hyperse­
cretion, more than 50% of patients who are not cured 
(>60% of patients) will die from tumor-related causes. 
At presentation, careful imaging studies are essential 
to localize the extent of the tumor. A third of patients 
present with hepatic metastases, and in <15% of those 
patients the disease is limited, so that surgical resection 
may be possible. Surgical short-term cure is possible in 
60% of all patients without MEN 1 or liver metastases 
(40% of all patients) and in 30% of patients long-term. 
In patients with MEN 1, long-term surgical cure is rare 
because the tumors are multiple, frequently with lymph 
node metastases. Therefore, all patients with gastrino­
mas without MEN 1 or a medical condition that limits 
life expectancy should undergo surgery by a surgeon 
experienced in the treatment of these disorders.
Insulinomas
An insulinoma is an endocrine tumor of the pancreas 
that is thought to be derived from beta cells that ectop-
ically secrete insulin, which results in hypoglycemia. 
The average age of occurrence is 40–50 years old. The 
most common clinical symptoms are due to the effect 
of the hypoglycemia on the CNS (neuroglycemic 
symptoms) and include confusion, headache, disorien-
tation, visual difficulties, irrational behavior, and even 
coma. Also, most patients have symptoms due to excess 
catecholamine release secondary to the hypoglycemia, 
including sweating, tremor, and palpitations. Charac-
teristically, these attacks are associated with fasting.
Insulinomas are generally small (>90% <2 cm) and 
usually not multiple (90%); only 5–15% are malignant, 
and they almost invariably occur only in the pancreas, 
distributed equally in the pancreatic head, body, and tail.
Insulinomas should be suspected in all patients with 
hypoglycemia, especially when there is a history sug-
gesting that attacks are provoked by fasting, or with a 
family history of MEN 1. Insulin is synthesized as pro-
insulin, which consists of a 21-amino-acid α chain and 
a 30-amino-acid β chain connected by a 33-amino-
acid connecting peptide (C peptide). In insulinomas, 
in addition to elevated plasma insulin levels, elevated 
plasma proinsulin levels are found, and C-peptide levels 
can be elevated.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of insulinoma requires the demonstra-
tion of an elevated plasma insulin level at the time of 
hypoglycemia. A number of other conditions may cause 
fasting hypoglycemia, such as the inadvertent or sur-
reptitious use of insulin or oral hypoglycemic agents, 
severe liver disease, alcoholism, poor nutrition, and 
other extrapancreatic tumors. Furthermore, postprandial 
hypoglycemia can be caused by a number of conditions 
that confuse the diagnosis of insulinoma. Particularly 
important here is the increased occurrence of hypogly-
cemia after gastric bypass surgery for obesity, which is 
now widely performed. The most reliable test to diag-
nose insulinoma is a fast up to 72 h with serum glu-
cose, C-peptide, proinsulin, and insulin measurements 
every 4–8 h. If at any point the patient becomes 
symptomatic or glucose levels are persistently below 
<2.2 mmol/L (40 mg/dL), the test should be termi-
nated and repeat samples for the above studies should 
be obtained before glucose is given. Some 70–80% of 
patients will develop hypoglycemia during the first 
24 h, and 98% by 48 h. In nonobese normal subjects, 
serum insulin levels should decrease to <43 pmol/L 
(<6 μU/mL) when blood glucose decreases to <2.2 
mmol/L (<40 mg/dL) and the ratio of insulin to glu-
cose is <0.3 (in mg/dL). In addition to having an insu-
lin level >6 μU/mL when blood glucose is <40 mg/dL, 
some investigators also require an elevated C-peptide 
and serum proinsulin level, an insulin/glucose ratio >0.3, 
and a decreased plasma β-hydroxybutyrate level for 
the diagnosis of insulinomas. Surreptitious use of insu-
lin or hypoglycemic agents may be difficult to distin-
guish from insulinomas. The combination of proinsulin 
levels (normal in exogenous insulin/hypoglycemic agent 
users), C-peptide levels (low in exogenous insulin users), 
antibodies to insulin (positive in exogenous insulin 
users), and measurement of sulfonylurea levels in serum 
or plasma will allow the correct diagnosis to be made. 
The diagnosis of insulinoma has been complicated by 
the introduction of specific insulin assays that do not also 
interact with proinsulin, as do many of the older radio-
immunoassays (RIAs), and therefore give lower plasma 
insulin levels. The increased use of these specific insulin 
assays has resulted in increased numbers of patients with 
 
CHAPTER 52
Endocrine Tumors of the Gastrointestinal Tract and Pancreas
567
insulinomas having lower plasma insulin values than the 
6 μU/mL levels proposed to be characteristic of insuli-
nomas by RIA. In these patients the assessment of pro-
insulin and C-peptide levels at the time of hypoglycemia 
is particularly helpful for establishing the correct 
diagnosis. An elevated proinsulin level when the fasting 
glucose level is <45 mg/dL is sensitive and specific.
Treatment	
Insulinomas
Only 5–15% of insulinomas are malignant; therefore, after 
appropriate imaging (discussed later), surgery should 
be performed. In different studies, 75–100% of patients 
are cured by surgery. Before surgery, the hypoglycemia 
can be controlled by frequent small meals and the use of 
diazoxide (150–800 mg/d). Diazoxide is a benzothiadia­
zide whose hyperglycemic effect is attributed to inhibi­
tion of insulin release. Its side effects are sodium retention 
and GI symptoms such as nausea. Approximately 50–60%  
of patients respond to diazoxide. Other agents effective  
in some patients to control the hypoglycemia include vera­
pamil and diphenylhydantoin. Long-acting somatostatin 
analogues such as octreotide and lanreotide are acutely 
effective in 40% of patients. However, octreotide must be 
used with care because it inhibits growth hormone secre­
tion and can alter plasma glucagon levels; therefore, in 
some patients it can worsen the hypoglycemia.
For the 5–15% of patients with malignant insulinomas, 
these drugs or somatostatin analogues are used initially. 
In a small number of patients with insulinomas, some 
with malignant tumors, mammalian target of rapamycin 
(mTor) inhibitors (everolimus, rapamycin) are reported to 
control the hypoglycemia. If they are not effective, vari­
ous antitumor treatments such as hepatic arterial embo­
lization, chemoembolization, chemotherapy, and peptide 
receptor radiotherapy have been used (discussed later).
Insulinomas, which are usually benign (>90%) and 
intrapancreatic in location, are increasingly resected 
using a laparoscopic approach, which has lower morbid­
ity rates. This approach requires that the insulinoma be 
localized on preoperative imaging studies.
Glucagonomas
A glucagonoma is an endocrine tumor of the pancreas 
that secretes excessive amounts of glucagon, which 
causes a distinct syndrome characterized by derma-
titis, glucose intolerance or diabetes, and weight loss. 
Glucagonomas principally occur between 45 and 
70 years of age. The tumor is clinically heralded by a 
characteristic dermatitis (migratory necrolytic ery-
thema) (67–90%), accompanied by glucose intolerance 
(40–90%), weight loss (66–96%), anemia (33–85%), 
diarrhea (15–29%), and thromboembolism (11–24%). 
The characteristic rash usually starts as an annular ery-
thema at intertriginous and periorificial sites, especially 
in the groin or buttock. It subsequently becomes 
raised, and bullae form; when the bullae rupture, 
eroded areas form. The lesions can wax and wane. 
The development of a similar rash in patients receiv-
ing glucagon therapy suggests that the rash is a direct 
effect of the hyperglucagonemia. A characteristic labo-
ratory finding is hypoaminoacidemia, which occurs in 
26–100% of patients.
Glucagonomas are generally large tumors at diagno-
sis (5–10 cm). Some 50–80% occur in the pancreatic 
tail. From 50 to 82% have evidence of metastatic spread 
at presentation, usually to the liver. Glucagonomas are 
rarely extrapancreatic and usually occur singly.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis is confirmed by demonstrating an 
increased plasma glucagon level. Characteristically, 
plasma glucagon levels exceed 1000 pg/mL (normal 
is <150 pg/mL) in 90%; 7% are between 500 and 
1000 pg/mL, and 3% are <500 pg/mL. A trend 
toward lower levels at diagnosis has been noted in the 
last decade. A plasma glucagon level >1000 pg/mL is 
considered diagnostic of glucagonoma. Other diseases 
causing increased plasma glucagon levels include renal 
insufficiency, acute pancreatitis, hypercorticism, hepatic 
insufficiency, severe stress, and prolonged fasting or 
familial hyperglucagonemia, as well as danazol treat-
ment. With the exception of cirrhosis, these disorders 
do not increase plasma glucagon >500 pg/mL.
Necrolytic migratory erythema is not pathogno-
monic for glucagonoma and occurs in myeloprolif-
erative disorders, hepatitis B infection, malnutrition, 
short-bowel syndrome, inflammatory bowel disease, 
and malabsorption disorders.
Treatment	
Glucagonomas
In 50–80% of patients, hepatic metastases are pres­
ent, and so curative surgical resection is not possible. 
Surgical debulking in patients with advanced dis­
ease or other antitumor treatments may be beneficial  
(discussed later). Long-acting somatostatin analogues 
such as octreotide and lanreotide improve the skin rash 
in 75% of patients and may improve the weight loss,  
pain, and diarrhea but usually do not improve the  
glucose intolerance.
Somatostatinoma Syndrome
The somatostatinoma syndrome is due to an NET that 
secretes excessive amounts of somatostatin, which causes 
a distinct syndrome characterized by diabetes mellitus, 
SECTION IX
Neoplastic Diseases of the Gastrointestinal System
568
gallbladder disease, diarrhea, and steatorrhea. There 
is no general distinction in the literature between a 
tumor that contains somatostatin-like immunoreactiv-
ity (somatostatinoma) and does (11–45%) or does not 
(55–90%) produce a clinical syndrome (somatostatinoma 
syndrome) by secreting somatostatin. In a review of 173 
cases of somatostatinomas, only 11% were associated 
with the somatostatinoma syndrome. The mean age is 
51 years. Somatostatinomas occur primarily in the pan-
creas and small intestine, and the frequency of the symp-
toms and occurrence of the somatostatinoma syndrome 
differ in each. Each of the usual symptoms is more com-
mon in pancreatic than in intestinal somatostatinomas: 
diabetes mellitus (95% vs. 21%), gallbladder disease (94% 
vs. 43%), diarrhea (92% vs. 38%), steatorrhea (83% vs. 
12%), hypochlorhydria (86% vs. 12%), and weight loss 
(90% vs. 69%). The somatostatinoma syndrome occurs 
in 30–90% of pancreatic and 0–5% of small-intestinal 
somatostatinomas. In various series 43% of all duodenal 
NETs contain somatostatin; however, the somatostati-
noma syndrome is rarely present (<2%). Somatostatino-
mas occur in the pancreas in 56–74% of cases, with the 
primary location being the pancreatic head. The tumors 
are usually solitary (90%) and large (mean size 4.5 cm). 
Liver metastases are common, being present in 69–84% 
of patients. Somatostatinomas are rare in patients with 
MEN 1, occurring in only 0.65%.
Somatostatin is a tetradecapeptide that is widely 
distributed in the CNS and GI tract, where it func-
tions as a neurotransmitter or has paracrine and auto-
crine actions. It is a potent inhibitor of many processes, 
including release of almost all hormones, acid secre-
tion, intestinal and pancreatic secretion, and intesti-
nal absorption. Most of the clinical manifestations are 
directly related to these inhibitory actions.
Diagnosis
In most cases somatostatinomas have been found by 
accident either at the time of cholecystectomy or during 
endoscopy. The presence of psammoma bodies in 
a duodenal tumor should particularly raise suspicion. 
Duodenal somatostatin-containing tumors are increas-
ingly associated with von Recklinghausen’s disease. Most 
of these tumors (>98%) do not cause the somatostati-
noma syndrome. The diagnosis of the somatostatinoma 
syndrome requires the demonstration of elevated plasma 
somatostatin levels.
Treatment	
Somatostatinomas
Pancreatic tumors are frequently (70–92%) metastatic 
at presentation, whereas 30–69% of small-intestinal 
somatostatinomas have metastases. Surgery is the 
­treatment of choice for those without widespread hepatic 
metastases. Symptoms in patients with the somatostatin­
oma syndrome are also improved by octreotide treatment.
VIPOMAS
VIPomas are endocrine tumors that secrete excessive 
amounts of vasoactive intestinal peptide, which causes 
a distinct syndrome characterized by large-volume 
diarrhea, hypokalemia, and dehydration. This syndrome 
also is called Verner-Morrison syndrome, pancreatic 
cholera, and WDHA syndrome for watery diarrhea, 
hypokalemia, and achlorhydria, which some patients 
develop. The mean age of patients with this syndrome 
is 49 years; however, it can occur in children, and when 
it does, it is usually caused by a ganglioneuroma or 
ganglioneuroblastoma.
The principal symptoms are large-volume diarrhea 
(100%) severe enough to cause hypokalemia (80–100%), 
dehydration (83%), hypochlorhydria (54–76%), and flush-
ing (20%). The diarrhea is secretory in nature, persisting 
during fasting, and is almost always >1 L/d and in 70% 
is >3 L/d. In a number of studies, the diarrhea was inter-
mittent initially in up to half the patients. Most patients 
do not have accompanying steatorrhea (16%), and the 
increased stool volume is due to increased excretion of 
sodium and potassium, which, with the anions, accounts 
for the osmolality of the stool. Patients frequently have 
hyperglycemia (25–50%) and hypercalcemia (25–50%).
VIP is a 28-amino-acid peptide that is an important 
neurotransmitter, ubiquitously present in the CNS and 
GI tract. Its known actions include stimulation of small-
intestinal chloride secretion as well as effects on smooth 
muscle contractility, inhibition of acid secretion, and 
vasodilatory effects, which explain most features of the 
clinical syndrome.
In adults 80–90% of VIPomas are pancreatic in 
location, with the rest due to VIP-secreting pheochro-
mocytomas, intestinal carcinoids, and rarely ganglioneu-
romas. These tumors are usually solitary, 50–75% are in 
the pancreatic tail, and 37–68% have hepatic metastases 
at diagnosis. In children <10 years old, the syndrome is 
usually due to ganglioneuromas or ganglioblastomas and 
is less often malignant (10%).
Diagnosis
The diagnosis requires the demonstration of an 
elevated plasma VIP level and the presence of large- 
volume diarrhea. A stool volume <700 mL/d is pro-
posed to exclude the diagnosis of VIPoma. When the 
patient fasts, a number of diseases can be excluded that can 
cause marked diarrhea. Other diseases that can produce 
a secretory large-volume diarrhea include gastrinomas, 
chronic laxative abuse, carcinoid syndrome, systemic 
 
CHAPTER 52
Endocrine Tumors of the Gastrointestinal Tract and Pancreas
569
mastocytosis, rarely medullary thyroid cancer, diabetic 
diarrhea, sprue, and AIDS. Among these conditions, 
only VIPomas caused a marked increase in plasma VIP. 
Chronic surreptitious use of laxatives/diuretics can be 
particularly difficult to detect clinically. Hence, in a 
patient with unexplained chronic diarrhea, screens for 
laxatives should be performed; they will detect many, 
but not all, laxative abusers.
Treatment	
Vasoactive Intestinal Peptidomas
The most important initial treatment in these patients is 
to correct their dehydration, hypokalemia, and electro­
lyte losses with fluid and electrolyte replacement. These 
patients may require 5 L/d of fluid and >350 meq/d of 
potassium. Because 37–68% of adults with VIPomas have 
metastatic disease in the liver at presentation, a signifi­
cant number of patients cannot be cured surgically. In 
these patients long-acting somatostatin analogues such 
as octreotide and lanreotide are the drugs of choice.
Octreotide/lanreotide will control the diarrhea short- 
and long-term in 75–100% of patients. In nonresponsive  
patients the combination of glucocorticoids and  
octreotide/lanreotide has proved helpful in a small 
number of patients. Other drugs reported to be help­
ful in small numbers of patients include prednisone  
(60–100 mg/d), clonidine, indomethacin, phenothi­
azines, loperamide, lidamidine, lithium, propranolol, 
and metoclopramide. Treatment of advanced disease 
with embolization, chemoembolization, chemotherapy, 
radiotherapy, radiofrequency ablation, and peptide 
receptor radiotherapy may be helpful (discussed later).
Nonfunctional Pancreatic 
Endocrine Tumors (NF-PETs)
NF-PETs are endocrine tumors that originate in the 
pancreas and secrete no products, or their products do 
not cause a specific clinical syndrome. The symptoms 
are due entirely to the tumor per se. NF-PETs secrete 
chromogranin A (90–100%), chromogranin B (90–100%), 
PP (58%), α-HCG (human chorionic gonadotropin) 
(40%), and β-HCG (20%). Because the symptoms are 
due to the tumor mass, patients with NF-PETs usually 
present late in the disease course with invasive tumors 
and hepatic metastases (64–92%) and the tumors are 
usually large (72% >5 cm). NF-PETs are usually soli-
tary except in patients with MEN 1, in which case they 
are multiple. They occur primarily in the pancreatic 
head. Even though these tumors do not cause a func-
tional syndrome, immunocytochemical studies show 
that they synthesize numerous peptides and cannot be 
distinguished from functional tumors by immunocy-
tochemistry. In MEN 1, 80–100% of patients have 
microscopic NF-PETs, but they become large or symp-
tomatic in only a minority (0–13%) of cases. In VHL 
12–17% develop NF-PETs, and in 4% they are ≥3 cm 
in diameter.
The most common symptoms are abdominal pain 
(30–80%), jaundice (20–35%), and weight loss, fatigue, 
or bleeding; 10–30% are found incidentally. The aver-
age time from the beginning of symptoms to diagnosis 
is 5 years.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis is established by histologic confirmation 
in a patient without either the clinical symptoms or the 
elevated plasma hormone levels of one of the established 
syndromes. The principal difficulty in diagnosis is to 
distinguish an NF-PET from a nonendocrine pancre-
atic tumor, which is more common. Even though chro-
mogranin A levels are elevated in almost every patient, 
this is not specific for this disease as it can be found in 
functional PETs, carcinoids, and other neuroendocrine 
disorders. Plasma pancreatic polypeptide is increased 
in 22–71% of patients and should strongly suggest the 
diagnosis in a patient with a pancreatic mass because it 
is usually normal in patients with pancreatic adenocar-
cinomas. Elevated plasma PP is not diagnostic of this 
tumor because it is elevated in a number of other con-
ditions, such as chronic renal failure, old age, inflamma-
tory conditions, and diabetes. A positive somatostatin 
receptor scan in a patient with a pancreatic mass should 
suggest the presence of PET/NF-PET rather than a 
nonendocrine tumor.
Treatment	
Nonfunctional Pancreatic Endocrine 
Tumors
Overall survival in patients with sporadic NF-PET is 
30–63% at 5 years, with a median survival of 6 years. 
Unfortunately, surgical curative resection can be consid­
ered only in a minority of these patients because 64–92% 
present with metastatic disease. Treatment needs to 
be directed against the tumor per se using the various 
modalities discussed later for advanced disease. The 
treatment of NF-PETs in either MEN 1 patients or patients 
with VHL is controversial. Most recommend surgical 
resection for any tumor >2–3 cm in diameter; however,  
there is no consensus on smaller NF-PETs, with most  
recommending careful surveillance of these patients.
GRFOMAS
GRFomas are endocrine tumors that secrete excessive 
amounts of growth hormone–releasing factor (GRF) 
that cause acromegaly. GRF is a 44-amino-acid peptide, 
and 25–44% of PETs have GRF immunoreactivity, 
SECTION IX
Neoplastic Diseases of the Gastrointestinal System
570
although it is uncommonly secreted. GRFomas are lung 
tumors in 47–54% of cases, PETs in 29–30%, and small-
intestinal carcinoids in 8–10%; up to 12% occur at other 
sites. Patients have a mean age of 38 years, and the 
symptoms usually are due to either acromegaly or the 
tumor per se. The acromegaly caused by GRFomas is 
indistinguishable from classic acromegaly. The pancre-
atic tumors are usually large (>6 cm), and liver metas-
tases are present in 39%. They should be suspected in 
any patient with acromegaly and an abdominal tumor, 
a patient with MEN 1 with acromegaly, or a patient 
without a pituitary adenoma with acromegaly or asso-
ciated with hyperprolactinemia, which occurs in 70% 
of GRFomas. GRFomas are an uncommon cause 
of acromegaly. GRFomas occur in <1% of MEN 1 
patients. The diagnosis is established by performing 
plasma assays for GRF and growth hormone. Most 
GRFomas have a plasma GRF level >300 pg/mL (nor-
mal <5 pg/mL men, <10 pg/mL women). Patients 
with GRFomas also have increased plasma levels of 
insulin-like growth factor type I (IGF-I) levels similar to 
those in classic acromegaly. Surgery is the treatment of 
choice if diffuse metastases are not present. Long-acting 
somatostatin analogues such as octreotide and lanreo-
tide are the agents of choice, with 75–100% of patients 
responding.
Other Rare Pancreatic Endocrine 
Tumor Syndromes
Cushing’s syndrome (ACTHoma) due to a PET occurs 
in 4–16% of all ectopic Cushing’s syndrome cases. It 
occurs in 5% of cases of sporadic gastrinomas, almost 
invariably in patients with hepatic metastases, and is 
an independent poor prognostic factor. Paraneoplastic 
hypercalcemia due to PETs releasing parathyroid hor-
mone–related peptide (PTHrP), a PTH-like material, or 
unknown factor, is rarely reported. The tumors are usu-
ally large, and liver metastases are usually present. Most 
(88%) appear to be due to release of PTHrP. PETs 
occasionally can cause the carcinoid syndrome. PETs 
secreting calcitonin have been proposed as a specific 
clinical syndrome. One-half of the patients have diar-
rhea, which disappears with resection of the tumor. 
The proposal that this could be a discrete syndrome 
is supported by the finding that 25–42% of patients 
with medullary thyroid cancer with hypercalcitonemia 
develop diarrhea, probably secondary to a motility 
disorder. This is classified in Table 52-2 as a possible spe-
cific disorder because so few cases have been described. 
Similarly classified with only a few cases described are 
a renin-producing PET in a patient presenting with 
hypertension; PETs secreting luteinizing hormone, 
resulting in masculinization or decreased libido; a PET-
secreting erythropoietin resulting in polycythemia; and 
PETs secreting insulin-like growth factor II causing 
hypoglycemia (Table 52-2). Ghrelin is a 28-amino-acid 
peptide with a number of metabolic functions. Even 
though it is detectable immunohistochemically in most 
PETs, no specific syndrome is associated with release of 
ghrelin by the PET.
Tumor Localization
Localization of the primary tumor and knowledge of 
the extent of the disease are essential to the proper man-
agement of all carcinoids and PETs. Without proper 
localization studies it is not possible to determine 
whether the patient is a candidate for curative resection 
or cytoreductive surgery or requires antitumor treat-
ment or to predict the patient’s prognosis reliably.
Numerous tumor localization methods are used in 
both types of NETs, including conventional imag-
ing studies (computed tomographic scanning, magnetic 
resonance imaging, transabdominal ultrasound, selective 
angiography), somatostatin receptor scintigraphy (SRS), 
and positron emission tomographic scanning. In PETs, 
endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) and functional localiza-
tion by measuring venous hormonal gradients are also 
reported to be useful. Bronchial carcinoids are usually 
detected by standard chest radiography and assessed by 
CT. Rectal, duodenal, colonic, and gastric carcinoids 
are usually detected by GI endoscopy.
PETs, as well as carcinoid tumors, frequently overex-
press high-affinity somatostatin receptors in both their 
primary tumors and their metastases. Of the five types 
of somatostatin receptors (sst1–5), radiolabeled octreo-
tide binds with high affinity to sst2 and sst5, has a lower 
affinity for sst3, and has a very low affinity for sst1 and 
sst4. Between 90 and 100% of carcinoid tumors and 
PETs possess sst2, and many also have the other four 
sst subtypes. Interaction with these receptors can be 
used to localize NETs by using [111In-DTPA-d-Phe1]
octreotide and radionuclide scanning (SRS) as well as 
for treatment of the hormone-excess state with octreo-
tide or lanreotide, as discussed earlier. Because of its 
sensitivity and ability to localize tumor throughout the 
body, SRS is the initial imaging modality of choice for 
localizing both the primary and metastatic NETs. SRS 
localizes tumor in 73–89% of patients with carcinoids 
and in 56–100% of patients with PETs, except insulino-
mas. Insulinomas are usually small and have low densi-
ties of sst receptors, resulting in SRS being positive in 
only 12–50% of patients with insulinomas. Figure 52-3 
shows an example of the increased sensitivity of SRS in 
a patient with a carcinoid tumor. The CT scan showed 
a single liver metastasis, whereas the SRS demonstrated 
three metastases in the liver in multiple locations. Occa-
sional false-positive responses with SRS can occur (12% 
in one study) because numerous other normal tissues 
 
CHAPTER 52
Endocrine Tumors of the Gastrointestinal Tract and Pancreas
571
as well as diseases can have high densities of sst recep-
tors, including granulomas (sarcoid, tuberculosis, etc.), 
thyroid diseases (goiter, thyroiditis), and activated lym-
phocytes (lymphomas, wound infections). For PETs 
in the pancreas, EUS is highly sensitive, localizing 
77–100% of insulinomas, which occur almost exclu-
sively within the pancreas. Endoscopic ultrasound is less 
sensitive for extrapancreatic tumors. It is increasingly 
used in patients with MEN 1 and to a lesser extent VHL 
to detect small PETs not seen with other modalities or 
for serial PET assessments to determine size changes or 
rapid growth in patients in whom surgery is deferred. 
EUS with cytologic evaluation also is used frequently to 
distinguish an NF-PET from a pancreatic adenocarci-
noma or another nonendocrine pancreatic tumor.
Insulinomas overexpress receptors for GLP-1; a 
radiolabeled GLP-1 analogue can detect occult insu-
linomas not localized by other imaging modalities. 
Functional localization by measuring hormonal gradi-
ents is now uncommonly used with gastrinomas (after 
intraarterial secretin injections) but is still frequently 
used in insulinoma patients in whom other imaging 
studies are negative (assessing hepatic vein insulin con-
centrations post-intraarterial calcium injections). The 
intraarterial calcium test may also allow differentiation 
of the cause of the hypoglycemia and indicate whether 
it is due to an insulinoma or a nesidioblastosis. The 
latter entity is becoming increasingly important because 
hypoglycemia after gastric bypass surgery for obesity is 
increasing in frequency, and it is primarily due to nesid-
ioblastosis, although it can occasionally be due to an 
insulinoma.
If liver metastases are identified by SRS, to plan 
the proper treatment either a CT or an MRI is rec-
ommended to assess the size and exact location of the 
metastases because SRS does not provide information 
on tumor size. Functional localization measuring hor-
mone gradients after intraarterial calcium injections in 
insulinomas (insulin) or gastrin gradients after secretin 
injections in gastrinoma is a sensitive method, being 
positive in 80–100% of patients. However, this method 
provides only regional localization and therefore is 
reserved for cases in which the other imaging modalities 
are negative.
Two newer imaging modalities (positron emission 
tomography and use of hybrid scanners such as CT and 
SRS) may have increased sensitivity. Positron emis-
sion tomographic scanning with 
18F-fluoro-DOPA 
in patients with carcinoids or with 11C-5-HTP or 
68gallium-labeled somatostatin analogues in patients 
with PETs or carcinoids has greater sensitivity than con-
ventional imaging studies or SRS and probably will be 
used increasingly in the future. Positron emission tomo-
graphic scanning for GI NETs is not currently approved 
in the United States.
Treatment	
	Advanced Disease (Diffuse Metastatic 
Disease)
The single most important prognostic factor for sur­
vival is the presence of liver metastases (Fig. 52-4). 
For patients with foregut carcinoids without hepatic 
metastases, the 5-year survival in one study was 95%, 
and with distant metastases, it was 20% (Fig. 52-4, bot­
tom). With gastrinomas the 5-year survival without 
liver metastases is 98%; with limited metastases in one 
hepatic lobe, it is 78%; and with diffuse metastases,  
16% (Fig. 52-4, top). In a large study of 156 patients  
(67 PETs, rest carcinoids) the overall 5-year survival rate 
was 77%; it was 96% without liver metastases, 73% with 
liver metastases, and 50% with distant disease. There­
fore, treatment for advanced metastatic disease is an 
important challenge. A number of different modalities 
are reported to be effective, including cytoreductive 
Figure 52-3 
Ability of CT scanning (top) or somatostatin receptor 
scintigraphy (SRS) (bottom) to localize metastatic carci-
noid in the liver.
SECTION IX
Neoplastic Diseases of the Gastrointestinal System
572
surgery (surgically or by radio frequency ablation [RFA]), 
treatment with chemotherapy, somatostatin analogues, 
interferon α, hepatic embolization alone or with chemo­
therapy (chemoembolization), radiotherapy with radio­
labeled beads/microspheres, peptide radio-receptor 
therapy, and liver transplantation.
Specific Antitumor Treatments  Cyto­
reductive surgery, unfortunately, is possible in only 
9–22% of patients who present with limited hepatic 
metastases. Although no randomized studies have 
proved that it extends life, results from a number of 
studies suggest that it probably increases survival; 
therefore, it is recommended, if possible. Radio fre­
quency thermal ablation can be applied to GI NET liver 
metastases if they are limited in number (usually <5) 
and size (usually <3.5 cm in diameter). Response rates 
are >80%, the morbidity rate is low, and this procedure 
may be particularly helpful in patients with functional 
PETs that are difficult to control medically.
Chemotherapy for metastatic carcinoid tumors has 
generally been disappointing, with response rates of 
0–40% with various two- and three-drug combinations. 
Chemotherapy for PETs has been more successful, with  
tumor shrinkage reported in 30–70% of patients.  
The current regimen of choice is streptozotocin and 
doxorubicin. In poorly differentiated PETs, chemo­
therapy with cisplatin, etoposide, or their derivatives 
is the recommended treatment, with response rates of 
40–70%; however, responses are generally short-lived. 
Some newer combinations of chemotherapeutic agents 
show promise in small numbers of patients, including 
temozolomide (TMZ) alone, especially in PETs, which 
frequently have O6-methylguanine DNA methyltrans­
ferase deficiency, which increases their TMZ sensitiv­
ity (34% response rate), and TMZ plus capecitabine 
(response rate 59–71%, retrospective studies).
Long-acting somatostatin analogues such as octreo­
tide, lanreotide, and interferon α rarely decrease tumor 
size (i.e., 0–17%); however, these drugs have tumori­
static effects, stopping additional growth in 26–95% of 
patients with NETs. A randomized, double-blind study 
in patients with metastatic midgut carcinoids dem­
onstrated a marked lengthening of time to progres­
sion (14.3 vs. 6 months, p = .000072) from the use of 
octreotide-LAR. This improvement was seen in patients 
with limited liver involvement. Whether this change will 
result in extended survival has not been proved. Soma­
tostatin analogues can induce apoptosis in carcinoid 
tumors, and interferon α can decrease Bcl-2 protein 
expression, which probably contributes to its antiprolife­
rative effects.
Hepatic embolization and chemoembolization (with 
dacarbazine, cisplatin, doxorubicin, 5-fluorouracil, or 
streptozotocin) have been reported to decrease tumor 
bulk and help control the symptoms of the hormone-
excess state. These modalities generally are reserved 
for liver-directed therapy in cases in which treat­
ment with somatostatin analogues, interferon (car­
cinoids), or chemotherapy (PETs) fails. Embolization, 
when combined with treatment with octreotide and 
interferon α, significantly reduces tumor progression 
(p = .008) compared with treatment with embolization 
and octreotide alone in patients with advanced midgut 
carcinoids.
Radiotherapy with radiolabeled somatostatin ana­
logues that are internalized by the tumors is being inves­
tigated. Three different radionuclides are being used. 
High doses of [111In-DTPA-d-Phe1]octreotide, which 
emits γ-rays, internal conversion, and Auger electrons; 
yttrium-90, which emits high-energy β-particles coupled 
00
10
10
20
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
5
15
25
 Years since diagnosis of ZES
A
0
0
10
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
5
15
 Time, years
B
Probability of survival, %
No liver metastases (n = 158)
Diffuse liver metastases
(n = 27)
Local disease
(n = 25)
Distant
metastases
(n = 46)
Single liver
lobe metastases
(n = 14)
p < .028
p = .0004
p = .0001
Figure 52-4 
Effect of the presence and extent of liver metastases on 
survival in patients with gastrinomas (A) or carcinoid tumors 
(B). ZES, Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. (Top panel is drawn 
from data from 199 patients with gastrinomas modified from 
F Yu et al: J Clin Oncol 17:615, 1999. Bottom panel is drawn 
from data from 71 patients with foregut carcinoid tumors 
from EW McDermott et al: Br J Surg 81:1007, 1994.)
 
CHAPTER 52
Endocrine Tumors of the Gastrointestinal Tract and Pancreas
573
by a DOTA chelating group to octreotide or octreotate; 
and 177lutetium-coupled analogues, which emit both, 
are all in clinical studies. 111Indium-, 90yttrium-, and 
177lutetium-labeled compounds caused tumor stabiliza­
tion in 41–81%, 44–88%, and 23–40%, respectively, and 
a decrease in tumor size in 8–30%, 6–37%, and 38%, 
respectively, of patients with advanced metastatic NETs. 
Use of 177Lu-labeled analogues to treat 504 patients with 
malignant NETs produced a reduction of tumor size of 
>50% in 30% of patients (2% complete) and tumor stabi­
lization in 51%. An effect on survival has not been estab­
lished. These results suggest that this novel therapy may 
be helpful, especially in patients with widespread meta­
static disease.
Selective internal radiation therapy (SIRT) using 
90yttrium glass or resin microspheres is being evalu­
ated in patients with unresectable NET liver metastases. 
The treatment requires careful evaluation for vascular 
shunting before treatment and generally is reserved for 
patients without extrahepatic metastatic disease and 
with adequate hepatic reserve. The 90Y-microspheres 
are delivered to the liver by intraarterial injection from 
percutaneous placed catheters. In four studies involving 
metastatic NETs, the response rate varied from 50–61% 
(partial or complete), tumor stabilization occurred in 
22–41%, and overall survival varied from 25–70 months. 
In the largest study (148 patients), no radiation-induced 
liver failure occurred and the most common side effect 
was fatigue (6.5%).
The use of liver transplantation has been abandoned 
for treatment of most metastatic tumors to the liver. 
However, for metastatic NETs, it is still a consideration.  
In a review of 103 cases of malignant NETs (48 PETs,  
43 carcinoids) the 2- and 5-year survival rates were  
60% and 47%, respectively. However, recurrence-free 
survival was low (<24%). For younger patients with met­
astatic NETs limited to the liver, liver transplantation may 
be justified.
Newer approaches show some promise in the treat­
ment of advanced GI NETs. They include the use of 
growth factor inhibitors or inhibitors of their receptors 
(using tyrosine kinase inhibitors, monoclonal antibodies), 
inhibitors of mTor signaling (everolimus, temsirolimus), 
angiogenesis inhibitors, and VEGF or vascular endo­
thelial growth factor receptor (VEGFR) tyrosine kinase 
inhibitors. A number of these agents, particularly suni­
tinib (tyrosine kinase inhibitor), various mTor inhibitors, 
and bevacizumub (monoclonal antibody against VEGF), 
show impressive activity. Additional value may result 
from selected combinations of agents.
This page intentionally left blank 
Nutrition
SECTION X
 Johanna Dwyer 
576
 Nutrients are substances that are not synthesized in 
 suffi cient amounts in the body and therefore must be 
supplied by the diet. Nutrient requirements for groups 
of healthy persons have been determined experimentally. 
For good health, we require energy-providing nutrients 
(protein, fat, and carbohydrate), vitamins, minerals, and 
water. Human requirements for organic nutrients include 
9 essential amino acids, several fatty acids,  glucose, 4 fat-
soluble vitamins, 10 water-soluble vitamins, dietary fi ber, 
and choline. Several inorganic substances, including 
4 minerals, 7 trace minerals, 3 electrolytes, and the ultra 
trace elements, must also be supplied by diet. 
 The required amounts of the essential nutrients dif-
fer by age and physiologic state. Conditionally essential 
nutrients are not required in the diet but must be sup-
plied to individuals who do not synthesize them in ade-
quate amounts, such as those with genetic defects, those 
having pathologic states with nutritional implications, 
and developmentally immature infants. Many other 
organic and inorganic compounds present in foods have 
health effects. For example, lead and pesticide residues 
may have toxic effects. 
 essential nutrient reQuirements 
 ENErgy 
 For weight to remain stable, energy intake must match 
energy output. The major components of energy output 
are resting energy expenditure (REE) and physical activ-
ity; minor sources include the energy cost of metabo-
lizing food (thermic effect of food or specifi c dynamic 
action) and shivering thermogenesis (e.g., cold-induced 
thermogenesis). The average energy intake is about 
2600 kcal/d for American men and about 1900 kcal/d 
for American women, though these estimates vary with 
body size and activity level. Formulas for estimating 
REE are useful for assessing the energy needs of an indi-
vidual whose weight is stable. Thus, for males, REE =
900 + 10 m , and for females, REE = 700 + 7 m , where 
m is mass in kilograms. The calculated REE is then 
adjusted for physical activity level by multiplying by 1.2 
for sedentary, 1.4 for moderately active, or 1.8 for very 
active individuals. The fi nal fi gure provides an estimate 
of total caloric needs in a state of energy balance. For 
further discussion of energy balance in health and 
disease, see  Chap. 55 . 
 prOTEIN 
 Dietary protein consists of both essential and nonessential 
amino acids that are required for protein synthesis. The 
nine essential amino acids are histidine, isoleucine, leu-
cine, lysine, methionine/cystine, phenylalanine/tyrosine, 
threonine, tryptophan, and valine. Certain amino acids, 
such as alanine, can also be used for energy and gluco-
neogenesis. When energy intake is inadequate, protein 
intake must be increased, because ingested amino acids 
are diverted into pathways of glucose synthesis and oxi-
dation. In extreme energy deprivation, protein-calorie 
malnutrition may ensue  ( Chap. 55 ) . 
 For adults, the recommended dietary allowance 
(RDA) for protein is about 0.6 g/kg desirable body 
mass per day, assuming that energy needs are met and 
that the protein is of relatively high biologic value. 
 Current recommendations for a healthy diet call for at 
least 10 to 14% of calories from protein. Most American 
diets provide at least those amounts. Biologic value 
tends to be highest for animal proteins, followed by 
proteins from legumes (beans), cereals (rice, wheat, 
corn), and roots. Combinations of plant proteins that 
complement one another in biologic value, or com-
binations of animal and plant proteins, can increase 
 biologic value and lower total protein requirements. 
 NUTRIENT REQUIREMENTS
AND DIETARY ASSESSMENT 
 cHaPter 53 
 
CHAPTER 53
Nutrient Requirementsand Dietary Assessment 
577
Protein needs increase during growth, pregnancy, 
lactation, and rehabilitation after injury or malnutri-
tion. Tolerance to dietary protein is decreased in renal 
insufficiency (causing uremia) and in liver failure. 
­Normal protein intake can precipitate encephalopathy 
in patients with cirrhosis of the liver.
Fat and Carbohydrate
Fats are a concentrated source of energy and constitute, 
on average, 34% of calories in U.S. diets. However, for 
optimal health, fat intake should total no more than 
30% of calories. Saturated fat and trans-fat should be 
limited to <10% of calories, and polyunsaturated fats to 
<10% of calories, with monounsaturated fats comprising 
the remainder of fat intake. At least 45–55% of total cal-
ories should be derived from carbohydrates. The brain 
requires about 100 g/d of glucose for fuel; other tis-
sues use about 50 g/d. Some tissues (e.g., brain and red 
blood cells) rely on glucose supplied either exogenously 
or from muscle proteolysis. Over time, adaptations 
in carbohydrate needs are possible during hypocaloric 
states.
Water
For adults, 1 to 1.5 mL water per kcal of energy expen-
diture is sufficient under usual conditions to allow 
for normal variations in physical activity, sweating, 
and solute load of the diet. Water losses include 50 to 
100 mL/d in the feces; 500 to 1000 mL/d by evapo-
ration or exhalation; and, depending on the renal 
solute­ load, ≥1000 mL/d in the urine. If external losses 
increase, intakes must increase accordingly to avoid 
underhydration. Fever increases water losses by approxi-
mately 200 mL/d per °C; diarrheal losses vary, but may 
be as great as 5 L/d in severe diarrhea. Heavy sweat-
ing and vomiting also increase water losses. When renal 
function is normal and solute intakes are adequate, the 
kidneys can adjust to increased water intake by excret-
ing up to 18 L/d of excess water. However,­ obligatory 
urine outputs can compromise hydration status when 
there is inadequate intake or when losses increase in dis-
ease or kidney damage.
Infants have high requirements for water because of 
their large ratio of surface area to volume, the limited 
capacity of the immature kidney to handle high renal 
solute loads, and their inability to communicate their 
thirst. Increased water needs during pregnancy are about 
30 mL/d. During lactation, milk production increases 
water requirements so that approximately 1000 mL/d of 
additional water is needed, or 1 mL for each mL of milk 
produced. Special attention must be paid to the water 
needs of the elderly, who have reduced total body water 
and blunted thirst sensation, and are more likely to be 
taking medications such as diuretics.
Other Nutrients
See Chap. 54 for detailed descriptions of vitamins and 
trace minerals.
Dietary Reference Intakes 
and Recommended Dietary 
Allowances
Fortunately, human life and well-being can be main-
tained within a fairly wide range for most nutrients. 
However, the capacity for adaptation is not infinite—
too much, as well as too little, intake of a nutrient could 
have adverse effects or alter the health benefits con-
ferred by another nutrient. Therefore, benchmark rec-
ommendations regarding nutrient intakes have been 
developed to guide clinical practice. These quantitative 
estimates of nutrient intakes are collectively referred to 
as the dietary reference intakes (DRIs). The DRIs supplant 
the recommended daily allowances (RDAs), the single ref-
erence values used in the United States until the early 
1990s. DRIs include the estimated average requirement 
(EAR) for nutrients as well as other reference values 
used for dietary planning for individuals: the RDA, the 
adequate intake (AI), and the tolerable upper level (UL). 
The DRI also include acceptable macronutrient distri-
bution ranges (AMDR) for protein, fat, and carbohy-
drate. The current DRIs for vitamins and elements are 
provided in Tables 53-1 and 53-2, respectively.
Estimated Average Requirement
When florid manifestations of the classic dietary defi-
ciency diseases such as rickets (deficiency of vitamin D 
and calcium), scurvy (deficiency of vitamin C), xero­
phthalmia (deficiency of vitamin A), and protein- 
calorie malnutrition were common, nutrient adequacy 
was inferred from the absence of their clinical signs. 
Later, biochemical and other changes were found to 
be ­evident long before the clinical deficiency became 
apparent. Consequently, criteria of adequacy are now 
based on biologic markers when they are available. 
Current efforts focus on the amount of a nutrient that 
reduces the risk of chronic degenerative diseases. ­Priority 
is given to sensitive biochemical, physiologic, or behav-
ioral tests that reflect early changes in regulatory processes; 
maintenance of body stores of nutrients; or, if available, 
the amount of a nutrient that minimizes risk of chronic 
degenerative disease.
The EAR is the amount of a nutrient estimated to be 
adequate for half of the healthy individuals of a specific 
age and sex. The types of evidence and criteria used to 
establish nutrient requirements vary by nutrient, age, 
and physiologic group. The EAR is not an effective 
estimate of nutrient adequacy in individuals because it 
SECTION X
Nutrition
578
Dietary Reference Intakes: Recommended Intakes for Individuals—Vitamins
Life-Stage 
Group
Vitamin, μg/d
Thiamine, 
mg/d
Riboflavin, 
mg/d
Niacin, 
mg/de
Vitamin B6, 
mg/d
Folate, 
μg/df
Vitamin B12, 
μg/d
Pantothenic 
Acid, mg/d
Biotin, 
μg/d
Choline, 
mg/dg
Aa
C
Db,c
Ed
K
Infants
0–6 mo
400
40
5
4
2.0
0.2
0.3
2
0.1
65
0.4
1.7
5
125
7–12 mo
500
50
5
5
2.5
0.3
0.4
4
0.3
80
0.5
1.8
6
150
Children
1–3 y
300
15
5
6
30
0.5
0.5
6
0.5
150
0.9
2
8
200
4–8 y
400
25
5
7
55
0.6
0.6
8
0.6
200
1.2
3
12
250
Males
9–13 y
600
45
5
11
60
0.9
0.9
12
1.0
300
1.8
4
20
375
14–18 y
900
75
5
15
75
1.2
1.3
16
1.3
400
2.4
5
25
550
19–30 y
900
90
5
15
120
1.2
1.3
16
1.3
400
2.4
5
30
550
31–50 y
900
90
5
15
120
1.2
1.3
16
1.3
400
2.4
5
30
550
51–70 y
900
90
10
15
120
1.2
1.3
16
1.7
400
2.4h
5
30
550
>70 y
900
90
15
15
120
1.2
1.3
16
1.7
400
2.4h
5
30
550
Females
9–13 y
600
45
5
11
60
0.9
0.9
12
1.0
300
1.8
4
20
375
14–18 y
700
65
5
15
75
1.0
1.0
14
1.2
400i
2.4
5
25
400
19–30 y
700
75
5
15
90
1.1
1.1
14
1.3
400i
2.4
5
30
425
31–50 y
700
75
5
15
90
1.1
1.1
14
1.3
400i
2.4
5
30
425
51–70 y
700
75
10
15
90
1.1
1.1
14
1.5
400
2.4h
5
30
425
>70 y
700
75
15
15
90
1.1
1.1
14
1.5
400
2.4h
5
30
425
Pregnancy
≤18 y
750
80
5
15
75
1.4
1.4
18
1.6
600j
2.6
6
30
450
19–30 y
770
85
5
15
90
1.4
1.4
18
1.9
600j
2.6
6
30
450
31–50 y
770
85
5
15
90
1.4
1.4
18
1.9
600j
2.6
6
30
450
 
CHAPTER 53
Nutrient Requirements and Dietary Assessment
579
Lactation
≤18 y
1200
115
5
19
75
1.4
1.6
17
2.0
500
2.8
7
35
550
19–30 y
1300
120
5
19
90
1.4
1.6
17
2.0
500
2.8
7
35
550
31–50 y
1300
120
5
19
90
1.4
1.6
17
2.0
500
2.8
7
35
550
Note: This table presents recommended dietary allowances (RDAs) in bold type and adequate intakes (AIs) in ordinary type. RDAs and AIs may both be used as goals for individual intake. RDAs are 
set to meet the needs of almost all individuals (97–98%) in a group. For healthy breastfed infants, the AI is the mean intake. The AI for other life stage and gender groups is believed to cover needs of all 
individuals in the group, but lack of data or uncertainty in the data prevent being able to specify with confidence the percentage of individuals covered by this intake.
aAs retinol activity equivalents (RAEs). 1 RAE = 1 μg retinol, 12 μg β-carotene, 24 μg α-carotene, or 24 μg β-cryptoxanthin. To calculate RAEs from retinol equivalents (REs) of provitamin A carotenoids 
in foods, divide the REs by 2. For preformed vitamin A in foods or supplements and for provitamin A carotenoids in supplements, 1 RE = 1 RAE.
bAs calciferol. 1 μg calciferol = 40 IU vitamin D.
cIn the absence of adequate exposure to sunlight.
dAs α-tocopherol. α-Tocopherol includes RRR-α-tocopherol, the only form of α-tocopherol that occurs naturally in foods, and the 2R-stereoisomeric forms of α-tocopherol (RRR-, RSR-, RRS-, and 
RSS-α-tocopherol) that occur in fortified foods and supplements. It does not include the 2S-stereoisomeric forms of α-tocopherol (SRR-, SSR-, SRS-, and SSS-α-tocopherol), also found in fortified 
foods and supplements.
eAs niacin equivalents (NE). 1 mg of niacin = 60 mg of tryptophan; 0–6 months = preformed niacin (not NE).
fAs dietary folate equivalents (DFEs). 1 DFE = 1 μg food folate = 0.6 μg of folic acid from fortified food or as a supplement consumed with food = 0.5 μg of a supplement taken on an empty stomach.
gAlthough AIs have been set for choline, there are few data to assess whether a dietary supply of choline is needed at all stages of the life cycle, and it may be that the choline requirement can be met 
by endogenous synthesis at some of these stages.
hBecause 10 to 30% of older people may malabsorb food-bound B12, it is advisable for those >50 years to meet their RDA mainly by consuming foods fortified with B12 or a supplement containing B12.
iIn view of evidence linking inadequate folate intake with neural tube defects in the fetus, it is recommended that all women capable of becoming pregnant consume 400 μg from supplements or forti-
fied foods in addition to intake of food folate from a varied diet.
jIt is assumed that women will continue consuming 400 μg from supplements or fortified food until their pregnancy is confirmed and they enter prenatal care, which ordinarily occurs after the end of the 
periconceptional period—the critical time for formation of the neural tube.
Source: Food and Nutrition Board, Institute of Medicine—National Academy of Sciences Dietary Reference Intakes, 2000, 2002, reprinted with permission. Courtesy of the National Academy Press, 
Washington, DC. http://www.nap.edu.
SECTION X
Nutrition
580
Table 53-2 
Dietary Reference Intakes: Recommended Intakes for Individuals—Elements
Life-Stage 
Group
Calcium, 
mg/d
Chromium, 
μg/d
Copper, 
μg/d
Fluoride, 
mg/d
Iodine, 
μg/d
Iron, 
mg/d
Magnesium, 
mg/d
Manganese, 
mg/d
Molybdenum, 
μg/d
Phosphorus 
mg/d
Selenium, 
μg/d
Zinc, 
mg/d
Infants
0–6 mo
210
0.2
200
0.01
110
0.27
30
0.003
2
100
15
2
7–12 mo
270
5.5
220
0.5
130
11
75
0.6
3
275
20
3
Children
1–3 y
500
11
340
0.7
90
7
80
1.2
17
460
20
3
4–8 y
800
15
440
1
90
10
130
1.5
22
500
30
5
Males
9–13 y
1300
25
700
2
120
8
240
1.9
34
1250
40
8
14–18 y
1300
35
890
3
150
11
410
2.2
43
1250
55
11
19–30 y
1000
35
900
4
150
8
400
2.3
45
700
55
11
31–50 y
1000
35
900
4
150
8
420
2.3
45
700
55
11
51–70 y
1200
30
900
4
150
8
420
2.3
45
700
55
11
>70 y
1200
30
900
4
150
8
420
2.3
45
700
55
11
Females
9–13 y
1300
21
700
2
120
8
240
1.6
34
1250
40
8
14–18 y
1300
24
890
3
150
15
360
1.6
43
1250
55
9
19–30 y
1000
25
900
3
150
18
310
1.8
45
700
55
8
31–50 y
1000
25
900
3
150
18
320
1.8
45
700
55
8
51–70 y
1200
20
900
3
150
8
320
1.8
45
700
55
8
>70 y
1200
20
900
3
150
8
320
1.8
45
700
55
8
Pregnancy
≤18 y
1300
29
1000
3
220
27
400
2.0
50
1250
60
12
19–30 y
1000
30
1000
3
220
27
350
2.0
50
700
60
11
31–50 y
1000
30
1000
3
220
27
360
2.0
50
700
60
11
Lactation
≤18 y
1300
44
1300
3
290
10
360
2.6
50
1250
70
13
19–30 y
1000
45
1300
3
290
9
310
2.6
50
700
70
12
31–50 y
1000
45
1300
3
290
9
320
2.6
50
700
70
12
Note: This table presents recommended dietary allowances (RDAs) in bold type and adequate intakes (AIs) in ordinary type. RDAs and AIs may both be used as goals for individual intake. RDAs 
are set to meet the needs of almost all individuals (97–98%) in a group. For healthy breastfed infants, the AI is the mean intake. The AI for other life stage and gender groups is believed to cover 
needs of all individuals in the group, but lack of data or uncertainty in the data prevent being able to specify with confidence the percentage of individuals covered by this intake.
Source: Food and Nutrition Board, Institute of Medicine—National Academy of Sciences Dietary Reference Intakes, 2000, 2002, reprinted with permission. Courtesy of the National Academy 
Press, Washington, DC. http://www.nap.edu.
 
CHAPTER 53
Nutrient Requirementsand Dietary Assessment 
581
is a median requirement for a group; 50% of individu-
als in a group fall below the requirement and 50% fall 
above it. Thus, a person with a usual intake at the EAR 
has a 50% risk of an inadequate intake. For these rea-
sons, other standards, described later, are more useful for 
clinical purposes.
Recommended Dietary Allowances
The RDA is the average daily dietary intake level that 
meets the nutrient requirements of nearly all healthy 
persons of a specific sex, age, life stage, or physi-
ologic condition (such as pregnancy or lactation). The 
RDA is the nutrient-intake goal for planning diets of 
individuals.
The RDA is defined statistically as two standard 
deviations (SD) above the EAR to ensure that the 
needs of any given individual are met. Recommenda-
tions for individuals of a given age, sex, and weight are 
easily obtained from a Web-based calculator at http://
fnic.nal.usda.gov/interactiveDRI/. This online tool allows 
health professionals to calculate daily nutrient recom-
mendations for dietary planning based on the DRIs for 
individuals.
The RDAs are used to formulate food guides such 
as the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) Food 
Guide Pyramid for individuals, to create food-exchange 
lists for therapeutic diet planning, and as a standard for 
describing the nutritional content of processed foods 
and nutrient-containing dietary supplements. The nutri-
ent content in a food is stated by weight or as a per-
cent of the daily value (DV), a variant of the RDA used 
in food labeling on the nutrition facts panel that, for an 
adult, represents the highest RDA for an adult consum-
ing 2000 kcal/d.
The risk of dietary inadequacy increases as intake 
falls below the RDA. However, the RDA is an overly 
generous criterion for evaluating nutrient adequacy. 
For example, by definition the RDA exceeds the actual 
requirements of all but about 2 to 3% of the population. 
Therefore, many people whose intake falls below the 
RDA may still be getting enough of the nutrient.
Adequate Intake
It is not possible to set an RDA for some nutrients that 
do not have an established EAR. In this circumstance, 
the AI is based on observed, or experimentally deter-
mined, approximations of nutrient intakes in healthy 
people. In the DRIs, AIs rather than RDAs are pro-
posed for infants up to age 1 year, as well as for ­calcium, 
chromium, vitamin D, fluoride, manganese, panto-
thenic acid, biotin, and choline for persons of all ages. 
Vitamin D and calcium are currently being reevaluated, 
and more precise values may be available in the near 
future.
Tolerable Upper Levels of  
Nutrient Intake
Excessive nutrient intake can disturb body functions 
and cause acute, progressive, or permanent disabilities. 
The tolerable UL is the highest level of chronic nutri-
ent intake (usually daily) that is unlikely to pose a risk 
of adverse health effects for most of the population. 
Data on the adverse effects of large amounts of many 
nutrients are unavailable or too limited to establish a 
UL. Therefore, the lack of a UL does not mean that the 
risk of adverse effects from high intake is nonexistent. 
Healthy individuals derive no established benefit from 
consuming nutrient levels above the RDA or AI. 
Nutrients in commonly eaten foods rarely exceed the 
UL. However, highly fortified foods and dietary supple-
ments provide more concentrated amounts of nutrients 
per serving and, thus, pose a potential risk of toxicity. 
Nutrient supplements are labeled with supplement facts 
that express the amount of nutrient in absolute units or 
as the percent of the DV provided per recommended 
serving size. Total nutrient consumption, including 
foods; supplements; and over-the-counter medications, 
such as antacids, should not exceed RDA levels.
Acceptable Macronutrient 
Distribution Ranges
The AMDR is a range of energy providing intakes that 
the Food and Nutrition Board considers to be health-
ful for macronutrients. These ranges are 10–35% calo-
ries for protein, 20–35% calories for fat, and 45–65% of 
calories for carbohydrate. Alcohol, which also provides 
energy, is not a nutrient and recommendations, there-
fore, are not provided for it.
Factors Altering Nutrient Needs
The DRIs are affected by age, sex, rate of growth, preg-
nancy, lactation, physical activity, concomitant diseases, 
drugs, and dietary composition. If requirements for 
nutrient sufficiency are close to levels indicating excess, 
dietary planning is difficult.
Physiologic Factors
Growth, strenuous physical activity, pregnancy, and 
lactation increase needs for energy and several essen-
tial nutrients. Energy needs rise during pregnancy 
due to the demands of fetal growth and during lacta-
tion because of the increased energy required for milk 
production. Energy needs decrease with loss of lean 
body mass, the major determinant of REE. Because 
both health and physical activity tend to decline with 
SECTION X
Nutrition
582
age, energy needs of older persons, especially those over 
70, tend to be less than those of younger persons.
Dietary Composition
Dietary composition affects the biologic availability 
and use of nutrients. For example, the absorption of 
iron may be impaired by high amounts of calcium or 
lead; also, non-heme iron uptake may be impaired by 
the lack of ascorbic acid and amino acids in the meal. 
Protein use by the body may be decreased when essen-
tial amino acids are not present in sufficient amounts. 
Animal foods, such as milk, eggs, and meat, have high 
biologic values with most of the needed amino acids 
present in adequate amounts. Plant proteins in corn 
(maize), soy, and wheat have lower biologic values and 
must be combined with other plant or animal proteins 
to achieve optimal use by the body.
Route of Administration
The RDAs apply only to oral intakes. When nutrients 
are administered parenterally, similar values can some-
times be used for amino acids, carbohydrates, fats, sodium, 
chloride, potassium, and most of the vitamins, because 
their intestinal absorption is nearly 100%. However, the 
oral bioavailability of most mineral elements may be only 
half that obtained by parenteral administration. For some 
nutrients that are not readily stored in the body or cannot 
be stored in large amounts, timing of administration may 
also be important. For example, amino acids cannot be 
used for protein synthesis if they are not supplied together; 
instead, they will be used for energy production.
Disease
Specific dietary deficiency diseases include: protein-
calorie malnutrition; iron, iodine, and vitamin A defi-
ciency; megaloblastic anemia due to vitamin B12 or folic 
acid deficiency; vitamin D–deficiency rickets and osteo-
malacia; and scurvy, beriberi, and pellagra (Chaps. 54  
and 55). Each deficiency disease is characterized by 
imbalances at the cellular level between the supply of 
nutrients or energy and the body’s nutritional needs for 
growth, maintenance, and other functions. Imbalances 
and excess in nutrient intakes are recognized as risk fac-
tors for certain chronic degenerative diseases, such as 
saturated fat and cholesterol in coronary artery disease; 
sodium in hypertension; obesity in hormone-dependent 
endometrial and breast cancers; and ethanol in alcoholism. 
Because the etiology and pathogenesis of these disorders 
are multifactorial, diet is only one of many risk factors. 
Osteoporosis, for example, is associated with calcium defi-
ciency, as well as risk factors related to environment (e.g., 
smoking, sedentary lifestyle), physiology (e.g., estrogen 
deficiency), genetic determinants (e.g., defects in collagen 
metabolism), and drug use (chronic steroids).
Dietary Assessment
In clinical situations, nutritional assessment is an itera-
tive process that involves: (1) screening for malnutrition, 
(2) assessing the diet and other data to establish either 
the absence or presence of malnutrition and its possible 
causes, (3) planning and implementing the most appro-
priate nutritional therapy, and (4) reassessing intakes to 
make sure that they were consumed. Some disease states 
affect the bioavailability, requirement, use, or excretion 
of specific nutrients. In these circumstances, specific mea-
surements of various nutrients or their biomarkers may be 
required to ensure adequate replacement.
Most health care facilities have nutrition-screening 
processes in place for identifying possible malnutri-
tion after hospital admission. Nutritional screening is 
required by the Joint Commission on Accreditation of 
Healthcare Organizations (JCAHO), but there are no 
universally recognized or validated standards. The fac-
tors that are usually assessed include: abnormal weight 
for height or body mass index (e.g., BMI <19 or >25); 
reported weight change (involuntary loss or gain of 
>5 kg in the past 6 months) (Chap. 10); diagnoses with 
known nutritional implications (metabolic disease, any 
disease affecting the gastrointestinal tract, alcoholism, 
and others); present therapeutic dietary prescription; 
chronic poor appetite; presence of chewing and swal-
lowing problems or major food intolerances; need for 
assistance with preparing or shopping for food, eating, 
or other aspects of self-care; and social isolation. Reas-
sessment of nutrition status should occur periodically in 
hospitalized patients—at least once every week.
A more complete dietary assessment is indicated for 
patients who exhibit a high risk of or frank malnutri-
tion on nutrition screening. The type of assessment var-
ies based on the clinical setting, severity of the patient’s 
illness, and stability of his or her condition.
Acute Care Settings
In acute care settings, anorexia, various diseases, test pro-
cedures, and medications can compromise dietary intake. 
Under such circumstances, the goal is to identify and avoid 
inadequate intake and assure appropriate alimentation. 
Dietary assessment focuses on what patients are cur-
rently eating, whether or not they are able and willing 
to eat, and whether or not they experience any problems 
with eating. Dietary intake assessment is based on infor-
mation from observed intakes; medical record; history; 
clinical examination; and anthropometric, biochemical, 
and functional status. The objective is to gather enough 
 
CHAPTER 53
Nutrient Requirementsand Dietary Assessment 
583
information to establish the likelihood of malnutri-
tion due to poor dietary intake or other causes to assess 
whether nutritional therapy is indicated (Chap. 56).
Simple observations may suffice to suggest inade-
quate oral intake. These include dietitians’ and nurses’ 
notes, the amount of food eaten on trays, frequent 
tests and procedures that are likely to cause meals to 
be skipped, nutritionally inadequate diet orders such 
as clear liquids or full liquids for more than a few days, 
fever, gastrointestinal distress, vomiting, diarrhea, a 
comatose state, and diseases or treatments that involve 
any part of the alimentary tract. Acutely ill patients with 
diet-related diseases such as diabetes need assessment 
because an inappropriate diet may exacerbate these 
conditions and adversely affect other therapies. Abnor-
mal biochemical values (serum albumin levels <35 g/L 
[<3.5 mg/dL]; serum cholesterol levels <3.9 mmol/L 
[<150 mg/dL]) are nonspecific but may also indicate a 
need for further nutritional assessment.
Most therapeutic diets offered in hospitals are calcu-
lated to meet individual nutrient requirements and the 
RDA if they are eaten. Exceptions include clear liquids, 
some full-liquid diets, and test diets (such as preparation 
for gastrointestinal procedures), which are inadequate 
for several nutrients and should not be used, if possible, 
for more than 24 h. As much as half of the food served 
to hospitalized patients is not eaten, and so it cannot 
be assumed that the intakes of hospitalized patients are 
adequate. Dietary assessment should compare how much 
and what food the patient has consumed with the diet that 
has been provided. Major deviations in intakes of energy, 
protein, fluids, or other nutrients of special concern for 
the patient’s illness should be noted and corrected.
Nutritional monitoring is especially important for 
patients who are very ill and who have extended lengths 
of stay. Patients who are fed by special enteral and par-
enteral routes also require special nutritional assessment 
and monitoring by physicians and/or dietitians with 
certification in nutrition support (Chap. 56).
Ambulatory Settings
The aim of dietary assessment in the outpatient setting is 
to determine whether or not the patient’s usual diet is a 
health risk in itself or if it contributes to existing chronic 
disease-related problems. Dietary assessment also pro-
vides the basis for planning a diet that fulfills therapeutic 
goals while ensuring patient adherence. The outpatient 
dietary assessment should review the adequacy of pres-
ent and usual food intakes, including vitamin and min-
eral supplements, medications, and alcohol, because all 
of these may affect the patient’s nutritional status. The 
assessment should focus on the dietary constituents that 
are most likely to be involved or compromised by a 
specific diagnosis, as well as any co morbidities that are 
present. More than one day’s intake should be reviewed 
to provide a better representation of the usual diet.
There are many ways to assess the adequacy of the 
patient’s habitual diet. These include a food guide, a food-
exchange list, a diet history, or a food-frequency question-
naire. A commonly used food guide for healthy persons is 
the USDA’s food pyramid, which is useful as a basis for 
identifying inadequate intakes of essential nutrients, as 
well as likely excesses in fat, saturated fat, sodium, sugar, 
and alcohol (Table 53-3). The Web version of the guide 
provides a calculator that tailors the number of servings 
Table 53-3 
My Pyramid: The USDA Food Guide Pyramid for Healthy Persons
Servings and Examples of  
Standard Portion Sizes
Lower:  
1600 kcal
Moderate:  
2200 kcal
Higher:  
2800 kcal
Fruits, cups
1.5
2
2.5
Vegetables, cups
2
3
3.5
Grains, oz eq
5
7
10
(1 slice bread, 1 cup ready to eat cereal, 0.5 cup cooked rice, pasta, 
cooked cereal)
Meat and beans, oz eq
(1 oz lean meat, poultry, or fish; 1 egg, 1 Tbsp. peanut butter, 0.25 cup 
cooked dry beans, or 0.5 oz nuts or seeds)
5
6
7
Milk, cups
(1 cup milk or yogurt, 1.5 oz natural or 2 oz processed cheese)
3
3
3
Oils, tsp
5
6
8
Discretionary calorie allowance, kcal (remaining calories after 
­accounting for all of the above)
132
290
426
Abbreviation: oz eq, ounce equivalent.
Source: Data from United States Department of Agriculture. http://www.MyPyramid.gov.
SECTION X
Nutrition
584
suggested for healthy patients of different weights, sexes, 
ages, and life-cycle stages: http://www.mypyramidtracker.gov/
planner/launchpage.aspx. Patients who follow ethnic or 
unusual dietary patterns may need extra instruction on 
how foods should be categorized, as well as the appropri-
ate portion sizes that constitute a serving. The process of 
reviewing the guide with patients helps them transition to 
healthier dietary patterns and identifies food groups eaten 
in excess of recommendations or in insufficient quantities. 
For those on therapeutic diets, assessment against food-
exchange lists may be useful. These include, for example, 
the American Diabetes Association food-exchange lists 
for diabetes or the American Dietetic Association food-
exchange lists for renal disease.
Nutritional Status Assessment
Full nutritional status assessment is reserved for seriously 
ill patients and those at very high nutritional risk when 
the cause of malnutrition is still uncertain after initial 
clinical evaluation and dietary assessment. It involves 
multiple dimensions, including documentation of dietary 
intake, anthropometric measurements, biochemical measure­
ments of blood and urine, clinical examination, health 
history, and functional status. Therapeutic dietary pre-
scriptions and menu plans for most diseases are available 
from most hospitals and from the American Dietetic 
Association. For further discussion of nutritional assess-
ment, see Chap. 55.
Global Considerations
The DRI such as the EAR, UL, and energy 
needs are estimates of physiologic requirements 
based on experimental evidence. Assuming 
appropriate adjustments are made for age, sex, body 
size, and physical activity level, they should be applica-
ble to individuals in most parts of the world. However, 
the AI are based on customary and adequate intakes in 
U.S. and Canadian populations, which appear to be 
compatible with good health, rather than being based 
on a large body of direct experimental evidence. Simi-
larly, the AMDR represent expert opinion of approxi-
mate intakes of energy providing nutrients that are 
healthful in these North American populations. As such, 
they should be used with caution in other settings. 
Nutrient-based standards like the DRI have also been 
developed by the World Health Organization/Food 
and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations 
(WHO/FAO) and are available at their Web site: 
http://wwww.who.int/nutrition/topics/nutrecomm/en/index.
html. The different standards have many similarities 
in their basic concepts, definitions, and nutrient- 
recommendation levels, but there are some differences 
from the DRI, due to the functional criteria chosen, 
environmental differences, the timeliness of the evi-
dence reviewed, and expert judgment.
 Robert M. Russell 
I  Paolo M. Suter 
585
 Vitamins and trace minerals are required constituents 
of the human diet since they are inadequately syn-
thesized or not synthesized in the human body. Only 
small amounts of these substances are needed to carry 
out essential biochemical reactions (e.g., by acting as 
coenzymes or prosthetic groups). Overt vitamin or 
trace mineral defi ciencies are rare in Western countries 
due to a plentiful, varied, and inexpensive food supply; 
however, multiple nutrient defi ciencies may appear 
together in persons who are chronically ill or alcoholic. 
After gastric bypass surgery, patients are at high risk 
for multiple nutrient defi ciencies. Moreover, subclini-
cal vitamin and trace mineral defi ciencies, as diagnosed 
by laboratory testing, are quite common in the normal 
population, especially in the geriatric age group. 
 
Victims of famine, emergency-affected and dis-
placed populations, and refugees are at increased 
risk for protein-energy malnutrition and classic 
micronutrient defi ciencies (vitamin A, iron, iodine) as 
well as for thiamine (beriberi), ribofl avin, vitamin C 
(scurvy), and niacin (pellagra) overt defi ciencies. 
 Body stores of vitamins and minerals vary tremendously. 
For example, vitamin B 12 and vitamin A stores are 
large, and an adult may not become defi cient for 1 or 
more years after being on a defi cient diet. However, 
folate and thiamine may become depleted within weeks 
among those eating a defi cient diet. Therapeutic modal-
ities can deplete essential nutrients from the body; for 
example, hemodialysis removes water-soluble vitamins, 
which must be replaced by supplementation. 
 There are several roles for vitamins and trace miner-
als in diseases: (1) defi ciencies of vitamins and minerals 
may be caused by disease states such as malabsorption; 
(2) both defi ciency and excess of vitamins and minerals 
can cause disease in and of themselves (e.g., vitamin A 
intoxication and liver disease); and (3) vitamins and min-
erals in high doses may be used as drugs (e.g., niacin for 
hypercholesterolemia). The hematologic-related vitamins 
and minerals either are not considered or are consid-
ered only briefl y in this chapter, as are the bone-related 
vitamins and minerals (vitamin D, calcium, phospho-
rus , since they are covered elsewhere  ( Tables 54-1 and 
54-2 and  Fig. 54-1 ) . 
 ViTaMins 
 thiamine (Vitamin b 1 ) 
 Thiamine was the fi rst B vitamin to be identifi ed and 
therefore is referred to as vitamin B 1 . Thiamine func-
tions in the decarboxylation of α-ketoacids, such as 
pyruvate α-ketoglutarate, and branched-chain amino 
acids and thus is essential for energy generation. In addi-
tion, thiamine pyrophosphate acts as a coenzyme for a 
transketolase reaction that mediates the conversion of 
hexose and pentose phosphates. It has been postulated 
that thiamine plays a role in peripheral nerve conduc-
tion, although the exact chemical reactions underlying 
this function are not known. 
 Food sources 
 The median intake of thiamine in the United States 
from food alone is 2 mg/d. Primary food sources for 
thiamine include yeast, organ meat, pork, legumes, 
beef, whole grains, and nuts. Milled rice and grains 
contain little thiamine, if any. Thiamine defi ciency is 
therefore more common in cultures that rely heavily 
on a rice-based diet. Tea, coffee (regular and decaffein-
ated), raw fi sh, and shellfi sh contain thiaminases, which 
can destroy the vitamin. Thus, drinking large amounts 
of tea or coffee can theoretically lower thiamine body 
stores. 
 VITAMIN AND TRACE MINERAL DEFICIENCY 
AND EXCESS 
 CHaPTer 54 
Section X
Nutrition
586
Deficiency
Most dietary deficiency of thiamine worldwide is the 
result of poor dietary intake. In Western countries, the 
primary causes of thiamine deficiency are alcoholism 
and chronic illnesses such as cancer. Alcohol interferes 
directly with the absorption of thiamine and with the 
synthesis of thiamine pyrophosphate. Thiamine should 
always be replenished when a patient with alcohol-
ism is being refed, as carbohydrate repletion without 
adequate thiamine can precipitate acute thiamine defi-
ciency with lactic acidosis. Other at-risk populations 
are women with prolonged hyperemesis gravidarum 
Table 54-1 
Principal Clinical Findings of Vitamin Malnutrition
Nutrient
Clinical Finding
Dietary Level per Day 
Associated with Overt 
Deficiency in Adults
Contributing Factors to 
Deficiency
Thiamine
Beriberi: neuropathy, muscle weakness 
and wasting, cardiomegaly, edema, 
ophthalmoplegia, confabulation
<0.3 mg/1000 kcal
Alcoholism, chronic diuretic use, 
hyperemesis
Riboflavin
Magenta tongue, angular stomatitis, 
seborrhea, cheilosis
<0.6 mg
—
Niacin
Pellagra: pigmented rash of sun-
exposed areas, bright red tongue, 
­diarrhea, apathy, memory loss, 
­disorientation
<9.0 niacin equivalents
Alcoholism, vitamin B6 deficiency, 
riboflavin deficiency, tryptophan 
­deficiency
Vitamin B6
Seborrhea, glossitis, convulsions, 
­neuropathy, depression, confusion, 
microcytic anemia
<0.2 mg
Alcoholism, isoniazid
Folate
Megaloblastic anemia, atrophic glossitis, 
depression, ↑ homocysteine
<100 μg/d
Alcoholism, sulfasalazine, 
­pyrimethamine, triamterene
Vitamin B12
Megaloblastic anemia, loss of vibratory 
and position sense, abnormal gait, 
dementia, impotence, loss of bladder 
and bowel control, ↑ homocysteine, 
↑ methylmalonic acid
<1.0 μg/d
Gastric atrophy (pernicious anemia),  
terminal ileal disease, strict 
­vegetarianism, acid-reducing drugs 
(e.g., H2 blockers)
Vitamin C
Scurvy: petechiae, ecchymosis, coiled 
hairs, inflamed and bleeding gums, joint 
effusion, poor wound healing, fatigue
<10 mg/d
Smoking, alcoholism
Vitamin A
Xerophthalmia, night blindness, Bitot’s 
spots, follicular hyperkeratosis, 
impaired embryonic development, 
immune dysfunction
<300 μg/d
Fat malabsorption, infection, ­measles, 
alcoholism, protein-energy 
­malnutrition
Vitamin D
Rickets: skeletal deformation, rachitic 
rosary, bowed legs; osteomalacia
<2.0 μg/d
Aging, lack of sunlight exposure, fat 
malabsorption, deeply pigmented 
skin
Vitamin E
Peripheral neuropathy, spinocerebellar  
ataxia, skeletal muscle atrophy, 
­retinopathy
Not described unless 
underlying contributing 
factor is present
Occurs only with fat malabsorption 
or genetic abnormalities of vitamin E 
metabolism/transport
Vitamin K
Elevated prothrombin time, bleeding
<10 μg/d
Fat malabsorption, liver disease, 
­antibiotic use
and anorexia, patients with overall poor nutritional sta-
tus on parenteral glucose, patients after bariatric bypass 
surgery, and patients on chronic diuretic therapy due 
to increased urinary thiamine losses. Maternal thiamine 
deficiency can lead to infantile beriberi in breast-fed 
children. ­Thiamine deficiency should be considered in 
the setting of motor vehicle accidents associated with 
head injury.
Thiamine deficiency in its early stage induces anorexia 
and nonspecific symptoms (e.g., irritability, decrease in 
short-term memory). Prolonged thiamine deficiency 
causes beriberi, which is classically categorized as wet 
or dry, although there is considerable overlap. In either 
 
CHAPTER 54
Vitamin and Trace Mineral Deficiency and Excess
587
Table 54-2 
Deficiencies and Toxicities of Metals
Element
Deficiency
Toxicity
Tolerable Upper 
(Dietary) Intake Level
Boron
No biologic function determined
Developmental defects, male sterility, 
testicular atrophy
20 mg/d (extrapolated 
from animal data)
Calcium
Reduced bone mass, osteoporosis
Renal insufficiency (milk-alkali syn-
drome), nephrolithiasis, impaired iron 
absorption
2500 mg/d (milk-alkali)
Copper
Anemia, growth retardation, defective 
keratinization and pigmentation of hair, 
hypothermia, degenerative changes 
in aortic elastin, osteopenia, mental 
­deterioration
Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, hepatic 
­failure, tremor, mental deterioration, 
hemolytic anemia, renal dysfunction
10 mg/d (liver toxicity)
Chromium
Impaired glucose tolerance
Occupational: renal failure, dermatitis, 
pulmonary cancer
ND
Fluoride
↑ Dental caries
Dental and skeletal fluorosis, 
­osteosclerosis
10 mg/d (fluorosis)
Iodine
Thyroid enlargement, ↓ T4, cretinism
Thyroid dysfunction, acne-like ­eruptions
1100 μg/d (thyroid 
­dysfunction)
Iron
Muscle abnormalities, koilonychia, pica, 
anemia, ↓ work performance, impaired 
cognitive development, premature 
labor, ↑ perinatal maternal mortality
Gastrointestinal effects (nausea, 
­vomiting, diarrhea, constipation), iron 
overload with organ damage, acute 
systemic toxicity
45 mg/d of elemental 
iron (GI side effects)
Manganese
Impaired growth and skeletal 
­development, reproduction, lipid and 
carbohydrate metabolism; upper 
body rash
General: neurotoxicity, Parkinson-like 
symptoms; occupational: encephalitis-
like syndrome, Parkinson-like syndrome, 
psychosis, pneumoconiosis
11 mg/d (neurotoxicity)
Molybdenum
Severe neurologic abnormalities
Reproductive and fetal abnormalities
2 mg/d extrapolated 
from animal data
Selenium
Cardiomyopathy, heart failure, striated 
muscle degeneration
General: alopecia, nausea, vomiting, 
abnormal nails, emotional lability, 
peripheral neuropathy, lassitude, garlic 
odor to breath, dermatitis; occupa-
tional: lung and nasal carcinomas, liver 
­necrosis, pulmonary inflammation
400 μg/d (hair, nail 
changes)
Phosphorus
Rickets (osteomalacia), proximal muscle 
weakness, rhabdomyolysis, paresthe-
sia, ataxia, seizure, confusion, heart 
failure, hemolysis, acidosis
Hyperphosphatemia
4000 mg/d
Zinc
Growth retardation, ↓ taste and smell, 
alopecia, dermatitis, diarrhea, immune 
dysfunction, failure to thrive, gonadal 
atrophy, congenital malformations
General: reduced copper absorption, 
gastritis, sweating, fever, nausea, vom-
iting; occupational: respiratory distress, 
pulmonary fibrosis
40 mg/d (impaired 
­copper metabolism)
Abbreviations: GI, gastrointestinal; ND, not determined.
form of beriberi, patients may complain of pain and 
paresthesia. Wet beriberi presents primarily with cardio-
vascular symptoms, due to impaired myocardial energy 
metabolism and dysautonomia, and can occur after 3 
months of a thiamine-deficient diet. Patients present 
with an enlarged heart, tachycardia, high-output con-
gestive heart failure, peripheral edema, and peripheral 
neuritis. Patients with dry beriberi present with a sym-
metric peripheral neuropathy of the motor and sen-
sory systems with diminished reflexes. The neuropathy 
affects the legs most markedly, and these patients have 
difficulty rising from a squatting position.
Alcoholic patients with chronic thiamine deficiency 
also may have central nervous system (CNS) manifestations 
Section X
Nutrition
588
Vitamin
Thiamine (B1)
Riboflavin (B2)
Flavin mononucleotide
  (FMN) and flavin
  adenine dinucleotide
  (FAD)
Cofactor for
  oxidation,
  reduction
  reactions,
  and covalently
  attached
  prosthetic groups
  for some
  enzymes
Niacin
Nicotinamide adenine
  dinucleotide phosphate
  (NADP) and nicotinamide
  adenine dinucleotide
  (NAD)
Coenzymes for
  oxidation and
  reduction
  reactions
Vitamin B6
Pyridoxal phosphate
Cofactor for
  enzymes of amino
  acid metabolism
Folate
Polyglutamate forms of
  (5, 6, 7, 8)
  tetrahydrofolate with
  carbon unit
  attachments
Coenzyme for one
  carbon transfer in
  nucleic acid and
  amino acid
  metabolism
Active derivative or
  cofactor form
Principal
function
CH2OH
CH2OH
HO
N
N
N
NH
Ribityl
N
O
O
NH2
CH3
CH2CH2OH
N
N
N
S
N
H
O
C
O

Vitamin B12
Methylcobalamine
Adenosylcobalamin
Coenzyme for
  methionine
  synthase
  and
   L-methylmalonyl-
  CoA mutase
H2N
CH2
N
N
N
N
C
CH
CH2
CH2
COOH
H
N
H
N
H
O
O
O
C
CH
CH2
CH2
COOH
O
C
OH
n
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
H3C
H3C
H3C
CH2
CH2CH2CONH2
NHCOCH2CH2
CH2CH2CONH2
CH2CH2CONH2
CH2CH2CONH2
CONH2
CH2
CH2
CHCH3
CONH2
HOCH2
HO
Co
N
N
N
N
N
N
O
O
O
P
O
O
OH
Cbl
Thiamine pyrophosphate
Coenzyme for
  cleavage of
  carbon-carbon
  bonds; amino
  acid and
  carbohydrate
  metabolism
Figure 54-1
The structures and principal functions of vitamins associated with human disorders.
 
CHAPTER 54
Vitamin and Trace Mineral Deficiency and Excess
589
known as Wernicke’s encephalopathy, consisting of hori-
zontal nystagmus, ophthalmoplegia (due to weakness of 
one or more extraocular muscles), cerebellar­ ataxia, and 
mental impairment. When there is an additional loss of 
memory and a confabulatory psychosis, the syndrome 
is known as Wernicke-Korsakoff ­syndrome. Despite the 
typical clinical picture and history, Wernicke-Korsakoff 
syndrome is underdiagnosed.
The laboratory diagnosis of thiamine deficiency 
­usually is made by a functional enzymatic assay of trans-
ketolase activity measured before and after the addition 
of thiamine pyrophosphate. A >25% stimulation by the 
addition of thiamine pyrophosphate (an activity coeffi-
cient of 1.25) is interpreted as abnormal. Thiamine or 
the phosphorylated esters of thiamine in serum or blood 
also can be measured by high-performance liquid chro-
matography (HPLC) to detect deficiency.
Treatment	
Thiamine Deficiency
In acute thiamine deficiency with either cardiovascu-
lar or neurologic signs, 100 mg/d of thiamine should 
be given parenterally for 7 days, followed by 10 mg/d 
orally until there is complete recovery. Cardiovascular 
and ophthalmoplegic improvement occurs within 24 h. 
Other manifestations gradually clear, although psychosis 
in Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome may be permanent or 
­persist for several months.
Toxicity
Although anaphylaxis has been reported after high doses 
of thiamine, no adverse effects have been recorded from 
either food or supplements at high doses. Thiamine 
Vitamin
Vitamin C
Vitamin A
Retinol, retinaldehyde,
  and retinoic acid
Formation of
  rhodopsin (vision)
  and glycoproteins
  (epithelial cell
  function); also
  regulates gene
  transcription
Vitamin D
1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D
Maintenance of
  blood calcium
  and phosphorus
  levels;
  antiproliferative
  hormone
Vitamin E
Tocopherols and
  tocotrienols
Antioxidants
Active derivative or
  cofactor form
Principal
function
Vitamin K
Vitamin K hydroquinone
Cofactor for
  posttranslation
  carboxylation of
  many proteins
  including essential
  clotting factors
Ascorbic acid and
  dehydroascorbic acid
Participation as a
  redox ion in many
  biologic
  oxidation and
  hydrogen transfer
  reactions
O
O
C
C
OH OH
OH
C
C
C
CH2OH
O
O
R
CH2OH
(-Carotene)
(Retinol)
OH
CH2
OH
HO
CH2[CH2
CH2]3H
CH
HO
O
CH2
CH3
Figure 54-1
(Continued )
Section X
Nutrition
590
supplements may be bought over the counter in doses of 
up to 50 mg/d.
Riboflavin (Vitamin B2)
Riboflavin is important for the metabolism of fat, car-
bohydrate, and protein, reflecting its role as a respiratory 
coenzyme and an electron donor. Enzymes that contain 
flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) or flavin mononucleo-
tide (FMN) as prosthetic groups are known as flavoenzymes 
(e.g., succinic acid dehydrogenase, monoamine oxidase, 
glutathione reductase). FAD is a cofactor for methyltetra-
hydrofolate reductase and therefore modulates homocyste-
ine metabolism. The vitamin also plays a role in drug and 
steroid metabolism, including detoxification reactions.
Although much is known about the chemical and 
enzymatic reactions of riboflavin, the clinical mani-
festations of riboflavin deficiency are nonspecific and 
are similar to those of other deficiences of B vitamins. 
Riboflavin deficiency is manifested principally by 
lesions of the mucocutaneous surfaces of the mouth and 
skin (Table  54-1). In addition to the mucocutaneous 
lesions, corneal vascularization, anemia, and personality 
changes have been described with riboflavin deficiency.
Deficiency and excess
Riboflavin deficiency almost always is due to dietary 
deficiency. Milk, other dairy products, and enriched 
breads and cereals are the most important dietary sources 
of riboflavin in the United States, although lean meat, 
fish, eggs, broccoli, and legumes are also good sources. 
Riboflavin is extremely sensitive to light, and milk 
should be stored in containers that protect against pho-
todegradation. Laboratory diagnosis of riboflavin defi-
ciency can be made by measurement of red blood cell 
or urinary riboflavin concentrations or by measurement 
of erythrocyte glutathione reductase activity, with and 
without added FAD. Because the capacity of the gas-
trointestinal tract to absorb riboflavin is limited (∼20 mg 
if given in one oral dose), riboflavin toxicity has not 
been described.
Niacin (Vitamin B3)
The term niacin refers to nicotinic acid and nicotin-
amide and their biologically active derivatives. Nico-
tinic acid and nicotinamide serve as precursors of two 
coenzymes, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) 
and NAD phosphate (NADP), which are impor-
tant in numerous oxidation and reduction reactions in 
the body. In addition, NAD and NADP are active in 
adenine diphosphate–ribose transfer reactions involved 
in DNA repair and calcium mobilization.
Metabolism and requirements
Nicotinic acid and nicotinamide are absorbed well from 
the stomach and small intestine. Niacin bioavailability 
is high from beans, milk, meat, and eggs; bioavailabil-
ity from cereal grains is lower. Since flour is enriched 
with the “free” niacin (i.e., non-coenzyme form), bio-
availability is excellent. Median intakes of niacin in the 
United States considerably exceed the recommended 
dietary allowance (RDA).
The amino acid tryptophan can be converted to 
niacin with an efficiency of 60:1 by weight. Thus, 
the RDA for niacin is expressed in niacin equivalents. 
A lower conversion of tryptophan to niacin occurs in 
­vitamin B6 and/or riboflavin deficiencies and in the 
presence of isoniazid. The urinary excretion products of 
niacin include 2-pyridone and 2-methyl nicotinamide, 
measurements of which are used in the diagnosis of 
­niacin deficiency.
Deficiency
Niacin deficiency causes pellagra, which is found mostly 
among people eating corn-based diets in parts of China, 
Africa, and India. Pellagra in North America is found 
mainly among alcoholics; in patients with congenital 
defects of intestinal and kidney absorption of trypto-
phan (Hartnup disease); and in patients with carci-
noid syndrome (Chap. 52), in which there is increased 
conversion of tryptophan to serotonin. In the setting 
of famine or population displacement, the occurrence 
of pellagra results from the absolute lack of niacin but 
also from the deficiency of micronutrients required for 
the conversion of tryptophan to niacin (e.g., iron, ribo-
flavin, and pyridoxine). The early symptoms of ­pellagra 
include loss of appetite, generalized weakness and irri-
tability, abdominal pain, and vomiting. Bright red glos-
sitis then ensues, followed by a characteristic skin rash 
that is pigmented and scaling, particularly in skin areas 
exposed to sunlight. This rash is known as Casal’s 
necklace because it forms a ring around the neck; it is seen 
in advanced cases. Vaginitis and esophagitis also may 
occur. Diarrhea (in part due to proctitis and in part due 
to malabsorption), depression, seizures, and dementia 
are also part of the pellagra syndrome—the four Ds: 
dermatitis, diarrhea, and dementia leading to death.
Treatment	
Pellagra
Treatment of pellagra consists of oral supplementation of 
100–200 mg of nicotinamide or nicotinic acid three times 
daily for 5 days. High doses of nicotinic acid (2 g/d in a 
time-release form) are used for the treatment of elevated 
cholesterol and triglyceride levels and/or a low high-­
density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol level.
 
CHAPTER 54
Vitamin and Trace Mineral Deficiency and Excess
591
Toxicity
Prostaglandin-mediated flushing due to binding of 
the vitamin to a G protein–coupled receptor has been 
observed at daily doses as low as 50 mg of niacin when 
taken as a supplement or as therapy for dyslipidemia. 
There is no evidence of toxicity from niacin derived 
from food sources. Flushing always starts in the face 
and may be accompanied by skin dryness, itching, par-
esthesia, and headache. Pharmaceutical preparations of 
nicotinic acid combined with laropiprant, a selective 
prostaglandin D2 receptor 1 antagonist, or premedica-
tion with aspirin may alleviate these symptoms. Flush-
ing is subject to tachyphylaxis and often improves with 
time. Nausea, vomiting, and abdominal pain also occur 
at similar doses of niacin. Hepatic toxicity is the most 
serious toxic reaction caused by niacin and may pres-
ent as jaundice with elevated aspartate aminotransferase 
(AST) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) levels. A few 
cases of fulminant hepatitis requiring liver transplan-
tation have been reported at doses of 3–9 g/d. Other 
toxic reactions include glucose intolerance, hyperurice-
mia, macular edema, and macular cysts. The combina-
tion of nicotinic acid preparations for dyslipidemia with 
3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) 
reductase inhibitors may increase the risk of rhabdomy-
olysis. The upper limit for daily niacin intake has been 
set at 35 mg. However, this upper limit does not pertain 
to the therapeutic use of niacin.
Pyridoxine (Vitamin B6)
Vitamin B6 refers to a family of compounds that 
include pyridoxine, pyridoxal, pyridoxamine, and their 
5′-phosphate derivatives. 5′-Pyridoxal phosphate (PLP) 
is a cofactor for more than 100 enzymes involved in 
amino acid metabolism. Vitamin B6 also is involved in 
heme and neurotransmitter synthesis and in the metab-
olism of glycogen, lipids, steroids, sphingoid bases, and 
several vitamins, including the conversion of trypto-
phan to niacin.
Dietary sources
Plants contain vitamin B6 in the form of pyridoxine, 
whereas animal tissues contain PLP and pyridoxamine 
phosphate. The vitamin B6 contained in plants is less 
­bioavailable than that in animal tissues. Rich food sources 
of vitamin B6 include legumes, nuts, wheat bran, and 
meat, although it is present in all food groups.
Deficiency
Symptoms of vitamin B6 deficiency include epithe-
lial changes, as seen frequently with other B vitamin 
deficiencies. In addition, severe vitamin B6 deficiency 
can lead to peripheral neuropathy, abnormal electro-
encephalograms, and personality changes that include 
depression and confusion. In infants, diarrhea, seizures, 
and anemia have been reported. Microcytic hypochro-
mic anemia is due to diminished hemoglobin synthesis, 
since the first enzyme involved in heme biosynthesis 
(aminolevulinate synthase) requires PLP as a cofactor. 
In some case reports, platelet dysfunction has been 
reported. Since vitamin B6 is necessary for the con-
version of homocysteine to cystathionine, it is 
possible that chronic low-grade vitamin B6 deficiency 
may result in hyperhomocysteinemia and increased risk 
of cardiovascular disease. Independent of homocysteine, 
low levels of circulating vitamin B6 have been associated 
with inflammation and elevated levels of C-reactive 
protein.
Certain medications, such as isoniazid, l-dopa, penicil-
lamine, and cycloserine, interact with PLP due to a reac-
tion with carbonyl groups. Pyridoxine should be given 
concurrently with isoniazid to avoid neuropathy. The 
increased ratio of AST to ALT seen in alcoholic liver 
disease reflects the relative vitamin B6 dependence of 
ALT. Vitamin B6 dependency syndromes that require 
pharmacologic doses of vitamin B6 are rare; they include 
­cystathionine β-synthase deficiency, pyridoxine-responsive 
(primarily sideroblastic) anemias, and gyrate atrophy with 
chorioretinal degeneration due to decreased activity of 
the mitochondrial enzyme ornithine aminotransferase. 
In these situations, 100–200 mg/d of oral vitamin B6 is 
required for treatment.
High doses of vitamin B6 have been used to treat car-
pal tunnel syndrome, premenstrual syndrome, schizo-
phrenia, autism, and diabetic neuropathy but have not 
been found to be effective.
The laboratory diagnosis of vitamin B6 deficiency is 
generally made on the basis of low plasma PLP values 
(<20 nmol/L). Treatment of vitamin B6 deficiency is 
done with 50 mg/d; higher doses of 100–200 mg/d 
are given if the deficiency is related to medication use. 
Vitamin B6 should not be given with l-dopa, since the 
vitamin interferes with the action of this drug.
Toxicity
The safe upper limit for vitamin B6 has been set at 
100 mg/d, although no adverse effects have been associ-
ated with high intakes of vitamin B6 from food sources 
only. When toxicity occurs, it causes a severe sensory neu-
ropathy, leaving patients unable to walk. Some cases of 
photosensitivity and dermatitis have been reported.
Folate, Vitamin B12
Folates are related compounds that build on a backbone 
of pteroylglutamic acid. The biologically active form 
of folate is reduced (dihydro- and tetrahydrofolate) and 
Section X
Nutrition
592
contains a methyl group that it donates to uridylate to 
make thymidylate, the rate-limiting step in DNA syn-
thesis. Folates are also involved in purine synthesis and 
methionine synthesis. Folate is also involved in the 
development of the nervous system. Folate deficiency 
during pregnancy can lead to spina bifida and other 
neural tube defects in the baby. However, the most 
common manifestation of folate deficiency is mega-
loblastic anemia due to the shortage of thymidylate. 
Folate deficiency is rare due to folate food supplementa-
tion. Folates are found in virtually every kind of food 
but even more is required in the setting of high red 
cell turnover such as hemolytic anemia or rapid growth 
such as pregnancy.
Vitamin B12 or cobalamin exists in a variety of forms 
that all have a cobalt atom within a corrin ring. The 
2-deoxyadenosyl form is located in the mitochon-
dria and is a coafactor for methylmalonyl coenzyme A 
mutase, which is involved in myelin synthesis and other 
reactions. Methylcobalamin is a cofactor for methionine 
synthase and participates in the reduction and methyla-
tion of folate to donate a methyl group for thymidylate 
synthesis. Vitamin B12 is found only in meat, fish, and 
dairy products, not plants. Its absorption is mediated by 
intrinsic factor produced by parietal cells in the stomach 
and the intrinsic factor-B12 complex is absorbed in the 
terminal ileum. Gastritis and acid blockers can inhibit 
intrinsic factor production. Diseases of the terminal 
ileum may also inhibit absorption. Because folate cor-
rects the anemia of B12 deficiency, folate food supple-
mentation has also reduced the detection of B12 defi-
ciency from anemia symptoms. Accordingly, it is now 
more common to detect B12 deficiency in older patients 
with balance difficulties from posterior columns demy-
elination, B12 deficiency is also a reversible cause of 
dementia.
Vitamin C
Both ascorbic acid and its oxidized product dehydro-
ascorbic acid are biologically active. Actions of vitamin C 
include antioxidant activity, promotion of nonheme 
iron absorption, carnitine biosynthesis, the conver-
sion of dopamine to norepinephrine, and the synthesis 
of many peptide hormones. Vitamin C is also impor-
tant for connective tissue metabolism and cross-linking 
(proline hydroxylation), and it is a component of many 
drug-metabolizing enzyme systems, particularly the 
mixed-function oxidase systems.
Absorption and dietary sources
Almost complete absorption of vitamin C occurs if 
<100 mg is administered in a single dose; however, 
only 50% or less is absorbed at doses >1 g. Enhanced 
degradation and fecal and urinary excretion of vitamin C 
occur at higher intake levels.
Good dietary sources of vitamin C include citrus 
fruits, green vegetables (especially broccoli), tomatoes, 
and potatoes. Consumption of five servings of fruits 
and vegetables a day provides vitamin C in excess of the 
RDA of 90 mg/d for males and 75 mg/d for females. 
In addition, approximately 40% of the U.S. popula-
tion consumes vitamin C as a dietary supplement in 
which “natural forms” of the vitamin are no more bio-
available than synthetic forms. Smoking, hemodialysis, 
pregnancy, and stress (e.g., infection, trauma) appear to 
increase vitamin C requirements.
Deficiency
Vitamin C deficiency causes scurvy. In the United States, 
this is seen primarily among the poor and elderly, in 
alcoholics who consume <10 mg/d of vitamin C, and 
in individuals consuming macrobiotic diets. Vitamin C 
deficiency also can occur in young adults who eat 
severely unbalanced diets. In addition to generalized 
fatigue, symptoms of scurvy primarily reflect impaired 
formation of mature connective tissue and include 
bleeding into skin (petechiae, ecchymoses, perifol-
licular hemorrhages); inflamed and bleeding gums; 
and manifestations of bleeding into joints, the perito-
neal cavity, the pericardium, and the adrenal glands. 
In children, vitamin C deficiency may cause impaired 
bone growth. Laboratory diagnosis of vitamin C defi-
ciency is made on the basis of low plasma or leukocyte 
levels.
Administration of vitamin C (200 mg/d) improves 
the symptoms of scurvy within a matter of several days. 
High-dose vitamin C supplementation (e.g., 1–2 g/d) may 
slightly decrease the symptoms and duration of upper respi-
ratory tract infections. Vitamin C supplementation has also 
been reported to be useful in Chédiak-Higashi syndrome 
and osteogenesis imperfecta. Diets high in vitamin C 
have been claimed to lower the incidence of certain can-
cers, particularly esophageal and ­gastric cancers. If proved, 
this effect may be due to the fact that vitamin C can pre-
vent the conversion of nitrites and secondary amines to 
carcinogenic nitrosamines. However, an intervention study 
from China did not show vitamin C to be protective. Par-
enteral ascorbic acid has been suggested to have a potential 
therapeutic role in the treatment of advanced cancers.
Toxicity
Taking >2 g of vitamin C in a single dose may result in 
abdominal pain, diarrhea, and nausea. Since vitamin C 
may be metabolized to oxalate, it is feared that chronic 
high-dose vitamin C supplementation could result in 
an increased prevalence of kidney stones. However, 
 
CHAPTER 54
Vitamin and Trace Mineral Deficiency and Excess
593
this has not been borne out in several trials, except in 
patients with preexisting renal disease. Thus, it is rea-
sonable to advise patients with a past history of kidney 
stones not to take large doses of vitamin C. There is 
also an unproven but possible risk that chronic high 
doses of vitamin C could promote iron overload in 
patients taking supplemental iron. High doses of vita-
min C can induce hemolysis in patients with glucose-
6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency, and doses 
>1 g/d can cause false-negative guaiac reactions as well 
as interfere with tests for urinary glucose. High doses 
may interfere with certain drugs (e.g., bortezomib in 
myeloma patients).
Biotin
Biotin is a water-soluble vitamin that plays a role in 
gene expression, gluconeogenesis, and fatty acid syn-
thesis and serves as a CO2 carrier on the surface of 
both cytosolic and mitochondrial carboxylase enzymes. 
The vitamin also functions in the catabolism of specific 
amino acids (e.g., leucine). Excellent food sources of 
biotin include organ meat such as liver or kidney, soy, 
beans, yeast, and egg yolks; however, egg white contains 
the protein avidin, which strongly binds the vitamin 
and reduces its bioavailability.
Biotin deficiency due to low dietary intake is rare; 
rather, deficiency is due to inborn errors of metabolism. 
Biotin deficiency has been induced by experimental 
feeding of egg white diets and in patients with short 
bowels who received biotin-free parenteral nutrition. 
In adults, biotin deficiency results in mental changes 
(depression, hallucinations), paresthesia, anorexia, and 
nausea. A scaling, seborrheic, and erythematous rash 
may occur around the eyes, nose, and mouth as well 
as on the extremities. In infants, biotin deficiency pres-
ents as hypotonia, lethargy, and apathy. In addition, 
infants may develop alopecia and a characteristic rash 
that includes the ears. The laboratory diagnosis of biotin 
deficiency can be established on the basis of a decreased 
urinary concentration or an increased urinary excretion 
of 3-hydroxyisovaleric acid after a leucine challenge. 
Treatment requires pharmacologic doses of biotin, using 
up to 10 mg/d. No toxicity is known.
Pantothenic Acid (Vitamin B5)
Pantothenic acid is a component of coenzyme A 
and phosphopantetheine, which are involved in fatty 
acid metabolism and the synthesis of cholesterol, steroid 
hormones, and all compounds formed from isopren-
oid units. In addition, pantothenic acid is involved in 
the acetylation of proteins. The vitamin is excreted in 
the urine, and the laboratory diagnosis of deficiency is 
made on the basis of low urinary vitamin levels.
The vitamin is ubiquitous in the food supply. Liver, 
yeast, egg yolks, whole grains, and vegetables are par-
ticularly good sources. Human pantothenic acid defi-
ciency has been demonstrated only in experimental 
feeding of diets low in pantothenic acid or by giving a 
specific pantothenic acid antagonist. The symptoms of 
pantothenic acid deficiency are nonspecific and include 
gastrointestinal disturbance, depression, muscle cramps, 
paresthesia, ataxia, and hypoglycemia. Pantothenic acid 
deficiency is believed to have caused the burning feet 
syndrome seen in prisoners of war during World War II. 
No toxicity of this vitamin has been reported.
Choline
Choline is a precursor for acetylcholine, phospholipids, 
and betaine. Choline is necessary for the structural 
integrity of cell membranes, cholinergic neurotransmis-
sion, lipid and cholesterol metabolism, methyl-group 
metabolism, and transmembrane signaling. Recently, 
a recommended adequate intake was set at 550 mg/d 
for adult males and 425 mg/d for adult females, 
although certain genetic polymorphisms can increase 
an individual’s­ requirement. Choline is thought to be a 
“conditionally essential” nutrient in that de novo syn-
thesis occurs in the liver and is less than the vitamin’s 
utilization only under certain stress conditions (e.g., 
alcoholic liver disease). The dietary requirement of 
choline depends on the status of other methyl-group 
donors (folate, vitamin B12, and methionine) and thus 
varies widely. Choline is widely distributed in food 
(e.g., egg yolk, wheat germ, organ meat, milk) in the 
form of lecithin (phosphatidylcholine). Choline defi-
ciency has occurred in patients receiving parenteral nutri-
tion devoid of choline. Deficiency results in fatty liver, 
elevated transaminase levels, and skeletal muscle damage 
with high creatine phosphokinase values. The diagnosis 
of choline deficiency is currently made on the basis of 
low plasma levels, although nonspecific conditions (e.g., 
heavy exercise) may suppress plasma levels.
Toxicity from choline results in hypotension, cholin-
ergic sweating, diarrhea, salivation, and a fishy body odor. 
The upper limit for choline has been set at 3.5 g/d. Thera-
peutically, choline has been suggested for patients with 
dementia and patients at high risk of cardiovascular disease, 
due to its ability to lower cholesterol and homocysteine 
levels. However, such benefits have not been firmly docu-
mented. Choline- and betaine-restricted diets are of thera-
peutic value in trimethylaminuria (fish odor syndrome).
Flavonoids
Flavonoids constitute a large family of polyphenols that 
contribute to the aroma, taste, and color of fruits and 
vegetables. Major groups of dietary flavonoids include 
anthocyanidins in berries; catechins in green tea and 
Section X
Nutrition
594
chocolate; flavonols (e.g., quercitin) in broccoli, kale, 
leeks, onion, and the skins of grapes and apples; and iso-
flavones (e.g., genistein) in legumes. Isoflavones have a 
low bioavailability and are partially metabolized by the 
intestinal flora. The dietary intake of flavonoids is esti-
mated to be between 10 and 100 mg/d, although this 
is almost certainly an underestimate due to the lack of 
knowledge of their concentrations in many foods. Several 
flavonoids have been shown to have antioxidant activ-
ity and to affect cell signaling. From observational epide-
miologic studies and limited clinical human and animal 
studies, flavonoids have been postulated to play a role in 
the prevention of several chronic diseases, including neu-
rodegenerative disease, diabetes, and osteoporosis. The 
ultimate importance and usefulness of their compounds 
against human disease have not been demonstrated.
Vitamin A
Vitamin A, in the strictest sense, refers to retinol. How-
ever, the oxidized metabolites, retinaldehyde and reti-
noic acid, are also biologically active compounds. The 
term retinoids includes all molecules (including syn-
thetic molecules) that are chemically related to retinol. 
Retinaldehyde (11-cis) is the essential form of vitamin 
A that is required for normal vision, whereas retinoic 
acid is necessary for normal morphogenesis, growth, 
and cell differentiation. Retinoic acid does not function 
in vision and, in contrast to retinol, is not involved in 
reproduction. Vitamin A also plays a role in iron utili-
zation, humoral immunity, T cell–mediated immunity, 
natural killer cell activity, and phagocytosis. Vitamin A 
is commercially available in esterified forms (e.g., ace-
tate, palmitate) since it is more stable as an ester.
There are more than 600 carotenoids in nature, 
and approximately 50 of them can be metabolized to 
­vitamin A. β-Carotene is the most prevalent carotenoid 
in the food supply that has provitamin A ­activity. In 
humans, significant fractions of carotenoids are absorbed 
intact and are stored in liver and fat. It is now estimated 
that 12 μg or more (range, 4–27 μg) of dietary all-trans 
β-carotene is equivalent to 1 μg of retinol activity, 
whereas 24 μg or more of other dietary provitamin A 
carotenoids (e.g., cryptoxanthin, α-carotene) is equivalent 
to 1 μg of retinol activity. The vitamin A equivalency for 
a β-carotene supplement in an oily solution is 2:1.
Metabolism
The liver contains approximately 90% of the vitamin A 
reserves and secretes vitamin A in the form of retinol, 
which is bound to retinol-binding protein. Once this has 
occurred, the retinol-binding protein complex interacts 
with a second protein, transthyretin. This trimolecu-
lar complex functions to prevent vitamin A from being 
filtered by the kidney glomerulus to protect the body 
against the toxicity of retinol and to allow retinol to be 
taken up by specific cell-surface receptors that recognize 
retinol-binding protein. A certain amount of vitamin A 
enters peripheral cells even if it is not bound to retinol-
binding protein. After retinol is internalized by the cell, 
it becomes bound to a series of cellular retinol-binding 
proteins, which function as sequestering and transport-
ing agents as well as co-ligands for enzymatic reactions. 
Certain cells also contain retinoic acid–binding proteins, 
which have sequestering functions but also shuttle reti-
noic acid to the nucleus and enable its metabolism.
Retinoic acid is a ligand for certain nuclear recep-
tors that act as transcription factors. Two families 
of receptors (RAR and RXR receptors) are active in 
retinoid-mediated gene transcription. Retinoid receptors 
regulate transcription by binding as dimeric complexes 
to specific DNA sites, the retinoic acid response ele-
ments, in target genes. The receptors can either stimulate 
or repress gene expression in response to their ligands. 
RAR binds all-trans retinoic acid and 9-cis-retinoic acid, 
whereas RXR binds only 9-cis-retinoic acid.
The retinoid receptors play an important role in con-
trolling cell proliferation and differentiation. Retinoic 
acid is useful in the treatment of promyelocytic leu-
kemia and also is used in the treatment of cystic acne 
because it inhibits keratinization, decreases sebum secre-
tion, and possibly alters the inflammatory reaction. 
RXRs dimerize with other nuclear receptors to func-
tion as coregulators of genes responsive to retinoids, 
thyroid hormone, and calcitriol. RXR agonists induce 
insulin sensitivity experimentally, perhaps because RXR 
is a cofactor for the peroxisome-proliferator-activated 
receptors (PPARs), which are targets for thiazolidinedi-
one drugs such as rosiglitazone and troglitazone.
Dietary sources
The retinol activity equivalent (RAE) is used to express 
the vitamin A value of food. One RAE is defined as 
1 μg of retinol (0.003491 mmol), 12 μg of β-carotene, 
and 24 μg of other provitamin A carotenoids. In older 
literature, vitamin A often was expressed in interna-
tional units (IU), with 1 μg of retinol being equal to 
3.33 IU of retinol and 20 IU of β-carotene, but these 
units are no longer in scientific use.
Liver, fish, and eggs are excellent food sources for 
preformed vitamin A; vegetable sources of provitamin A 
carotenoids include dark green and deeply colored 
fruits and vegetables. Moderate cooking of vegeta-
bles enhances carotenoid release for uptake in the gut. 
Carotenoid absorption is also aided by some fat in a 
meal. Infants are particularly susceptible to vitamin 
A deficiency because neither breast nor cow’s milk 
supplies­ enough vitamin A to prevent deficiency. In 
developing countries, chronic dietary deficiency is the 
main cause of vitamin A deficiency and is exacerbated 
 
CHAPTER 54
Vitamin and Trace Mineral Deficiency and Excess
595
by infection. In early childhood, low vitamin A status 
results from inadequate intakes of animal food sources 
and edible oils, both of which are expensive, coupled 
with seasonal unavailability of vegetables and fruits 
and lack of marketed fortified food products. Concur-
rent zinc deficiency can interfere with the mobilization 
of vitamin A from liver stores. Alcohol interferes with 
the conversion of retinol to retinaldehyde in the eye by 
competing for alcohol (retinol) dehydrogenase. Drugs 
that interfere with the absorption of vitamin A include 
mineral oil, neomycin, and cholestyramine.
Deficiency
Vitamin A deficiency is endemic in areas where 
diets are chronically poor, especially in southern 
Asia, sub-Saharan Africa, some parts of Latin 
America, and the western Pacific, including parts 
of China. Vitamin A status is usually assessed by mea­
suring serum retinol (normal range, 1.05–3.50 μmol/L 
[30–100 μg/dL]) or blood spot retinol or by tests of dark 
adaptation. There are stable isotopic or invasive liver biopsy 
methods to estimate total body stores of vitamin A. Based 
on deficient serum retinol (<0.70 μmol/L [20 μg/dL]), 
there are >90 million preschool-age children with 
vitamin A deficiency, among whom >4 million have an 
ocular manifestation of deficiency termed xerophthalmia. 
This condition includes milder stages of night blindness 
and conjunctival xerosis (dryness) with Bitot’s spots 
(white patches of keratinized epithelium appearing on 
the sclera) as well as rare, potentially blinding corneal 
ulceration and necrosis. Keratomalacia (softening of the 
cornea) leads to corneal scarring that blinds at least a 
quarter of a million children each year and is associated 
with a fatality rate of 4–25%. However, vitamin A defi-
ciency at any stage poses an increased risk of mortality 
from diarrhea, dysentery, measles, malaria, and respira-
tory disease. Vitamin A deficiency can compromise 
­barrier and innate and acquired immune defenses to 
infection. Vitamin A supplementation can markedly 
reduce risk of child mortality (23–34%, on average) in 
areas where deficiency is widely prevalent. About 10% 
of pregnant women in undernourished settings also 
develop night blindness, assessed by history, during the 
latter half of pregnancy, and this moderate vitamin A 
deficiency is associated with an increased risk of mater-
nal infection and mortality rate.
Treatment	
Vitamin A Deficiency
Any stage of xerophthalmia should be treated with 
60  mg of vitamin A in oily solution, usually contained 
in a soft-gel capsule. The same dose is repeated 1 
and 14  days later. Doses should be reduced by half for 
patients 6–11 months of age. Mothers with night blind-
ness or Bitot’s spots should be given vitamin A orally, 
either 3 mg daily or 7.5 mg twice a week for 3 months. 
These regimens are efficacious, and they are less expen-
sive and more widely available than injectable water-
miscible vitamin A. A common approach to prevention 
is to supplement young children in high-risk areas with  
60 mg every 4–6 months, with a half dose given to infants 
6–11 months of age.
Uncomplicated vitamin A deficiency rarely occurs in 
industrialized countries. One high-risk group, extremely 
low-birth-weight infants (<1000 g), is likely to be  
vitamin A–deficient and should be supplemented with 
1500 μg (or RAE) of vitamin A three times a week for 
4  weeks. Severe measles in any society can lead to 
secondary vitamin A deficiency. Children hospital-
ized with measles should receive two 60-mg doses of  
vitamin A on 2 consecutive days. Vitamin A deficiency 
most often occurs in patients with malabsorptive dis-
eases (e.g., celiac sprue, short-bowel syndrome) who 
have abnormal dark adaptation or symptoms of night 
blindness without other ocular changes. Typically, 
such patients are treated for 1 month with 15 mg/d of 
a water-miscible preparation of vitamin A. This is fol-
lowed by a lower maintenance dose, with the exact 
amount determined by monitoring serum retinol.
There are no specific deficiency signs or symptoms that 
result from carotenoid deficiency. It was postulated that 
β-carotene would be an effective chemopreventive agent 
for cancer because numerous epidemiologic studies had 
shown that diets high in β-carotene were associated with 
lower incidences of cancers of the respiratory and diges-
tive systems. However, intervention studies in smokers 
found that treatment with high doses of β-carotene actu-
ally resulted in more lung cancers than did treatment with 
placebo. Non–provitamin A carotenoids such as lutein and 
zeaxanthin have been suggested to protect against mac-
ular degeneration, and large-scale intervention studies 
have been ­undertaken to test this hypothesis. The non–
provitamin A carotenoid lycopene has been proposed to 
protect against prostate cancer. However, the effective-
ness of these agents has not been proved by intervention 
­studies, and the mechanisms underlying these purported 
biologic actions are unknown.
Selective plant breeding techniques that lead to 
a higher provitamin A content of staple foods may 
improve vitamin A malnutrition in low-income coun-
tries. Moreover, a recently developed genetically modi-
fied food (Golden Rice) showed an improved β-carotene 
to vitamin A conversion ratio of ∼3:1.
Toxicity
Acute toxicity of vitamin A was first noted in Arctic explor-
ers who ate polar bear liver and has also been seen after 
Section X
Nutrition
596
administration of 150 mg in adults or 100 mg in children. 
Acute toxicity is manifested by increased intracranial 
pressure, vertigo, diplopia, bulging fontanels in children, 
­seizures, and exfoliative dermatitis; it may result in death. 
In children being treated for vitamin A deficiency accord-
ing to the protocols outlined earlier, transient bulging of 
fontanels occurs in 2% of infants, and transient nausea, 
vomiting, and headache occur in 5% of preschoolers. 
Chronic vitamin A intoxication is largely a concern in 
industrialized countries and has been seen in normal adults 
who ingest 15 mg/d and children who ingest 6 mg/d of 
vitamin A over a period of several months. Manifestations 
include dry skin, cheilosis, glossitis, vomiting, alopecia,­ 
bone demineralization and pain, hypercalcemia, lymph 
node enlargement, hyperlipidemia, amenorrhea, and fea-
tures of pseudotumor cerebri with increased intracranial­ 
pressure and papilledema. Liver fibrosis with portal 
hypertension and bone demineralization may result from 
chronic vitamin A intoxication. When vitamin A is pro-
vided in excess to pregnant women, congenital malfor-
mations have included spontaneous abortions, craniofacial 
abnormalities, and valvular heart disease. In pregnancy, 
the daily dose of vitamin A should not exceed 3 mg. 
Commercially available retinoid derivatives are also toxic, 
including 13-cis-retinoic acid, which has been associated 
with birth defects. As a result, contraception should be 
continued for a least 1 year and possibly longer in women 
who have taken 13-cis-retinoic acid.
In malnourished children, vitamin A supplements 
(100,000–200,000 IU) as a function of age in several 
rounds over 2 years are considered to amplify nonspe-
cific effects of vaccines. However, for unclear reasons, 
there may be a negative effect on mortality rates in 
incompletely vaccinated girls.
High doses of carotenoids do not result in toxic 
symptoms but should be avoided in smokers due to 
an increased risk of lung cancer. Very high doses of 
β-carotene (∼200 mg/d) have been used to treat or pre-
vent the skin rashes of erythropoietic protoporphyria. 
Carotenemia, which is characterized by a yellowing of the 
skin (creases of the palms and soles) but not the sclerae, 
may be present after ingestion of >30 mg of β-carotene 
daily. Hypothyroid patients are particularly susceptible to 
the development of carotenemia due to impaired break-
down of carotene to vitamin A. ­Reduction of carotenes 
from the diet results in the disappearance of skin yellow-
ing and carotenemia over a period of 30–60 days.
Vitamin D
The biologic effects of vitamin D are mediated by 
vitamin D receptors, which are found in most tissues, 
thus potentially expanding vitamin D actions on nearly 
all cell systems and organs (e.g., immune cells, brain, 
breast, colon, and prostate) as well as exerting clas-
sic endocrine effects on calcium metabolism and bone 
health. Vitamin D is thought to be important for main-
taining normal function of many nonskeletal tissues 
such as muscle (including heart muscle), immune func-
tion, and inflammation as well as cell proliferation and 
differentiation. Studies have shown that it may be useful 
as adjunctive treatment for tuberculosis, psoriasis, and 
multiple sclerosis or for the prevention of certain can-
cers. Vitamin D insufficiency may increase the risk of 
type 1 diabetes mellitus, cardiovascular disease (insulin 
resistance, hypertension, or low-grade inflammation), 
or brain dysfunction (e.g., depression). However, the 
importance of the exact physiologic role of vitamin D 
in these nonskeletal diseases has not been clarified.
A major source of vitamin D is its synthesis in the skin 
upon ultraviolet B (UV-B) (wavelength, 290–315 nm) 
exposure. Except for fish, food (unless fortified) con-
tains only limited amounts of vitamin D. Vitamin D2 
(ergocalciferol) is obtained from plant sources and is the 
chemical form found in some supplements.
Deficiency
Vitamin D status has been assessed by measuring serum 
25-dihydroxyvitamin D (25[OH]2 vitamin D) ­levels; 
however, there is no consensus on a uniform assay meth-
odology or on optimal serum levels. The optimal level 
might, in fact, differ according to the targeted disease 
entity. Based on epidemiologic and experimental data, a 
25(OH)2 vitamin D level >20 ng/mL (≥50 nmol/L; to 
convert ng/mL to nmol/L, multiply by 2.496) is suf-
ficient for good bone health. Some experts advocate 
higher serum levels (e.g., >30 ng/mL) for other desirable 
endpoints of vitamin D action.
Risk factors for vitamin D deficiency are old age, 
lack of sun exposure, dark skin (especially among those 
living in northern latitudes), fat malabsorption, and 
obesity. Rickets represents the classic disease of ­vitamin D 
deficiency. Signs of deficiency are muscle soreness, 
weakness, and bone pain. Some of these effects are 
independent of calcium intake.
The U.S. National Academy of Science recently con-
cluded that the majority of North Americans are receiv-
ing adequate amounts of vitamin D (RDA = 15 μg/d 
or 600 IU/d; Chap. 53). However, for people older 
than 70 years, the RDA is set at 20 μg/d (800 IU/d). 
The consumption of fortified or enriched foods as well 
as suberythemal sun exposure should be encouraged 
for people at risk for vitamin D deficiency. If an ade-
quate intake cannot be achieved, vitamin D supplements 
should be taken, especially during the winter months. 
Vitamin D deficiency can be treated by the oral admin-
istration of 50,000 IU/week for 6–8 weeks followed by 
a maintenance dose of 800 IU/d (100 μg/d) from food 
and supplements after achievement of normal plasma 
levels. The physiologic effects of vitamin D2 and D3 are 
identical when ingested over long periods.
 
CHAPTER 54
Vitamin and Trace Mineral Deficiency and Excess
597
Toxicity
The upper limit of intake has been set at 4000 IU/d. 
­Contrary to earlier beliefs, acute vitamin D intoxication is 
rare and usually is caused by the uncontrolled and exces-
sive ingestion of supplements or faulty food fortification 
­practices. High plasma 1,25(OH)2 vitamin D and high 
plasma calcium levels are central features of toxicity.­ Stop-
ping vitamin D and calcium supplements is mandatory, 
and treatment of hypercalcemia may be required.
Vitamin E
Vitamin E is a collective name for all stereoisomers of 
tocopherols and tocotrienols, although only the RR 
tocopherols meet human requirements. Vitamin E 
acts as a chain-breaking antioxidant and is an efficient 
pyroxyl radical scavenger that protects low-density lipo-
proteins (LDLs) and polyunsaturated fats in membranes 
from oxidation. A network of other antioxidants (e.g., 
vitamin C, glutathione) and enzymes maintains vitamin E 
in a reduced state. Vitamin E also inhibits prostaglan-
din synthesis and the activities of protein kinase C and 
phospholipase A2.
Absorption and metabolism
After absorption, vitamin E is taken up from chylomi-
crons by the liver, and a hepatic α-tocopherol trans-
port protein mediates intracellular vitamin E transport 
and incorporation into very low density lipoprotein 
(VLDL). The transport protein has particular affinity 
for the RRR isomeric form of α-tocopherol; thus, this 
natural isomer has the most biologic activity.
Requirement
Vitamin E is widely distributed in the food supply and is 
particularly high in sunflower oil, safflower oil, and wheat 
germ oil; γ-tocotrienols are notably present in soybean 
and corn oils. Vitamin E is also found in meats, nuts, and 
cereal grains, and small amounts are present in fruits and 
vegetables. Vitamin E pills containing doses of 50–1000 mg 
are ingested by about 10% of the U.S. population. The 
RDA for vitamin E is 15 mg/d (34.9 μmol or 22.5 IU) for 
all adults. Diets high in polyunsaturated fats may necessitate 
a slightly higher intake of vitamin E.
Dietary deficiency of vitamin E does not exist. Vitamin E 
deficiency is seen in only severe and prolonged malabsorp-
tive diseases, such as celiac disease, or after small-intestinal 
resection. Children with cystic fibrosis or prolonged cho-
lestasis may develop vitamin E deficiency characterized 
by areflexia and hemolytic anemia. Children with abet-
alipoproteinemia cannot absorb or transport vitamin E 
and become deficient quite rapidly. A familial form of 
­isolated vitamin E deficiency also exists; it is due to a 
defect in the α-tocopherol transport protein. Vitamin E 
deficiency causes axonal degeneration of the large 
myelinated axons and results in posterior column and 
spinocerebellar symptoms. Peripheral neuropathy is ini-
tially characterized by areflexia, with progression to an 
ataxic gait, and by decreased vibration and position sen-
sations. Ophthalmoplegia, skeletal myopathy, and pig-
mented retinopathy may also be features of vitamin E 
deficiency. Either vitamin E or selenium deficiency in 
the host has been shown to increase certain viral muta-
tions and, therefore, virulence. The laboratory diagnosis­ 
of vitamin E deficiency is made on the basis of low 
blood levels of α-tocopherol (<5 μg/mL, or <0.8 mg of 
α-tocopherol per gram of total lipids).
Treatment	
Vitamin E Deficiency
Symptomatic vitamin E deficiency should be treated 
with 800–1200 mg of α-tocopherol per day. Patients 
with abetalipoproteinemia may need as much as  
5000–7000 mg/d. Children with symptomatic vita-
min E deficiency should be treated with 400 mg/d 
orally of water-miscible esters; alternatively, 2 mg/kg 
per d may be administered intramuscularly. Vitamin 
E in high doses may protect against oxygen-induced 
retrolental fibroplasia and bronchopulmonary dys-
plasia as well as intraventricular hemorrhage of pre-
maturity. Vitamin E has been suggested to increase 
sexual performance, treat intermittent claudication, 
and slow the aging process, but evidence for these 
properties is lacking. When given in combination 
with other antioxidants, vitamin E may help prevent  
macular degeneration. High doses (60–800 mg/d) of  
vitamin E have been shown in controlled trials to 
improve parameters of immune function and reduce 
colds in ­nursing home residents, but intervention stud-
ies using vitamin E to prevent cardiovascular disease 
or cancer­ have not shown efficacy, and at doses >400 
mg/d, ­vitamin E may even increase all-cause mortality 
rates.
Toxicity
All forms of vitamin E are absorbed and could contrib-
ute to toxicity. High doses of vitamin E (>800 mg/d) 
may reduce platelet aggregation and interfere with 
­vitamin K metabolism and are therefore contraindicated 
in patients taking warfarin and antiplatelet agents (such as 
aspirin or clopidogrel). Nausea, flatulence, and diarrhea 
have been reported at doses >1 g/d.
Vitamin K
There are two natural forms of vitamin K: vitamin K1, also 
known as phylloquinone, from vegetable and animal sources, 
Section X
Nutrition
598
and vitamin K2, or menaquinone, which is synthesized by 
bacterial flora and found in hepatic tissue. Phylloquinone 
can be converted to menaquinone in some organs.
Vitamin K is required for the posttranslational carbox-
ylation of glutamic acid, which is necessary for calcium 
binding to γ-carboxylated proteins such as prothrombin 
(factor II); factors VII, IX, and X; protein C; protein S; and 
proteins found in bone (osteocalcin) and ­vascular smooth 
muscle (e.g., matrix Gla protein). However, the impor-
tance of vitamin K for bone mineralization and prevention 
of vascular calcification is not known. ­Warfarin-type drugs 
inhibit γ-carboxylation by preventing the conversion of 
vitamin K to its active hydroquinone form.
Dietary sources
Vitamin K is found in green leafy vegetables such as kale 
and spinach, and appreciable amounts are also present in 
margarine and liver. Vitamin K is present in vegetable 
oils; olive, canola, and soybean oils are particularly rich 
sources. The average daily intake by Americans is esti-
mated to be approximately 100 μg/d.
Deficiency
The symptoms of vitamin K deficiency are due 
to hemorrhage, and newborns are particularly 
susceptible because of low fat stores, low breast 
milk levels of vitamin K, sterility of the infantile intesti-
nal tract, liver immaturity, and poor placental transport. 
Intracranial bleeding, as well as gastrointestinal and skin 
bleeding, can occur in vitamin K–deficient infants 
1–7 days after birth. Thus, vitamin K (1 mg IM) is 
given prophylactically at the time of delivery.
Vitamin K deficiency in adults may be seen in 
patients with chronic small-intestinal disease (e.g., celiac 
disease, Crohn’s disease), in those with obstructed bili-
ary tracts, or after small-bowel resection. Broad-spectrum 
antibiotic treatment can precipitate vitamin K deficiency 
by reducing gut bacteria, which synthesize menaqui-
nones, and by inhibiting the metabolism of vitamin K. 
In patients with warfarin therapy, the antiobesity drug 
orlistat can lead to international normalized ratio (INR) 
changes due to vitamin K malabsorption. The diag-
nosis of vitamin K deficiency usually is made on the 
basis of an elevated prothrombin time or reduced clot-
ting factors, although vitamin K may also be measured 
directly by HPLC. Vitamin K deficiency is treated by 
using a parenteral dose of 10 mg. For patients with 
chronic malabsorption, 1–2 mg/d of vitamin K should 
be given orally, or 1–2 mg/week can be taken paren-
terally. Patients with liver disease may have an elevated 
prothrombin time because of liver cell destruction as 
well as vitamin K deficiency. If an elevated prothrom-
bin time does not improve on vitamin K therapy, it 
can be deduced that it is not the result of vitamin K 
deficiency.
Toxicity
Toxicity from dietary phylloquinones and menaqui-
nones has not been described. High doses of vitamin K 
can impair the actions of oral anticoagulants.
Minerals
Table 54-2.
Zinc
Zinc is an integral component of many metalloenzymes 
in the body; it is involved in the synthesis and stabiliza-
tion of proteins, DNA, and RNA and plays a structural 
role in ribosomes and membranes. Zinc is necessary for 
the binding of steroid hormone receptors and several 
other transcription factors to DNA. Zinc is absolutely 
required for normal spermatogenesis, fetal growth, and 
embryonic development.
Absorption
The absorption of zinc from the diet is inhibited by 
dietary phytate, fiber, oxalate, iron, and copper, as well 
as by certain drugs, including penicillamine, sodium 
valproate, and ethambutol. Meat, shellfish, nuts, and 
legumes are good sources of bioavailable zinc, whereas 
zinc in grains and legumes is less available for absorption.
Deficiency
Mild zinc deficiency has been described in many 
diseases, including diabetes mellitus, HIV/AIDS, 
cirrhosis, alcoholism, inflammatory bowel disease, 
malabsorption syndromes, and sickle cell disease. In these 
diseases, mild chronic zinc deficiency can cause stunted 
growth in children, decreased taste sensation (hypogeu-
sia), and impaired immune function. Severe chronic zinc 
deficiency has been described as a cause of hypogonad-
ism and dwarfism in several Middle Eastern countries. In 
these children, hypopigmented hair is also part of the 
syndrome. Acrodermatitis enteropathica is a rare autoso-
mal recessive disorder characterized by abnormalities in 
zinc absorption. Clinical manifestations include diarrhea, 
alopecia, muscle wasting, depression, irritability, and a 
rash involving the extremities, face, and perineum. The 
rash is characterized by vesicular and pustular crusting 
with scaling and erythema. Occasional patients with 
Wilson’s disease have developed zinc deficiency as a 
consequence of penicillamine therapy.
The diagnosis of zinc deficiency is usually made by a 
serum zinc level <12 μmol/L (<70 μg/dL). Pregnancy 
and birth control pills may cause a slight depression 
in serum zinc levels, and hypoalbuminemia from any 
 
CHAPTER 54
Vitamin and Trace Mineral Deficiency and Excess
599
cause can result in hypozincemia. In acute stress situa-
tions, zinc may be redistributed from serum into ­tissues. 
Zinc deficiency may be treated with 60 mg elemen-
tal zinc, orally twice a day. Zinc gluconate lozenges 
(13 mg ­elemental zinc every 2 h while awake) have 
been reported to reduce the duration and symptoms of 
the common cold in adults, but studies are conflicting.
Zinc deficiency is prevalent in many developing 
countries and usually coexists with other micronutrient 
deficiencies (especially iron). Zinc (20 mg/d) may be 
an effective adjunctive therapeutic strategy for diarrheal 
disease and pneumonia in children.
Toxicity
Acute zinc toxicity after oral ingestion causes nausea, 
vomiting, and fever. Zinc fumes from welding may also 
be toxic and cause fever, respiratory distress, excessive 
salivation, sweating, and headache. Chronic large doses 
of zinc may depress immune function and cause hypo-
chromic anemia as a result of copper deficiency. Intra-
nasal zinc preparations should be avoided because they 
may lead to irreversible damage of nasal mucosa and 
anosmia.
Copper
Copper is an integral part of numerous enzyme sys-
temsz, including amine oxidases, ferroxidase (cerulo-
plasmin), cytochrome-c oxidase, superoxide dismutase, 
and dopamine hydroxylase. Copper is also a compo-
nent of ferroprotein, a transport protein involved in the 
basolateral transfer of iron during absorption from the 
enterocyte. As such, copper plays a role in iron metabo-
lism, melanin synthesis, energy production, neurotrans-
mitter synthesis, and CNS function; the synthesis and 
cross-linking of elastin and collagen; and the scavenging 
of superoxide radicals. Dietary sources of copper include 
shellfish, liver, nuts, legumes, bran, and organ meats.
Deficiency
Dietary copper deficiency is relatively rare, although it 
has been described in premature infants who are fed milk 
diets and in infants with malabsorption (Table  54-2). 
Copper-deficiency anemia has been reported in patients 
with malabsorptive diseases and nephrotic syndrome 
and in patients treated for Wilson’s disease with chronic 
high doses of oral zinc, which can interfere with copper 
absorption. Menkes’ kinky hair syndrome is an X-linked 
metabolic disturbance of copper metabolism character-
ized by mental retardation, hypocupremia, and decreased 
circulating ceruloplasmin. It is caused by mutations in 
the copper-transporting ATP7A gene. Children with 
this disease often die within 5 years because of dissect-
ing aneurysms or cardiac rupture. Aceruloplasminemia is 
a rare autosomal recessive disease characterized by tissue 
iron overload, mental deterioration, microcytic anemia, 
and low serum iron and copper concentrations.
The diagnosis of copper deficiency is usually made on 
the basis of low serum levels of copper (<65 μg/dL) and 
low ceruloplasmin levels (<20 mg/dL). Serum levels of 
copper may be elevated in pregnancy or stress conditions 
since ceruloplasmin is an acute-phase reactant and 90% 
of circulating copper is bound to ceruloplasmin.
Toxicity
Copper toxicity is usually accidental (Table  54-2). In 
severe cases, kidney failure, liver failure, and coma may 
ensue. In Wilson’s disease, mutations in the copper-
transporting ATP7B gene lead to accumulation of cop-
per in the liver and brain, with low blood levels due to 
decreased ceruloplasmin.
Selenium
Selenium, in the form of selenocysteine, is a com-
ponent of the enzyme glutathione peroxidase, 
which serves to protect proteins, cell membranes, 
lipids, and nucleic acids from oxidant molecules. As such, 
selenium is being actively studied as a chemopreventive 
agent against certain cancers, such as prostate cancer. 
Selenocysteine is also found in the deiodinase enzymes, 
which mediate the deiodination of thyroxine to triiodo-
thyronine. Rich dietary sources of selenium include sea-
food, muscle meat, and cereals, although the selenium 
content of cereal is determined by the soil ­concentration. 
Countries with low soil concentrations include parts of 
Scandinavia, China, and New Zealand. Keshan disease is 
an endemic cardiomyopathy found in children and 
young women residing in regions of China where dietary 
intake of selenium is low (<20 μg/d). Concomitant defi-
ciencies of iodine and selenium may worsen the clinical 
manifestations of cretinism. Chronic ingestion of high 
amounts of selenium leads to selenosis, characterized by 
hair and nail brittleness and loss, garlic breath odor, skin 
rash, myopathy, irritability, and other abnormalities of the 
nervous system.
Chromium
Chromium potentiates the action of insulin in patients 
with impaired glucose tolerance, presumably by increas-
ing insulin receptor–mediated signaling, although its 
usefulness in treating type 2 diabetes is uncertain. In 
addition, improvement in blood lipid profiles has been 
reported in some patients. The usefulness of chromium 
supplements in muscle building has not been substan-
tiated. Rich food sources of chromium include yeast, 
meat, and grain products. Chromium in the trivalent 
Section X
Nutrition
600
state is found in supplements and is largely nontoxic; 
however, chromium-6 is a product of stainless steel 
welding and is a known pulmonary carcinogen as well 
as a cause of liver, kidney, and CNS damage.
Magnesium
Magnesium is the major intracellular divalent cat-
ion and is essential for normal neuromuscular activity. 
Magnesium is a cofactor for a wide range of biochemi-
cal process in the cell including enzymes, transporters, 
and nucleic acids. The serum concentration is generally 
1.7-2.4 mg/dL (0.7-1 mmol/L or 1.4-2 mEq/L). Total 
body magnesium is about 25 grams about half of which 
is in bone. Vitamin D facilitates intestinal absorption. 
About 140-360 mg of magnesium are ingested in the 
normal diet each day and about 100 mg/d is absorbed 
and is matched by the levels of excretion.
Hypomagnesemia is generally a reflection of increased 
losses through nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, or increased 
renal excretion due to failure of reabsorption.  Hypo-
magnesemic patients may have tetany, tremor, muscle 
weakness, ataxia, nystagmus, vertigo, seizures, apathy, 
depression, irritability, delirium, or psychosis. Cardiac 
arrhythmias may also occur. Hypocalcemia and hypoka-
lemia may also be seen. Magnesium supplementation is 
usually corrective
Hypermagnesemia occurs mainly in the setting of renal 
failure or overingestion of magnesium-containing cathartics. 
Vasodilatation is the common result with hypotension 
refractory to pressors, nausea, lethargy, weakness, ileus, 
dilated pupils, and heart rhythm disturbances including 
heart block. Hydration and hemodialysis may be needed 
to bring magnesium levels down. Calcium administration 
may provide temporary relief of some symptoms.
Fluoride, Manganese, and 
Ultratrace Elements
An essential function for fluoride in humans has not 
been described, although it is useful for the maintenance 
of structure in teeth and bone. Adult fluorosis results 
in mottled and pitted defects in tooth enamel as well as 
brittle bone (skeletal fluorosis).
Manganese and molybdenum deficiencies have been 
reported in patients with rare genetic abnormalities 
and in a few patients receiving prolonged total paren-
teral nutrition. Several manganese-specific enzymes 
have been identified (e.g., manganese superoxide dis-
mutase). Deficiencies of manganese have been reported 
to result in bone demineralization, poor growth, ataxia, 
disturbances in carbohydrate and lipid metabolism, and 
convulsions.
Ultratrace elements are defined as those needed in 
amounts <1 mg/d. Essentiality has not been established 
for most ultratrace elements, although selenium, chro-
mium, and iodine are clearly essential. Molybdenum is 
necessary for the activity of sulfite and xanthine oxidase, 
and molybdenum deficiency may result in skeletal and 
brain lesions.
 Douglas C. Heimburger 
601
 Malnutrition can arise from primary or secondary 
causes, with the former resulting from inadequate or 
poor-quality food intake and the latter from  diseases 
that alter food intake or nutrient requirements, metabo-
lism, or absorption. Primary malnutrition occurs mainly 
in developing countries and under conditions of politi-
cal unrest, war, or famine. Secondary malnutrition, 
the main form encountered in industrialized countries, 
was largely unrecognized until the early 1970s, when it 
was appreciated that persons with adequate food sup-
plies can become malnourished as a result of acute or 
chronic diseases that alter nutrient intake or metabo-
lism, particularly diseases that cause acute or chronic 
infl ammation. Various studies have shown that pro-
tein-energy malnutrition (PEM) affects one-third to 
 one-half of patients on general medical and surgical 
wards in teaching hospitals. The consistent fi nding that 
nutritional status infl uences patient prognosis under-
scores the importance of preventing, detecting, and 
treating malnutrition. 
 Protein-enerGY Malnutrition 
 Defi nitions for forms of PEM are in fl ux. Tradition-
ally, the two major types of PEM have been  marasmus
and  kwashiorkor . These conditions are compared in 
Table 55-1 . Marasmus has been considered the end 
result of a long-term defi cit of dietary energy, whereas 
kwashiorkor has been understood to result from a 
protein-poor diet. Although the former concept remains 
essentially correct, evidence is accumulating that PEM 
 syndromes are distinguished by two main features: dietary 
intake and underlying infl ammatory processes. Energy-
poor diets with minimal infl ammation cause gradual 
erosion of body mass, resulting in classic marasmus. By 
contrast, infl ammation from acute illnesses such as injury 
or sepsis and chronic illnesses such as cancer, lung or 
heart disease, and HIV can erode lean body mass even 
in the presence of relatively suffi cient dietary intake, 
leading to a kwashiorkor-like state. Quite often, infl am-
matory illnesses impair appetite and dietary intake, 
 producing combinations of the two. 
 An international consensus committee has proposed 
the following revised defi nitions.  Starvation-related mal-
nutrition is suggested for instances of chronic starvation 
without infl ammation,  chronic disease–related malnutrition
when infl ammation is chronic and of mild to  moderate 
degree, and  acute disease– or injury-related malnutrition when 
infl ammation is acute and of a severe degree. However, 
because distinguishing diagnostic criteria for these con-
ditions have not been elaborated, this chapter outlines 
 criteria that have served well and are embedded in the 
medical literature. 
 MarasMus or CaChexia 
 Marasmus is a state in which virtually all available 
body fat stores have been exhausted due to starvation. 
Cachexia is a state that involves substantial loss of lean 
body mass due to chronic systemic infl ammation. 
 Conditions that produce cachexia in high-income 
countries tend to be chronic and indolent, such as 
 cancer and chronic pulmonary disease, whereas maras-
mus occurs in patients with anorexia nervosa. These 
conditions are relatively easy to detect because of the 
patient’s starved appearance. The diagnosis is based on 
fat and muscle wastage resulting from prolonged  calorie 
defi ciency and/or infl ammation. Diminished  skinfold 
thickness refl ects the loss of fat reserves; reduced arm 
muscle circumference with temporal and interosseous 
muscle wasting refl ects the catabolism of protein 
throughout the body, including vital organs such as the 
heart, liver, and kidneys. 
 MALNUTRITION AND NUTRITIONAL 
ASSESSMENT 
 cHaPter 55 
602
Section X
Nutrition
Routine laboratory findings in cachexia/marasmus 
are relatively unremarkable. The creatinine-height index 
(24-h urinary creatinine excretion compared with nor-
mal values based on height) is low, reflecting the loss 
of muscle mass. Occasionally, the serum albumin level 
is reduced, but it stays above 2.8 g/dL in uncompli-
cated cases. Despite a morbid appearance, immuno-
competence, wound healing, and the ability to handle 
short-term stress are reasonably well preserved in most 
patients.
Pure starvation-related malnutrition is a chronic, 
fairly well adapted form of starvation rather than an 
acute illness; it should be treated cautiously in an 
attempt to reverse the downward trend gradually. 
Although nutritional support is necessary, overly aggres-
sive repletion can result in severe, even life-threatening 
metabolic imbalances such as hypophosphatemia and 
cardiorespiratory failure (refeeding syndrome). When 
possible, oral or enteral nutritional support is preferred; 
treatment started slowly allows readaptation of meta-
bolic and intestinal functions (Chap. 56).
Kwashiorkor or Protein-Calorie 
Malnutrition (PCM)
By contrast, kwashiorkor or PCM in developed countries 
occurs mainly in connection with acute, life-threatening 
illnesses such as trauma and sepsis. The physiologic stress 
produced by these illnesses increases protein and energy 
requirements at a time when intake is often limited. A 
classic scenario for PCM is an acutely stressed patient 
who receives only 5% ­dextrose ­solutions for periods 
as brief as 2 weeks; this gives rise to the ­proposed term 
acute disease– or injury-related ­malnutrition. Although the 
etiologic mechanisms are not fully known, the protein-
sparing response normally seen in starvation is blocked 
by the stressed state and by carbohydrate infusion.
In its early stages, the physical findings of kwashiorkor/ 
PCM are few and subtle. Fat reserves and muscle­ mass 
are initially unaffected, giving the deceptive appearance 
of adequate nutrition. Signs that support the diagnosis 
of kwashiorkor/PCM include easy hair pluckability,­ 
edema, skin breakdown, and poor wound healing. 
The major sine qua non is severe reduction of levels­ 
of serum proteins such as albumin (<2.8 g/dL) and 
transferrin (<150 mg/dL) or iron-binding capacity 
(<200 μg/dL). Cellular immune function is depressed, 
reflected by lymphopenia (<1500 lymphocytes/μL in 
adults and older children) and lack of response to skin 
test antigens (anergy).
The prognosis of adult patients with full-blown 
kwashiorkor/PCM is not good even with aggres-
sive nutritional support. Surgical wounds often dehisce 
(fail to heal), pressure sores develop, gastroparesis and 
Table 55-1 
Comparison of Marasmus/Cachexia and Kwashiorkor/Protein-Calorie Malnutrition
Marasmus or Cachexia
Kwashiorkor or Protein-Calorie Malnutritiona
Clinical setting
↓ Energy intake
↓ Protein intake during stress state
Time course to 
develop
Months or years
Starved appearance
Weight <80% standard for height
Triceps skinfold <3 mm
Midarm muscle circumference <15 cm
Weeks
Well-nourished appearance
Easy hair pluckabilityb
Edema
Clinical features
Laboratory 
­findings
Creatinine-height index <60% 
­standard
Serum albumin <2.8 g/dL
Total iron-binding capacity <200 μg/dL
Lymphocytes <1500/μL
Anergy
Clinical course
Reasonably preserved responsive-
ness to short-term stress
Infections
Poor wound healing, decubitus ulcers, skin 
­breakdown
Mortality
Low unless related to underlying disease
High
Diagnostic ­criteria
Triceps skinfold <3 mm
Midarm muscle circumference  
<15 cm
Serum albumin <2.8 g/dL
  At least one of the following:
Poor wound healing, decubitus ulcers, or skin 
breakdown
  Easy hair pluckabilityb
Edema
aThe findings used to diagnose kwashiorkor must be unexplained by other causes.
bTested by firmly pulling a lock of hair from the top (not the sides or back), grasping with the thumb and forefinger. An average of three or more 
hairs removed easily and painlessly is considered abnormal hair pluckability.
 
CHAPTER 55
Malnutrition and Nutritional Assessment
603
diarrhea can occur with enteral feeding, the risk of gas-
trointestinal bleeding from stress ulcers is increased, host 
defenses are compromised, and death from overwhelm-
ing infection may occur despite antibiotic therapy. 
Unlike treatment in marasmus, aggressive nutritional 
support is indicated to restore better metabolic balance 
rapidly (Chap. 56). Although kwashiorkor in children is 
less foreboding, perhaps because a lesser degree of stress 
is required to precipitate the disorder, it is still a serious 
condition.
Physiologic Characteristics  
Of Hypometabolic and 
Hypermetabolic States
The metabolic characteristics and nutritional needs of 
hypermetabolic patients who are stressed from injury, 
infection, or chronic inflammatory illness differ from 
those of hypometabolic patients who are unstressed but 
chronically starved. In both cases, nutritional support is 
important, but misjudgments in selecting the appropri-
ate approach may have serious adverse consequences.
The hypometabolic patient is typified by the rela-
tively less stressed but mildly catabolic and chroni-
cally starved individual who, with time, will develop 
cachexia/marasmus. The hypermetabolic patient stressed 
from injury or infection is catabolic (experiencing 
rapid breakdown of body mass) and is at high risk for 
developing PCM/kwashiorkor if nutritional needs 
are not met and/or the illness does not resolve quickly. 
As summarized in Table 55-2, the two states are 
distinguished by differing perturbations of metabolic 
rate, rates of protein breakdown (proteolysis), and rates 
of gluconeogenesis. These differences are mediated 
by proinflammatory cytokines and counterregulatory 
hormones—tumor necrosis factor, interleukins 1 and 
6, C-reactive protein, catecholamines (epinephrine and 
norepinephrine), glucagon, and cortisol—that are rela-
tively reduced in hypometabolic patients and increased 
in hypermetabolic patients. Although insulin levels 
are also elevated in stressed patients, insulin resistance 
in the target tissues blocks insulin-mediated anabolic 
effects.
Metabolic Rate
In starvation and semistarvation, the resting metabolic 
rate falls between 10 and 30% as an adaptive response 
to energy restriction, slowing the rate of weight loss. 
By contrast, resting metabolic rate rises in the pres-
ence of physiologic stress in proportion to the degree 
of the insult. It may increase by about 10% after elec-
tive ­surgery, 20–30% after bone fractures, 30–60% with 
severe infections such as peritonitis or gram-negative 
septicemia, and as much as 110% after major burns.
Table 55-2 
Physiologic Characteristics of 
Hypometabolic and Hypermetabolic States
Physiologic 
Characteristics
Hypometabolic, 
Nonstressed 
Patient 
(Marasmic)
Hypermetabolic, 
Stressed Patient 
(Kwashiorkor 
Riska)
Cytokines, 
­catecholamines, 
glucagon, 
­cortisol, insulin
↓
↑
Metabolic rate, O2 
consumption
↓
↑
Proteolysis, 
­gluconeogenesis
↓
↑
Ureagenesis, urea 
excretion
↓
↑
Fat catabolism, 
fatty acid 
­utilization
Relative ↑
Absolute ↑
Adaptation to 
starvation
Normal
Abnormal
aThese changes characterize the stressed, kwashiorkor-risk patient 
seen in developed countries; they differ in some respects from the 
characteristics of primary kwashiorkor seen in developing countries.
If the metabolic rate (energy requirement) is not 
matched by energy intake, weight loss results, slowly 
in hypometabolism and quickly in hypermetabolism. 
Losses of up to 10% of body mass are unlikely to be 
detrimental; however, losses greater than this in acutely 
ill hypermetabolic patients may be associated with rapid 
deterioration in body function.
Protein Catabolism
The rate of endogenous protein breakdown (catabo-
lism) to supply energy needs normally falls during 
uncomplicated energy deprivation. After about 10 days 
of total starvation, an unstressed individual loses about 
12–18 g/d protein (equivalent to approximately 2 oz 
of muscle tissue or 2–3 g of nitrogen). By contrast, in 
injury and sepsis, protein breakdown accelerates in pro-
portion to the degree of stress, reaching 30–60 g/d after 
elective surgery, 60–90 g/d with infection, 100–130 g/d 
with severe sepsis or skeletal trauma, and >175 g/d with 
major burns or head injuries. These losses are reflected 
by proportional increases in the excretion of urea 
­nitrogen, the major by-product of protein breakdown.
Gluconeogenesis
The major aim of protein catabolism during a state 
of starvation is to provide the glucogenic amino acids 
604
Section X
Nutrition
(especially alanine and glutamine) that serve as substrates 
for endogenous glucose production (gluconeogenesis) 
in the liver. In the hypometabolic/starved state, protein 
breakdown for gluconeogenesis is minimized, especially 
as ketones derived from fatty acids become the substrate 
preferred by certain tissues. In the hypermetabolic/stress 
state, gluconeogenesis increases dramatically and in pro-
portion to the degree of the insult to increase the sup-
ply of glucose (the major fuel of reparation). Glucose is 
the only fuel that can be utilized by hypoxemic ­tissues 
(anaerobic glycolysis), white blood cells, and newly 
generated fibroblasts. Infusions of glucose partially off-
set a negative energy balance but do not significantly 
suppress the high rates of gluconeogenesis in catabolic 
patients. Hence, adequate supplies of protein are needed 
to replace the amino acids utilized for this metabolic 
response.
In summary, a hypometabolic patient is adapted to 
starvation and conserves body mass by reducing the 
metabolic rate and using fat as the primary fuel (rather 
than glucose and its precursor amino acids). A hyper-
metabolic patient also uses fat as a fuel but rapidly 
breaks down body protein to produce glucose, causing 
loss of muscle and organ tissue and endangering vital 
body functions.
Micronutrient Malnutrition
The same illnesses and reductions in nutrient intake 
that lead to PEM often produce deficiencies of vitamins 
and minerals as well (Chap. 54). Deficiencies of nutri-
ents that are stored in small amounts (such as the water- 
soluble vitamins) are lost through external secretions, 
such as zinc in diarrhea fluid or burn exudate, and are 
probably more common than generally recognized.
Deficiencies of vitamin C, folic acid, and zinc are 
reasonably common in sick patients. Signs of scurvy 
such as corkscrew hairs on the lower extremities are 
found frequently in chronically ill and/or alcoholic 
patients. The diagnosis can be confirmed with plasma 
vitamin C levels. Folic acid intakes and blood levels are 
often less than optimal, even among healthy persons; 
when illness, alcoholism, poverty, or poor dentition is 
present, these deficiencies are common. Low blood zinc 
levels are prevalent in patients with malabsorption syn-
dromes such as inflammatory bowel disease. Patients with 
zinc deficiency often exhibit poor wound healing, pres-
sure ulcer formation, and impaired immunity. ­Thiamine 
deficiency is a common complication of alcoholism but 
may be prevented by therapeutic doses of thiamine in 
patients treated for alcohol abuse.
Patients with low plasma vitamin C levels usually 
respond to the doses in multivitamin preparations, but 
patients with deficiencies should be supplemented with 
250–500 mg/d. Folic acid is absent from some oral 
multivitamin preparations; patients with deficiencies 
should be supplemented with about 1 mg/d. Patients 
with zinc deficiencies resulting from large external losses 
sometimes require oral supplementation with 220 mg 
of zinc sulfate one to three times daily. For these rea-
sons, laboratory assessments of the micronutrient status 
of patients at high risk are desirable.
Hypophosphatemia develops in hospitalized patients 
with remarkable frequency and generally results from 
rapid intracellular shifts of phosphate in cachectic or alco-
holic patients receiving intravenous glucose. The adverse 
clinical sequelae are numerous; some, such as acute car-
diopulmonary failure, are collectively called refeeding 
syndrome and can be life-threatening.
Global Considerations
Many developing countries are still faced with 
high prevalences of the classic forms of PEM: 
marasmus and kwashiorkor. Food insecurity, 
which characterizes many poor countries, prevents con-
sistent dietary sufficiency and/or quality and leads to 
endemic or cyclic malnutrition. Factors threatening 
food security include marked seasonal variations in agri-
cultural productivity (rainy season–dry season cycles), 
periodic droughts, political unrest or injustice, and dis-
ease epidemics, especially HIV/AIDS. The coexistence 
of malnutrition and disease epidemics exacerbates the 
latter and increases complications and mortality rates, 
creating vicious cycles of malnutrition and disease.
As economic prosperity improves, developing coun-
tries have been observed to undergo an epidemiologic 
transition, a component of which has been termed the 
nutrition transition. As improved economic resources make 
greater dietary diversity possible, middle-income popu-
lations (e.g., southern Asia, China, and Latin America) 
typically begin to adopt lifestyle habits of industrialized 
nations, with increased consumption of energy and fat 
and decreased levels of physical activity.­ This leads to 
­rising levels of obesity, metabolic syndrome, diabetes, 
cardiovascular disease, and cancer, sometimes coexisting 
in populations with persistent undernutrition.
Micronutrient deficiencies also remain prevalent in 
many countries of the world, impairing functional status 
and productivity and increasing mortality rates. Vitamin A 
deficiency affects perhaps 20% of the world’s population, 
impairing vision and increasing morbidity and mortality 
rates from infections, for example, measles. Community 
vitamin A supplementation programs have significantly 
reduced measles mortality rates in vulnerable populations. 
Mild to moderate iron deficiency may be prevalent in up 
to 50% of the world, resulting from poor dietary diver-
sity coupled with periodic blood loss and pregnancies. 
Iodine deficiency remains prevalent in about 35% of the 
world’s population, causing goiter, hypothyroidism, and 
 
CHAPTER 55
Malnutrition and Nutritional Assessment
605
Table 55-3 
The High-Risk Patient
Underweight (body mass index <18.5) and/or recent loss 
of ≥10% of usual body mass
Poor intake: anorexia, food avoidance (e.g., psychiatric 
condition), or NPO status for more than about 5 days
Protracted nutrient losses: malabsorption, enteric fistulas, 
draining abscesses or wounds, renal dialysis
Hypermetabolic states: sepsis, protracted fever, extensive 
trauma or burns
Alcohol abuse or use of drugs with antinutrient or 
­catabolic properties: steroids, antimetabolites (e.g., 
methotrexate), immunosuppressants, antitumor agents
Impoverishment, isolation, advanced age
cretinism. Zinc deficiency is endemic in many popula-
tions, producing growth retardation, hypogonadism, and 
dermatoses, and impairing wound healing.
Nutritional Assessment
Because interactions between illness and nutrition are 
complex, many physical and laboratory findings reflect 
both underlying disease and nutritional status. There-
fore, the nutritional evaluation of a patient requires an 
integration of the history, physical examination, anthro-
pometrics, and laboratory studies. This approach helps 
both to detect nutritional problems and to prevent con-
cluding that isolated findings indicate nutritional prob-
lems when they do not. For example, hypoalbuminemia 
caused by an underlying illness does not necessarily 
indicate malnutrition.
Nutritional History
A nutritional history is directed toward identify-
ing underlying mechanisms that put patients at risk 
for nutritional depletion or excess. These mecha-
nisms include inadequate intake, impaired absorption, 
decreased utilization, increased losses, and increased 
requirements of nutrients.
Individuals with the characteristics listed in Table 55-3 
are at particular risk for nutritional deficiencies.
Physical Examination
Physical findings that suggest vitamin, mineral, and 
protein-energy deficiencies and excesses are outlined 
in Table 55-4. Most of the physical findings are not 
specific for individual nutrient deficiencies and must 
be integrated with the historic, anthropometric, and 
laboratory findings. For example, the finding of follic-
ular hyperkeratosis on the back of the arms is a fairly 
common, normal finding. However, if it is widespread 
in a person who consumes little fruit and vegetables 
and smokes regularly (increasing ascorbic acid require-
ments), vitamin C deficiency is likely. Similarly, easily 
pluckable hair may be a consequence of chemotherapy, 
but in a hospitalized patient who has poorly healing sur-
gical wounds and hypoalbuminemia, it suggests PCM/
kwashiorkor.
Anthropometrics
Anthropometric measurements provide information on 
body muscle mass and fat reserves. The most practical 
and commonly used measurements are body weight, 
height, triceps skinfold (TSF), and midarm muscle cir-
cumference (MAMC). Body weight is one of the most 
useful nutritional parameters to follow in patients who 
are acutely or chronically ill. Unintentional weight loss 
during illness often reflects loss of lean body mass (mus-
cle and organ tissue), especially if it is rapid and is not 
caused by diuresis. This can be an ominous sign since it 
indicates use of vital body protein stores for metabolic 
fuel. The reference standard for normal body weight, 
body mass index (BMI: weight in kilograms divided by 
height, in meters, squared), is discussed in Chap. 58. 
BMIs <18.5 are considered underweight, 18.5–24.9 are 
normal, 25–29.9 are overweight, and ≥30 are obese.
Measurement of skinfold thickness is useful for esti-
mating body fat stores, because about 50% of body fat is 
normally in the subcutaneous region. Skinfold thickness 
can also permit discrimination of fat mass from muscle 
mass. The TSF is a convenient site that is generally 
representative of the body’s overall fat level. A thick-
ness <3 mm suggests virtually complete exhaustion of 
fat stores. The MAMC can be used to estimate skeletal 
muscle mass, calculated as follows:
MAMC (cm) = upper arm circumference (cm) − [0.314 
× TSF (mm)]
Laboratory Studies
A number of laboratory tests used routinely in clinical 
medicine can yield valuable information about a patient’s 
nutritional status if a slightly different approach to their 
interpretation is used. For example, abnormally low 
serum albumin levels, total iron-binding capacity, and 
anergy may have a distinct explanation, but collectively 
they may represent kwashiorkor. In the clinical setting 
of a hypermetabolic, acutely ill patient who is edema-
tous and has easily pluckable hair and inadequate protein 
intake, the diagnosis of PCM/kwashiorkor is clear-cut. 
Commonly used laboratory tests for assessing nutritional 
status are outlined in Table 55-5. The table also pro-
vides tips to avoid assigning nutritional significance to 
tests that may be abnormal for nonnutritional reasons.
606
Section X
Nutrition
Table 55-4 
Physical Findings of Nutritional Deficiencies
Clinical Findings
Possible Deficiencya
Possible Excess
Hair, Nails
Corkscrew hairs and unemerged coiled hairs
Vitamin C
Easily pluckable hair
Protein
Flag sign (transverse depigmentation of hair)
Protein
Sparse hair
Protein, biotin, zinc
Vitamin A
Transverse ridging of nails
Protein
Skin
Cellophane appearance
Protein
Cracking (flaky paint or crazy pavement dermatosis)
Protein
Follicular hyperkeratosis
Vitamins A, C
Petechiae (especially ­perifollicular)
Vitamin C
Purpura
Vitamins C, K
Pigmentation, scaling of sun-exposed areas
Niacin
Poor wound healing, decubitus ulcers
Protein, vitamin C, zinc
Scaling
Yellow pigmentation sparing sclerae (benign)
Vitamin A, essential fatty acids, biotin
Zinc (hyperpigmented)
Vitamin A
Carotene
Eyes
Night blindness
Vitamin A
Papilledema
Vitamin A
Perioral
Angular stomatitis
Riboflavin, ­pyridoxine, niacin
Cheilosis (dry, cracking, ulcerated lips)
Riboflavin, ­pyridoxine, niacin
Oral
Atrophic lingual papillae (slick tongue)
Riboflavin, niacin, folate,  
vitamin B12, protein, iron
Glossitis (scarlet, raw tongue)
Riboflavin, niacin, pyridoxine, 
folate, vitamin B12
Hypogeusesthesia, ­hyposmia
Zinc
Swollen, retracted, bleeding gums (if teeth present)
Vitamin C
Bones, Joints
Beading of ribs, epiphyseal swelling, bowlegs
Vitamin D
Tenderness, subperiosteal hemorrhage in children
Vitamin C
Neurologic
Confabulation, disorientation
Thiamine (Korsakoff’s psychosis)
Drowsiness, lethargy, vomiting
Vitamin A
Dementia
Niacin, vitamin B12, folate
Headache
Vitamin A
Ophthalmoplegia
Thiamine, ­phosphorus
Peripheral neuropathy (e.g., weakness, paresthesias, 
ataxia, footdrop, and decreased tendon reflexes, fine 
tactile sense, vibratory sense, and position sense)
Thiamine, pyridoxine, vitamin B12
Pyridoxine
Tetany
Calcium, ­magnesium
Other
Edema
Protein, ­thiamine
Heart failure
Thiamine (“wet” beriberi), 
­phosphorus
Hepatomegaly
Protein
Vitamin A
Parotid enlargement
Protein (consider also bulimia)
Sudden heart failure, death
Vitamin C
aIn this table, “protein deficiency” is used to signify kwashiorkor/PCM.
 
CHAPTER 55
Malnutrition and Nutritional Assessment
607
Table 55-5 
Laboratory Tests for Nutritional Assessment
Test (Normal Values)
Nutritional Use
Causes of Normal 
Value Despite ­ 
Malnutrition
Other Causes of  
Abnormal Value
Serum albumin  
(3.5–5.5 g/dL)
2.8–3.5: Compromised protein 
status
Dehydration
Low
Common:
Infection and other stress, 
­especially with poor protein 
intake
Burns, trauma
Congestive heart failure
Fluid overload
Severe liver disease
Uncommon:
Nephrotic syndrome
Zinc deficiency
Bacterial stasis/overgrowth of 
small intestine
<2.8: Possible kwashiorkor
Increasing value reflects positive 
protein balance
Infusion of albumin, 
fresh-frozen plasma, 
or whole blood
Serum prealbumin, also 
called transthyretin 
(20–40 mg/dL; lower in 
prepubertal children)
10–15 mg/dL: Mild protein 
­depletion
5–10 mg/dL: Moderate protein 
depletion
<5 mg/dL: Severe protein 
­depletion
Increasing value reflects positive 
protein balance
Chronic renal failure
Similar to serum albumin
Serum total iron-binding 
capacity (TIBC)  
240–450 μg/dL
<200: Compromised protein 
­status, possible kwashiorkor
Increasing value reflects positive 
protein balance
More labile than albumin
Iron deficiency
Low
Similar to serum albumin
High
Iron deficiency
Prothrombin time 
12.0–15.5 s
Prolongation: vitamin K deficiency
Prolonged
Anticoagulant therapy (warfarin)
Severe liver disease
Serum creatinine 
0.6–1.6 mg/dL
<0.6: Muscle wasting due to 
­prolonged energy deficit
Reflects muscle mass
High
Despite muscle wasting:
Renal failure
Severe dehydration
24-h urinary creatinine­ 
500–1200 mg/d 
­(standardized for height 
and sex)
Low value: muscle wasting due to 
prolonged energy deficit
>24-h collection
Decreasing serum 
creatinine
Low
Incomplete urine collection
Increasing serum creatinine
Neuromuscular wasting
24-h urinary urea nitrogen 
(UUN) <5 g/d (depends 
on level of protein intake)
Determine level of catabolism (as 
long as protein intake is ≥10 g 
below calculated protein loss or 
<20 g total, but at least 100 g 
carbohydrate is provided)
5–10 g/d = mild catabolism or 
normal fed state
10–15 g/d = moderate catabolism
>15 g/d = severe catabolism
Estimate protein balance
Protein balance = protein intake −
protein loss where protein loss 
(protein catabolic rate) = 
[24-h UUN (g) + 4] × 6.25
(continued )
608
Section X
Nutrition
Table 55-5 
Laboratory Tests for Nutritional Assessment (Continued)
Test (Normal Values)
Nutritional Use
Causes of Normal 
Value Despite ­ 
Malnutrition
Other Causes of  
Abnormal Value
Adjustments required in burn 
patients and others with large 
nonurinary nitrogen losses and 
in patients with fluctuating BUN 
levels (e.g., renal failure)
Blood urea nitrogen (BUN) 
8–23 mg/dL
<8: Possibly inadequate protein 
intake
12–23: Possibly adequate protein 
intake
>23: Possibly excessive protein 
intake
If serum creatinine is normal, use 
BUN
If serum creatinine is elevated, 
use BUN/creatinine ratio (normal 
range is essentially the same as 
for BUN)
Low
Severe liver disease
Anabolic state
Syndrome of inappropriate antidi-
uretic hormone
High
Despite poor protein intake:
Renal failure (use BUN/creatinine 
ratio)
Congestive heart failure
Gastrointestinal hemorrhage
Assessment of circulating (visceral) proteins
The serum proteins most commonly used to assess 
nutritional status include albumin, total iron-binding 
capacity (or transferrin), thyroxine-binding prealbumin 
(or transthyretin), and retinol-binding protein. Because 
they have differing synthesis rates and half-lives—the 
half-life of serum albumin is about 21 days, whereas 
those of prealbumin and retinol-binding protein are 
about 2 days and 12 h, respectively—some of these pro-
teins reflect changes in nutritional status more quickly 
than do others. However, rapid fluctuations can also 
make shorter-half-life proteins less reliable.
Levels of circulating proteins are influenced by their 
rates of synthesis and catabolism, “third spacing” (loss 
into interstitial spaces), and, in some cases, external loss. 
Although an adequate intake of calories and protein is 
necessary to achieve optimal circulating protein levels, 
serum protein levels generally do not reflect protein 
intake. For example, a drop in the serum level of albu-
min or transferrin often accompanies significant physi-
ologic stress (e.g., from infection or injury) and is not 
necessarily an indication of malnutrition or poor intake. 
A low serum albumin level in a burned patient with 
both hypermetabolism and increased dermal losses of 
protein may not indicate malnutrition. However, ade-
quate nutritional support of the patient’s calorie and 
protein needs is critical for returning circulating ­proteins 
to normal levels as stress resolves. Thus low values by 
themselves do not define malnutrition, but they often 
point to increased risk of malnutrition because of 
the hypermetabolic stress state. As long as significant 
physio­logic stress persists, serum protein levels remain 
low, even with aggressive nutritional support. How-
ever, if the levels do not rise after the underlying illness 
improves, the patient’s protein and calorie needs should 
be reassessed to ensure that intake is sufficient.
Assessment of vitamin and mineral status
The use of laboratory tests to confirm suspected micro-
nutrient deficiencies is desirable because the physical 
findings for those deficiencies are often equivocal or 
nonspecific. Low blood micronutrient levels can pre-
date more serious clinical manifestations and also may 
indicate drug-nutrient interactions.
Estimating Energy and Protein 
Requirements
A patient’s basal energy expenditures (BEE, measured 
in kilocalories per day) can be estimated from height, 
weight, age, and gender by using the Harris-Benedict 
equations:
	
Men: BEE = 66.47 + 13.75W + 5.00H − 6.76A
	 Women: BEE = 655.10 + 9.56W + 1.85H − 4.68A
where W is weight in kilograms; H is height in centi-
meters, and A is age in years. After these equations are 
solved, total energy requirements are estimated by mul-
tiplying BEE by a factor that accounts for the stress of 
illness. Multiplying by 1.1–1.4 yields a range 10–40% 
above basal that estimates the 24-h energy expenditure 
 
CHAPTER 55
Malnutrition and Nutritional Assessment
609
of the majority of patients. The lower value (1.1) is used 
for patients without evidence of significant physiologic 
stress; the higher value (1.4) is appropriate for patients 
with marked stress such as sepsis or trauma. The result is 
used as a 24-h energy goal for feeding.
When it is important to have a more accurate assess-
ment of energy expenditure, it can be measured at the 
bedside by using indirect calorimetry. This technique 
is useful in patients who are believed to be hypermet-
abolic from sepsis or trauma and whose body weights 
cannot be obtained accurately. Indirect calorimetry can 
also be useful in patients who have difficulty weaning 
from a ventilator, as their energy needs should not be 
exceeded to avoid excessive CO2 ­production. Patients 
at the extremes of weight (e.g., obese persons) and/
or age are good candidates as well, because the Harris-
Benedict equations were developed from measurements 
in adults with roughly normal body weights.
Because urea is a major by-product of protein cata­
bolism, the amount of urea nitrogen excreted each day 
can be used to estimate the rate of protein catabolism 
and determine whether protein intake is adequate to 
offset it. Total protein loss and protein balance can be 
calculated from urinary urea nitrogen (UUN) as follows:
Protein catabolic rate (g/d) = [24-h UUN (g) + 4] 
× 6.25 (g protein/g nitrogen)
The value of 4 g added to the UUN represents a 
liberal estimate of the unmeasured nitrogen lost in the 
urine (e.g., creatinine and uric acid), sweat, hair, skin, 
and feces. When protein intake is low (e.g., less than 
about 20 g/d), the equation indicates both the patient’s 
protein requirement and the severity of the catabolic 
state (Table  55-5). More substantial protein intakes 
can raise the UUN because some of the ingested (or 
infused) protein is catabolized and converted to UUN. 
Thus, at lower protein intakes the equation is useful for 
estimating requirements, and at higher protein intakes it is 
useful for assessing protein balance.
Protein balance (g/d) = protein intake – protein 
catabolic rate
 Bruce R. Bistrian 
I  David F. Driscoll 
610
 The ability to provide specialized nutritional support 
(SNS) represents a major advance in medical therapy. 
Nutritional support, via either enteral or parenteral 
routes, is used in two main settings: (1) to provide ade-
quate nutritional intake during the recuperative phase 
of illness or injury, when the patient’s ability to ingest 
or absorb nutrients is impaired, and (2) to support the 
patient during the systemic response to infl ammation, 
injury, or infection during an extended critical illness. 
SNS is also used in patients with permanent loss of 
intestinal length or function. In addition, an increasing 
number of elderly patients living in nursing homes and 
chronic care facilities receive enteral feeding, usually as 
a consequence of inadequate nutritional intake. 
 Enteral refers to feeding via a tube placed into the gut 
to deliver liquid formulas containing all essential nutri-
ents.  Parenteral refers to the infusion of complete nutri-
ent solutions into the bloodstream via a peripheral vein 
or, more commonly, by central venous access to meet 
nutritional needs. Enteral feeding is generally the pre-
ferred route because of benefi ts derived from maintain-
ing the digestive, absorptive, and immunologic  barrier 
functions of the gastrointestinal tract. Small-bore pli-
able tubes have largely replaced large-bore rubber 
tubes, making placement easier and more acceptable 
to patients. Infusion pumps have also improved the 
 delivery of nutrient solutions. 
 For short-term use, enteral tubes can be placed via 
the nose into the stomach, duodenum, or jejunum. For 
long-term use, these sites can be accessed through the 
abdominal wall using endoscopic, radiologic, or surgi-
cal procedures. Intestinal tolerance of tube feeding may 
be limited during acute illness by gastric retention or 
diarrhea. Parenteral feeding has greater risk of infec-
tion, refl ecting the need for venous access, and a greater 
propensity for inducing hyperglycemia.  However, these 
risks can generally be managed successfully by SNS 
 ENTERAL AND PARENTERAL 
NUTRITION THERAPY 
 ChaPTeR 56 
teams. For the postoperative patient with preexisting 
malnutrition, or in trauma patients who were previ-
ously well nourished, SNS is cost-effective. In the most 
critically ill patient in the intensive care unit, SNS can 
enhance survival. Although enteral nutrition (EN) can 
be provided by most health care teams caring for hos-
pitalized patients, safe and effective parenteral nutrition 
(PN) usually requires specialized teams. 
APPROACH TO THE
PATIENT
 
 Requirements for Specialized 
Nutritional Support 
 iNDicatioNS for SpEcializED Nutri-
tioNal Support  Although at least 15–20% of 
patients in acute care hospitals have evidence of signifi -
cant malnutrition, only a small fraction will benefi t from 
SNS. For others, wasting is an inevitable component of 
a terminal disease and the course of the disease will 
not be altered by SNS. The decision to use SNS should 
be based on the likelihood that preventing protein-
calorie malnutrition (PCM) will increase the likelihood 
of recovery, reduce infection rates, improve healing, or 
otherwise shorten the hospital stay. In the case of the 
elderly or chronically ill patient for whom full recovery is 
not anticipated, the decision to feed is usually based on 
whether SNS will extend the duration or quality of life. 
The decision-making process used to assess whether to 
use SNS is depicted in  Fig. 56-1 . 
 The fi rst step in deciding to administer SNS is to con-
sider the nutritional implications of the disease process. 
Is the condition or its treatment likely to impair food 
intake and absorption for a prolonged period of time? 
For example, a well-nourished individual can tolerate 
approximately 7 days of starvation while experiencing 
a systemic response to infl ammation (SRI). The second 
step is to determine if the patient is already signifi cantly 
 
CHAPTER 56
Enteral and Parenteral Nutrition Therapy 
611
malnourished to the degree that critical functions such 
as wound healing, immune responses, or ventilatory 
function are impaired (Chap. 55). An unintentional 
weight loss of >10% during the previous 6 months or a 
weight/height <90% of standard, when associated with 
physiologic impairment, represents significant PCM. 
Weight loss >20% of usual or <80% of standard reflects 
severe PCM. The presence or absence of SRI should be 
noted, since inflammation, injury, and infection increase 
the rate of lean tissue loss. SRI also has pathophysiologic 
effects that influence nutritional responses such as fluid 
retention and hyperglycemia, as well as impairment of 
anabolic responses to nutritional support.
Once it is determined that a patient is already or 
at risk of becoming malnourished, the next step is 
Is disease process likely to cause nutritional impairment?
Does the patient have PCM or is at risk for PCM?
Would preventing or treating the malnutrition
  with SNS improve the prognosis and quality of life?
What are the fluid, energy, mineral,
  and vitamin requirements and can these
  be provided enterally?
Does the patient require
  total parenteral nutrition?
Can requirements be met
  through oral foods and
   liquid supplements?
Keep under
   surveillance
   with frequent
   calorie counts
   and clinical
   assessment
Request feeding tube
Needed for
   several weeks
Needed for 
   months or years
Nasally
   inserted tube
Percutaneously
   inserted tube
Request CVC, PICC
   or peripheral catheter
   plus enteral nutrition
Request
  CVC or PICC
Need for
   several
   weeks
Need for 
   months
   or years
Tunneled
   external catheter
   or subcutaneous
   infusion port 
Subclavian
   catheter or
   PICC
Risks and discomfort of SNS
   outweigh potential benefits.
   Explain issue to patient or
   legal surrogate. Support patient
   with general comfort measures
   including oral food and liquid
   supplements if desired. 
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
ALGORITHM FOR IMPLEMENTATION OF SNS
Figure 56-1
Decision-making for the imple-
mentation of specialized nutri-
tion support (SNS). CVC, central 
venous catheter; PICC, peripherally 
inserted central catheter. (Adapted 
from chapter in Harrison’s Prin-
ciples of Internal Medicine, 16e, by 
Lyn Howard, MD.)
to decide whether SNS will impact positively on the 
patient’s response to disease. In the end stages of many 
chronic illnesses with accompanying PCM, particularly 
those due to cancer or terminal neurologic disorders, 
nutrition may not reverse the PCM or improve qual-
ity of life. While the provision of food and water is part 
of basic medical care, nutrition delivered by tube or 
catheter, either enterally or parenterally, is associated 
with risk and discomfort. Thus, SNS should be recom-
mended only when potential benefits exceed risks, 
and it should be undertaken with the consent of the 
patient. Like other life support measures, enteral or 
parenteral ­therapy is difficult to withdraw once started. 
Initiating nutrition support may be appropriate before 
a final prognosis can be determined, but this should 
Section X
Nutrition
612
not preclude its subsequent withdrawal. If prevent-
ing or treating PCM with SNS is appropriate, nutritional 
requirements and the method of delivery should be 
determined. The optimal route depends on the degree 
of gut function and somewhat on the available techni-
cal resources.
The timing of nutritional support is based on evalu-
ation of the preexisting nutritional status, the presence 
and extent of SRI, and the anticipated clinical course. SRI 
is identified by the standard clinical signs of leukocytosis, 
tachycardia, tachypnea, and/or temperature elevation or 
depression. Although the degree of hypoalbuminemia 
provides an estimate of SRI severity, normal serum albu-
min levels will not be restored by adequate nutritional 
support until the SRI remits, even though nutritional 
benefits can be achieved by adequate feeding.
The SRI can be graded as severe, moderate, or mild. 
Examples of severe SRI include sepsis or other inflam-
matory conditions like pancreatitis requiring ICU care, 
multiple trauma with an Injury Severity Score >20–25 
or Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation II 
(APACHE II) >25, closed head injury with a Glasgow 
Coma Scale <8, or major third-degree burns of >40% 
of body surface area. Moderate SRI includes less severe 
infections, injuries, or inflammatory conditions like 
pneumonia, major surgery, acute hepatic or renal 
insufficiency, and exacerbations of ulcerative colitis or 
regional enteritis requiring hospitalization. PCM should 
also be defined as severe, moderate, or minimal as 
assessed by weight/height, percent recent weight loss, 
and body mass index. The body mass index in relation 
to nutritional status is listed in Table 56-1. A patient 
with a severe SRI requires early feeding within the first 
several days of care because the condition is likely to 
produce inadequate spontaneous intake over the next 
7 days. A moderate SRI, as commonly seen during a 
postoperative period without oral intake that exceeds 
5 days, benefits from adequate feeding by day 5–7 if 
Table 56-1 
Body Mass Index (BMI) and Nutritional Status
BMI
Nutritional Status
>30 kg/m2
Obese
>25–30 kg/m2
Overweight
20–25 kg/m2
Normal
<18.5 kg/m2
Moderate malnutrition
<16 kg/m2
Severe malnutrition
<13 kg/m2
Lethal in males
<11 kg/m2
Lethal in females
Source: From D Driscoll, B Bistrian: Parenteral and enteral nutrition 
in the intensive care unit, in Intensive Care Medicine, R Irwin, J Rippe 
(eds). Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia, 2003.
the patient was initially well nourished. If severely mal-
nourished, candidates for elective major surgery ben-
efit from preoperative nutritional repletion for 5–7 days. 
However, this is not often possible. Thus, early postop-
erative feeding is indicated. Patients with a moderate 
SRI and moderate PCM also benefit from earlier feeding 
within the first several days.
Efficacy of SNS in Different Disease 
States  Efficacy studies have shown that malnour-
ished patients undergoing major thoracoabdominal 
surgery benefit from SNS. Critical illnesses requiring 
ICU care, including major burns, major trauma, severe 
sepsis, closed head injury, and severe pancreatitis (posi-
tive CT scan and APACHE II >10), all benefit from early 
SNS, as indicated by reduced mortality and morbidity. 
In critical illness, initiation of SNS within 24 h of injury 
or ICU admission is associated with a ~50% reduction 
in mortality. Patients with nitrogen accumulation dis-
orders of renal and hepatic failure have a likelihood of 
PCM of >50% and at least a moderate SRI. SNS is asso-
ciated with improvements in morbidity, including infec-
tion rates, encephalopathy, liver or renal function, and 
length of hospital stay. Inflammatory bowel disease—
including Crohn’s disease particularly and, to a lesser 
degree, ulcerative colitis—often produce PCM. In the 
outpatient setting, SNS in Crohn’s disease can improve 
nutritional status, quality of life, and the likelihood 
of remission. With pulmonary disease in the critically 
ill, SNS improves ventilatory status, and in acute lung 
injury the use of omega-3 fats as a component of SNS 
improves gas exchange and respiratory dynamics and 
reduces the need for mechanical ventilation. Low body 
mass in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease is asso-
ciated with diminished pulmonary status and exercise 
capacity and higher mortality rates. However, there is lit-
tle convincing evidence that SNS as caloric supplemen-
tation improves nutrition or pulmonary function. PCM 
is also common in the course of cancer and HIV disease, 
although less so in the latter with the advent of highly 
active antiretroviral therapy. When PCM develops as a 
consequence of SRI in these conditions, there is limited 
likelihood of substantial efficacy or benefit from SNS. 
However, when PCM develops as a consequence of gas-
trointestinal dysfunction, SNS can be effective. Although 
no randomized trials have been performed for SNS pro-
vided for hyperemesis gravidarum, there is considerable 
clinical evidence that it improves pregnancy outcomes.
Risks and Benefits of Specialized 
Nutrition Support  The risks are determined 
primarily by patient factors such as state of alertness, 
swallowing competence, the route of delivery, underlying 
conditions, and the experience of the supervising clinical 
team. The safest and least costly approach is to avoid SNS 
by close attention to oral food intake, by adding an oral 
 
CHAPTER 56
Enteral and Parenteral Nutrition Therapy 
613
liquid supplement, or in certain chronic conditions by 
using medications to stimulate appetite. Nutrient intake 
monitoring by frequent calorie counts or oral formula 
selection is best performed by a nutritionist.
Enteral tube feeding is often required in patients with 
anorexia, impaired swallowing, or bowel disease. The 
bowel and its associated digestive organs derive 70% of 
their required nutrients directly from food in the lumen. 
Arginine, glutamine, short-chain fatty acids, long-chain 
omega-3 fatty acids, and nucleotides available in some 
specialty enteral formulas are particularly important for 
maintaining immunity. Enteral feeding also supports  
gut function by stimulating splanchnic blood flow, neu-
ronal activity, IgA antibody release, and secretion of  
gastrointestinal hormones that stimulate gut trophic 
activity. These factors support the gut as an immuno-
logic barrier against enteric pathogens. For these rea-
sons, some luminal nutrition should be provided, even 
when PN is required to provide most of the nutritional 
support. The combination of some enteral feeding 
either by mouth or by enteral tube with parenteral feed-
ing often shortens the transition to full enteral feeding, 
which can generally be used when >50% of require-
ments can be met enterally. Substantial nutritional ben-
efit can be achieved by providing ~50% of energy needs 
for periods of up to 10 days, if protein and other essen-
tial nutrient requirements are met. For longer periods of 
time, it may be preferable to provide 75–80% of energy 
needs, rather than full feeding, if this improves gastro-
intestinal tolerance, glycemic control, and avoidance of 
excess fluid administration.
In the past, bowel rest through PN was the corner-
stone of treatment for many severe gastrointestinal 
disorders. However, the value of providing even mini-
mal amounts of EN is now widely accepted. Protocols 
to facilitate more widespread use of EN include ini-
tiation within 24 h of ICU admission; aggressive use of 
the head-upright position; postpyloric and nasojejunal 
feeding tubes; prokinetic agents; more rapid increases 
in feeding rates; tolerance of higher gastric residuals; 
and nurse-administered algorithms for feeding progres-
sion. PN alone is generally necessary only for severe 
gut dysfunction due to prolonged ileus, obstruction, 
or severe hemorrhagic pancreatitis. In the critically ill, 
feeding adequately by PN beginning within the first 
24 h of care improves mortality and is more effective 
than delayed EN. Early feeding of the critically ill in the 
ICU is associated with a 50% reduction in mortality, but 
there is also a 50% increase in infection risk. Much of 
the increase in morbidity related to PN and EN is due 
to hyperglycemia, which can be significantly reduced 
by intensive insulin therapy. The level of glycemia nec-
essary to accomplish this goal, whether <110 mg/dL or 
only <150 mg/dL, is not yet defined. Surgical patients 
being adequately fed may benefit from the lower  
glucose range, but studies of intensive insulin therapy 
alone without full feeding have shown improved mor-
bidity and mortality outcome with looser control of glu-
cose <180 mg/dL.
Although PN was initially relatively expensive, its 
components are now often less expensive than spe-
cialty enteral formulas. Percutaneous placement of a 
central venous catheter into the subclavian or internal 
jugular vein with advancement into the superior vena 
cava can be accomplished at the bedside by trained 
personnel using sterile techniques. Peripherally inserted 
central catheters (PICCs) can also be placed within the 
lumen in the central vein, but this technique is usually 
more appropriate for non-ICU patients. Subclavian or 
internal jugular catheters carry a greater risk, including 
pneumothorax or serious vascular damage, but they 
are well tolerated and can be exchanged over a wire 
rather than requiring reinsertion when ruling out cath-
eter infection. The peripherally inserted catheters are 
subject to position-related flow, and the catheter can-
not be changed over a wire. Inserting a nasogastric tube 
is a bedside procedure, but many critically ill patients 
have impaired gastric emptying that increases the risk 
of aspiration pneumonia. This risk can be reduced by 
feeding directly into the jejunum beyond the ligament 
of Treitz. This usually requires fluoroscopic guidance or 
endoscopic placement. In patients who have planned 
laparotomies or other conditions likely to require a pro-
longed need for SNS, it is advantageous to place a jeju-
nal feeding tube at the time of surgery.
Although most SNS is delivered in hospitals, some 
patients require it on a long-term basis. If they have 
a safe environment and a willingness to learn the self-
care techniques, SNS can be administered at home. The 
clinical outcomes of patients with severe intestinal dis-
orders treated with home PN or EN are summarized in 
Table 56-2. PN infused at home is usually cycled over-
night to give greater daytime freedom. Other impor-
tant considerations in determining the appropriateness 
of home PN or EN are that the patient’s prognosis is 
longer than several months and that the therapy ben-
efits quality of life. Recent advances in surgical tech-
niques and immunosuppressive therapies have made 
intestinal transplantation a viable alternative for some 
patients who require life-long home parenteral nutri-
tion. Although the quality of life can be improved with 
intestinal transplantation relative to home PN, long-
term survival even in the most accomplished centers is 
still somewhat less with transplantation.
Disease-Specific Nutritional Support
SNS is basically a support therapy and is primary 
­therapy only for the treatment or prevention of malnu-
trition. Certain conditions require modification of nutri-
tional support because of organ or system ­impairment. 
Section X
Nutrition
614
For instance, in nitrogen accumulation disorders, pro-
tein intake may need to be reduced. However, in renal 
disease, except for brief periods of several days, protein 
intakes should approach requirement levels of at least 
0.8 g/kg or higher up to 1.2 g/kg as long as the blood 
urea nitrogen does not exceed 100 mg/dL. If this is 
not possible, then dialysis or other renal replacement  
therapy should be considered to allow better feeding. 
In hepatic failure, intakes of 1.2–1.4 g/kg up to the opti-
mal 1.5 g/kg should be attempted, as long as encepha-
lopathy due to protein intolerance is not encoun-
tered. In the presence of protein intolerance, formulas 
containing 33–50% branched-chain amino acids are  
available and should be provided at the 1.2–1.4-g/kg  
level. Cardiac patients, and many severely stressed 
patients, often benefit from fluid and sodium restriction 
Table 56-2
Summary of Outcomes for Patients on Home Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition (HPEN)
Therapy Status, % at 1 Yearb
Rehabilitationc 
Status, % in 1st 
Year
Complicationsd 
per Patient-Year
Diagnosis
Number 
in 
Group
Age in 
Years
Survivala on 
Therapy, %
Full Oral 
Nutrition
Continued 
on HPEN 
Rx
Died
C
P
M
HPEN
NonHPEN
Home Parenteral Nutrition
Crohn’s 
­disease
562
36
96
70
25
2
60
38
2
0.9
1.1
Ischemic 
bowel 
­disease
331
49
87
27
48
19
53
41
6
1.4
1.1
Motility 
­disorder
299
45
87
31
44
21
49
39
12
1.3
1.1
Congenital 
bowel defect
172
5
94
42
47
9
63
27
11
2.1
1.0
Hyperemesis 
gravidarum
112
28
100
100
0
0
83
16
1
1.5
3.5
Chronic  
pancreatitis
156
42
90
82
10
5
60
38
2
1.2
2.5
Radiation 
enteritis
145
58
87
28
49
22
42
49
9
0.8
1.1
Chronic 
adhesive 
obstructions
120
53
83
47
34
13
23
68
10
1.7
1.4
Cystic fibrosis
51
17
50
38
13
36
24
66
16
0.8
3.7
Cancer
2122
44
20
26
8
63
29
57
14
1.1
3.3
AIDS
280
33
10
13
6
73
8
63
29
1.6
3.3
Home Enteral Nutrition
Neurologic 
disorders of 
swallowing
1134
65
55
19
25
48
5
24
71
0.3
0.9
Cancer
1644
61
30
30
6
59
21
59
21
0.4
2.7
aSurvival rates on therapy are values at 1 year, calculated by the life table method. This will differ from the percentage listed as died under 
Therapy Status, since all patients with known endpoints are considered in this latter measure. The ratio of observed versus expected deaths is 
equivalent to a Standard Mortality Ratio.
bNot shown are those patients who were back in hospital or who had changed therapy type by 12 months.
cRehabilitation is designated complete (C), partial (P), or minimal (M), relative to the patient’s ability to sustain normal age-related activity.
dComplications refer only to those complications that resulted in rehospitalization.
Source: Derived from North American HPEN Registry. Adapted from chapter in Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 16e, by Lyn Howard, MD.
 
CHAPTER 56
Enteral and Parenteral Nutrition Therapy 
615
to levels of 1000 mL of total parenteral nutrition (TPN) 
formula and 5–20 meq of sodium per day. In patients 
with severe chronic PCM characterized by severe weight 
loss and tissue wasting, TPN must be instituted gradu-
ally because of the profound antinatriuresis, antidiure-
sis, and intracellular accumulation of potassium, mag-
nesium, and phosphorus that develop as a consequence 
of high insulin levels. This modification of TPN is usually 
accomplished by limiting fluid intakes initially to about 
1000 mL containing modest carbohydrate content of 
10–20% dextrose, low sodium, and ample potassium, 
magnesium, and phosphorus, with careful daily assess-
ment of fluid and electrolyte status. Protein need not be 
restricted.
The Design of Individual Regimens
Fluid Requirements
The normal daily requirement for fluid is 30 mL/kg of 
body mass from all sources (IV infusions, per tube, or 
oral intake), plus any replacement of abnormal losses 
such as from an osmotic diuresis, nasogastric drainage, 
wound output, or diarrheal/ostomy losses. Electrolyte 
and mineral losses can be estimated or measured and 
also need to be replaced (Table 56-3). Fluid restric-
tion may be necessary in patients with fluid overload, 
and fluid inputs can be limited to 1200 mL/d if urine 
is the only significant fluid output. When severe fluid 
overload is present, the optimal TPN solution for central 
venous administration is a concentrated 1-L solution 
of 7% crystalline amino acids (70 g) and 21% dextrose 
(210 g), which provides an amount of nitrogen and glu-
cose that is optimally effective at protein-sparing.
Patients requiring PN or EN in the acute care set-
ting generally have some element of associated hor-
monal adaptations to their underlying critical illness 
(e.g., increased secretion of antidiuretic hormone, 
Table 56-3
Enteric Fluid Volumes and Their Electrolyte Contenta
L/d
Na
K
Cl
HCO3
H
Oral intake
2–3
Enteric secretions
  Saliva
1–2
15
30
15
50
—
  Gastric juice
1.5–2
50–70
5–15
90–120
0
70–100
  Bile
0.5–1.5
120–150
5–15
80–120
30–50
—
  Pancreatic
0.5–1
100–140
10
70–100
60–110
—
  Small intestine
1–2
80–140
10–20
80–120
20–40
—
aAll in meq/L.
Source: Adapted from chapter in Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 16e, by Lyn Howard, MD.
aldosterone, insulin, glucagon, or cortisol) that cause 
fluid retention and hyperglycemia. Weight gain in the 
critically ill, whether receiving SNS or not, is invari-
ably the consequence of fluid retention, since lean tissue 
accretion, even with feeding, is minimal in the acute 
phase of illness. Because excess fluid removal can be dif-
ficult, limiting fluid intake to allow for balanced intake 
and output is more effective.
Energy Requirements
Total energy expenditure comprises resting energy 
expenditure, activity energy expenditure, and the ther-
mal effect of feeding (Chap. 55). Resting energy expen-
diture (two-thirds) includes the calories necessary for 
basal metabolism at bed rest. Activity energy expendi-
ture represents one-fourth to one-third of the total, and 
the thermal effect of feeding is about 10% of the total 
energy expenditure. For normally nourished healthy 
individuals, the total energy expenditure is about 30–35 
kcal/kg. Although critical illness increases resting energy 
expenditure, only in initially well-nourished individuals 
with the highest systemic inflammatory response, such 
as that from severe multiple trauma, burns, closed head 
injury, or sepsis, do total energy expenditures reach 
40–45 kcal/kg. The chronically ill patient with lean tis-
sue loss has reduced basal energy expenditure, as well as 
inactivity, which results in a total energy expenditure of 
about 20–25 kcal/kg. About 95% of such patients need 
<30 kcal/kg to achieve energy balance. Because provid-
ing about 50% of measured energy expenditure as SNS 
is at least equally efficacious for the first 10 days of criti-
cal illness, actual measurement of energy expenditure 
is not generally necessary in the early period of SNS. 
However, in patients who remain critically ill beyond 
several weeks, in the severely malnourished for whom 
estimates of energy expenditure are unreliable, or in 
those who are difficult to wean from ventilators, it is 
reasonable to actually measure energy expenditure and 
Section X
Nutrition
616
to aim for energy balance to 1.2 times measured expen-
diture with SNS.
Insulin resistance due to SRI is associated with 
increased gluconeogenesis and reduced peripheral 
­glucose utilization, predisposing a patient to hypergly-
cemia. This is aggravated in patients receiving exog-
enous carbohydrate from SNS. Normalization of blood 
glucose levels by insulin infusion in critically ill patients 
receiving SNS reduces morbidity and mortality. In mild 
or moderately malnourished patients, a reasonable goal 
is to provide metabolic support to improve protein syn-
thesis and maintain metabolic homeostasis. Hypocaloric 
nutrition providing only about 1000 kcal/d and 70 g 
protein for up to 10 days requires less fluid and reduces 
the likelihood of poor glycemic control. Energy content 
can be advanced to 20–25 kcal/kg with 1.5 g protein/kg 
as metabolic conditions permit and definitely dur-
ing the second week of SNS. Patients with multiple 
trauma, closed head injury, and severe burns often have 
much higher energy expenditures, but there is little evi-
dence that providing more than 30 kcal/kg has addi-
tional benefit, and it substantially increases the risks of 
hyperglycemia.
Generally, because glucose is an essential tissue 
fuel, glucose and amino acids are provided parenter-
ally until the level of resting energy expenditure is 
reached. At this point, adding fat becomes benefi-
cial, since more parenteral glucose stimulates de novo 
lipogenesis by the liver—an energy-inefficient pro-
cess. Polyunsaturated long-chain triglycerides as soy-
bean oil are the chief ingredient in most parenteral fat 
emulsions and the majority of the fat in enteral feed-
ing formulas. These vegetable oil–based emulsions 
provide essential fatty acids. Enteral feeding formulas 
have fat content that ranges from 3% of calories up to 
as much as 50% of calories, while parenteral fat comes 
in separate containers as 10%, 20%, and 30% emul-
sions that can be infused separately or mixed by the 
pharmacy under controlled conditions as all-in-one 
or total nutrient admixture with glucose, amino acids, 
lipid, electrolytes, vitamins, and minerals. Although 
parenteral fat is required at only about 3% of energy 
requirements to meet essential fatty acid requirements, 
when provided as an all-in-one mixture of carbohy-
drate, fat, and protein, 2–3% fat in the TPN mixtures, 
representing about 20–30% of calories as fat, is pro-
vided to ensure emulsion stability. If given separately, 
parenteral fat should not be provided at rates exceed-
ing 0.11 g/kg body mass per h or about 100 g over 
12 h—equivalent to 1 L of 10% parenteral fat and 
500 mL of 20% parenteral fat.
Medium-chain triglycerides, which contain saturated 
fatty acids with chain lengths of 6, 8, 10, or 12 carbons, 
are provided in a number of enteral feeding formulas 
because they are absorbed preferentially. Fish oil con-
tains polyunsaturated fatty acids of the omega-3 family, 
which have been shown to improve immune function 
and reduce the inflammatory response.
Carbohydrates are provided as hydrous glucose pro-
viding 3.4 kcal/g in PN formulas. In enteral formulas, 
glucose is the carbohydrate source in so-called mono-
meric diets. These diets provide protein as amino acids 
and fat in minimal amounts (3%) to meet essential fatty 
acid requirements. Monomeric formulas are designed to 
optimize absorption in the seriously compromised gut. 
These formulas, like the immune-enhancing diets, are 
quite expensive. In polymeric diets, the carbohydrate 
source is usually an osmotically less active polysaccha-
ride, protein is usually soy or casein protein, and fat is 
present in amounts from 25 to 50%. Such formulas are 
usually well tolerated by patients with normal intestinal 
length, and some are acceptable for oral consumption.
Protein or Amino Acid Requirements
Although the recommended dietary allowance for pro-
tein is 0.8 g/kg per d, maximal rates of repletion occur 
with 1.5 g/kg in the malnourished. In the severely cat-
abolic patient, this higher level minimizes protein loss. 
In patients requiring SNS in the acute care setting, at 
least 1 g/kg is recommended, with greater amounts 
up to 1.5 g/kg as volume, renal, and hepatic toler-
ances allow. The standard parenteral and enteral formu-
las contain protein of high biologic value and meet the 
requirements for the eight essential amino acids when 
nitrogen needs are met. In protein-intolerant conditions 
such as renal and hepatic failure, modified amino acid 
formulas should be considered. In hepatic failure, higher 
branched-chain amino acid–enriched formulas appear to 
improve outcomes. Conditionally essential amino acids 
like arginine and glutamine may also have some benefit 
in supplemental amounts.
Protein (nitrogen) balance provides a measure of 
feeding efficacy of PN or EN. It is calculated as protein 
intake/6.25 because proteins are on average 16% nitro-
gen (N), minus the 24-h urine urea N (UUN) plus 4 g 
N, which reflects other N losses. In the critically ill, a 
mild negative balance of 2–4 g N/d is usually achiev-
able with a similarly mild positive balance in the recu-
perating patient. Each g N represents approximately 
30 g lean tissue.
Mineral and Vitamin Requirements
Parenteral electrolyte, vitamin, and trace mineral 
requirements are summarized in Tables 56-4, 56-5, 
and 56-6. Electrolyte modifications are necessary with 
substantial gastrointestinal losses from nasogastric drain-
age or intestinal losses from fistulas, diarrhea, or ostomy 
outputs. Such losses also imply extra calcium, magne-
sium, and zinc losses. Excessive urine or potassium 
losses with amphotericin, or magnesium losses with 
 
CHAPTER 56
Enteral and Parenteral Nutrition Therapy 
617
cisplatin or in renal failure, necessitate adjustments in 
sodium, potassium, magnesium, phosphorus, and acid-
base balance. Vitamin and trace element requirements 
are met by the daily provision of a complete parenteral 
vitamin supplement and trace elements for PN, and 
with the provision of adequate amounts of enteral feed-
ing formulas that contain these micronutrients.
Table 56-4 
Usual Daily Electrolyte Additions to 
Parenteral Nutrition
Electrolyte
Parenteral 
Equivalent 
of RDA
Usual Intake
Sodium
1–2 meq/kg + replace-
ment, but can be as low 
as 5–40 meq/d
Potassium
40–100 meq/d + replace-
ment of unusual losses
Chloride
As needed for acid-base 
balance, but usually 
2:1 to 1:1 with acetate
Acetate
As needed for acid-base 
balance
Calcium
10 meq
10–20 meq/d
Magnesium
10 meq
8–16 meq/d
Phosphorus
30 mmol
20–40 mmol
Table 56-5
Parenteral Multivitamin Requirements  
for Adults
Vitamin
Recently Revised Value
Vitamin A
3300 IU
Thiamin (B1)
6 mg
Riboflavin (B2)
3.6 mg
Niacin (B3)
40 mg
Folic acid
600 μg
Pantothenic acid
15 mg
Pyridoxine (B6)
6 mg
Cyanocobalamin (B12)
5 μg
Biotin
60 μg
Ascorbic acid (C)
200 mg
Vitamin D
200 IU
Vitamin E
10 IU
Vitamin Ka
150 μg
aA product is available without vitamin K. Vitamin K supplementation 
is recommended at 2–4 mg/week in patients not receiving oral anti-
coagulation therapy if using this product.
Table 56-6
Parenteral Trace Metal Supplementation 
for Adultsa
Trace Mineral
Intake
Zinc
2.5–4 mg/d, an additional 10–15 mg/d 
per L of stool or ileostomy output
Copper
0.5–1.5 mg/d, possibility of retention in 
biliary tract obstruction
Manganese
0.1–0.3 mg/d, possibility of retention in 
biliary tract obstruction
Chromium
10–15 μg/d
Selenium
20–100 μg/d, necessary for long-term 
PN, optional for short-term TPN
Molybdenum
20–120 μg/d, necessary for long-term 
PN, optional for short-term PN
Iodine
75–150 μg/d, necessary for long-term 
PN, optional for short-term PN
aCommercial products are available with the first four, first five, and 
all seven of these metals in recommended amounts.
Abbreviations: PN, parenteral nutrition; TPN, total parenteral nutrition.
Parenteral Nutrition
Infusion Technique  
and Patient Monitoring
Parenteral feeding through a peripheral vein is limited 
by osmolality and volume constraints. Solutions that 
contain more than 3% amino acids and 5% glucose 
(290 kcal/L) are poorly tolerated peripherally. Parenteral 
fat (20%) can be given to increase the calories delivered. 
The total volume required to provide a marginal pro-
tein intake of 60 g and 1680 total kcal is 2.5 L. More-
over, the risk of significant morbidity and mortality 
from incompatibilities of calcium and phosphate salts is 
greatest in these low-osmolality, low-glucose regimens. 
Parenteral feeding via a peripheral vein is generally 
intended as a supplement to oral feeding and is not opti-
mal for the critically ill. Peripheral parenteral nutrition 
may benefit from small amounts of heparin at 1000 U/L 
and co-infusion with parenteral fat to reduce osmolality, 
but volume constraints still limit the value of this ther-
apy. PICCs can be used for the short term to provide 
concentrated glucose parenteral solutions of 20–25% 
dextrose and 4–7% amino acids, while avoiding some of 
the complications of catheter placement via a large cen-
tral vein. With PICC lines, however, flow can be posi-
tion-related, and the lines cannot be exchanged over 
a wire for infection monitoring. For these reasons, in 
the critically ill, centrally placed catheters are preferred. 
The subclavian approach is best tolerated by the patient 
and is the easiest to dress. The jugular approach is less 
Section X
Nutrition
618
likely to lead to a pneumothorax. The femoral approach 
is discouraged because of the greater risk of catheter 
infection. For long-term feeding in the home, tunneled 
catheters and implanted ports reduce infection risk and 
are more acceptable to patients. However, tunneled 
catheters require placement in the operating room.
Catheters are made of silastic, polyurethane, or poly-
vinyl chloride. Silastic catheters are less thrombogenic 
and are best for tunneled catheters. Polyurethane is 
best for temporary catheters. Dressing changes with dry 
gauze at regular intervals should be performed by nurses 
skilled in catheter care to avoid infection. Chlorhexi-
dine solution is more effective than alcohol or iodine 
compounds. Appropriate monitoring for patients receiv-
ing PN is summarized in Table 56-7.
Complications
Mechanical
The insertion of a central venous catheter should be 
performed by trained and experienced personnel using 
aseptic techniques to limit the major common com-
plications of pneumothorax and inadvertent arterial 
Table 56-7
Monitoring the Patient on Parenteral 
Nutrition
Clinical Data Monitored Daily
General sense of well-being
Strength as evidenced in getting out of bed, walking, 
­resistance exercise as appropriate
Vital signs including temperature, blood pressure, pulse, 
and respiratory rate
Fluid balance: weight at least several times weekly, fluid 
intake (parenteral and enteral) vs. fluid output (urine, 
stool, gastric drainage, wound, ostomy)
Parenteral nutrition delivery equipment: tubing, pump, 
­filter, catheter, dressing
Nutrient solution composition
Laboratory Daily
Finger-stick glucose
Three times daily until stable
Blood glucose, Na, K, Cl, 
HCO3, BUN
Daily until stable and fully 
advanced, then twice 
weekly
Serum creatinine, albumin, 
PO4, Ca, Mg, Hb/Hct, 
WBC
Baseline, then twice weekly
INR
Baseline, then weekly
Micronutrient tests
As indicated
Abbreviations: BUN, blood urea nitrogen; Hb, hemoglobin; Hct, hema-
tocrit; INR, international normalized ratio; WBC, white blood cell count.
Source: Adapted from chapter in Harrison’s Principles of Internal 
Medicine, 16e, by Lyn Howard, MD.
puncture or injury. Catheter position should be radio-
graphically confirmed to be in the superior vena cava 
distal to the junction with the jugular or subclavian 
vein and not directly against the vessel wall. Thrombo-
sis related to the catheter may occur at the site of entry 
into the vein and extend to encase the catheter. Cath-
eter infection predisposes to thrombosis, as does the 
SRI. The addition of 6000 U of heparin in the daily 
parenteral formula in hospitalized patients with tempo-
rary catheters reduces the risk of fibrin sheath forma-
tion and catheter infection. Temporary catheters that 
develop a thrombus should be removed and, based on 
clinical findings, treated with anticoagulants. Throm-
bolytic therapy can be considered for patients with 
permanent catheters, depending on the ease of replace-
ment and presence of alternate, reasonably accept-
able venous access sites. Low-dose warfarin therapy of 
1 mg/d reduces the risk of thrombosis in permanent 
catheters used for home PN, but full anticoagulation 
may be required in patients who have recurrent throm-
bosis related to permanent catheters. A recent U.S. Food 
and Drug Administration mandate to reformulate par-
enteral multivitamins to include vitamin K at a dose of 
150 μg daily may affect the efficacy of low-dose warfa-
rin therapy. There is a “no vitamin K” version available 
for patients receiving this therapy. Catheters can become 
mechanically occluded and may also become occluded 
by fibrin at the tip, or by fat, minerals, or drugs intra-
luminally. These occlusions can be managed with low-
dose alteplase for fibrin, with indwelling 70% alcohol for 
fat, with 0.1 N hydrochloric acid for mineral precipi-
tates, and with either 0.1 N hydrochloric acid or 0.1 N 
sodium hydroxide for drugs, depending on their pH.
Metabolic
The most common problems related to PN are fluid 
overload and hyperglycemia (Table 56-8). Hyper-
tonic dextrose stimulates a much higher insulin level 
than meal feeding. Because insulin is a potent antin-
atriuretic and antidiuretic hormone, hyperinsulinemia 
leads to sodium and fluid retention. In the absence of 
gastrointestinal losses or renal dysfunction, net fluid 
retention is likely when total fluid intake exceeds 2000 
mL/d. Close monitoring of body mass, as well as fluid 
intake and output, is necessary to prevent this complica-
tion. In the absence of significant renal impairment, the 
sodium content of the urine is likely to be <10 meq/L. 
Providing sodium in limited amounts of 40 meq/d and 
the use of both glucose and fat in the PN mixture to 
lower total glucose and sodium will help reduce fluid 
retention. The elevated insulin also increases the intra-
cellular transport of potassium, magnesium, and phos-
phorus, which can precipitate a dangerous refeeding 
syndrome if the total glucose content of the PN solu-
tion is advanced too quickly in severely malnourished 
 
CHAPTER 56
Enteral and Parenteral Nutrition Therapy 
619
patients. It is generally best to start PN with <200 g 
glucose/d to assess glucose tolerance. Regular insulin 
can be added to the PN formula to establish glycemic 
control, and the insulin doses can be increased propor-
tionately as the glucose is advanced. As a general rule, 
patients with insulin-dependent diabetes require about 
twice their usual home insulin doses when they are 
receiving TPN at 20–25 kcal/kg, largely as a conse-
quence of parenteral glucose administration and some 
loss of insulin to the TPN container. As a rough esti-
mate, the amount of insulin can be provided in a similar 
proportion to the amount of calories provided as TPN 
relative to full feeding, and the insulin can be placed in 
the TPN formula. Subcutaneous (SC) regular insulin 
can be provided to improve glucose control as assessed 
by measurements of blood glucose every 6 h. About 
two-thirds of the total 24-h amount can be added to 
the next day’s order, with SC insulin supplements as 
needed. Advances in TPN concentration should be 
made when reasonable glucose control is established, 
and the insulin dose adjusted proportionately to the cal-
ories added as glucose and amino acids. These are gen-
eral rules, and they are conservative. Given the adverse 
clinical impact of hyperglycemia, it may be necessary to 
use intensive insulin therapy as a separate infusion with 
a standard protocol to initially establish control. Once 
established, this insulin dose can be added to the PN 
formula. Acid-base imbalance is also common during 
PN therapy. Amino acid formulas are buffered, but crit-
ically ill patients are prone to metabolic acidosis, often 
due to renal tubular impairment. The use of sodium and 
potassium acetate salts in the PN formula may address 
this problem. Bicarbonate salts should not be used 
because they are incompatible with TPN formulations. 
Table 56-8
Selected Metabolic Disturbances and Their Correction
Disturbance
Cause
Corrective Action with PN
Hyponatremia
Increased total body water or decreased total body sodium
Decrease free water or increase sodium
Hypernatremia
Occurs commonly with excessive isotonic or hypertonic 
fluid followed by diuretic administration with free water 
clearance; can also occur with dehydration and normal 
total body sodium
Increase free water to produce net posi-
tive fluid balance maintaining sodium 
and chloride balance
Hypokalemia
Inadequate intake relative to need
Use supplements
Excessive diuresis, tubular dysfunction
Use supplements
Magnesium deficiency
Increase PN magnesium
Metabolic alkalosis
Correct alkalosis
Hyperinsulinemia
Maintain constant PN, increase 
­potassium
Hyperkalemia
Excessive provision
Reduce supplements
Metabolic acidosis
Evaluate acidosis, treat with PN acetate 
salt and decrease potassium
Renal deterioration
Evaluate patient and adjust PN as 
­indicated
Hypocalcemia
Reciprocal response to phosphorus repletion
Increase calcium
Critical illness effect
Increase calcium
Severe malabsorption
Supplement calcium
Hypercalcemia
Excessive administration or pathologic (cancer, 
­hyperparathyroidism)
Reduce or eliminate calcium
Hypomagnesemia
Increased requirements due to diuretic use, alcoholism, 
malabsorption, malnutrition
Supplement magnesium
Critical illness
Supplement magnesium
Hypophosphatemia
Inadequate intake relative to needs related to malnutrition, 
alcohol use
Supplement phosphorus
Increased calcium intake
Use supplements
Hyperphosphatemia
Excessive administration or worsening renal function
Reduce phosphorus
Azotemia
Excessive amino acid infusion or worsening renal function
Reduce amino acid level but consider 
renal replacement therapy if cannot 
provide 1 g protein per kg for pro-
longed periods
Abbreviation: PN, parenteral nutrition.
Section X
Nutrition
620
Nasogastric drainage produces a hypochloremic alkalosis 
that can be managed by attention to chloride balance. 
Occasionally, hydrochloric acid may be required for a 
more rapid response or when diuretic therapy limits the 
ability to provide substantial sodium chloride. Up to 
100 meq/L and up to 150 meq of hydrochloric acid per 
day may be placed in a fat-free TPN formula.
Infectious
Infections of the central access catheter rarely occur in 
the first 72 h. Fever during this period is usually from 
infection elsewhere or another cause. Fever that develops 
during PN can be addressed by checking the catheter 
site and, if the site looks clean, exchanging the catheter 
over a wire with cultures taken through the catheter and 
at the catheter tip. If these cultures are negative, as they 
are most of the time, the new catheter can continue to 
be used. If a culture is positive for a relatively nonpatho-
genic bacteria like Staphylococcus epidermidis, consider a 
second exchange over a wire with repeat cultures or 
replace the catheter depending on the clinical circum-
stances. If cultures are positive for more pathogenic 
bacteria, or for fungi like Candida albicans, it is gener-
ally best to replace the catheter at a new site. Whether 
antibiotic treatment is required is a clinical decision, but 
C. albicans grown from the blood culture in a patient 
receiving PN should always be treated because the con-
sequences of failure to treat can be dire.
Catheter infections can be minimized by dedicat-
ing the feeding catheter to TPN, without blood sam-
pling or medication administration. Central catheter 
infections are a serious complication with an attributed 
mortality of 12–25%. Infections in central venous cath-
eters dedicated to feeding should occur less frequently 
than 3 per 1000 catheter-days. Home TPN catheters 
that become infected may be treated through the cath-
eter without removal of the catheter, particularly if the 
offending organism is S. epidermidis. Clearing of the bio-
film and fibrin sheath by local treatment of the catheter 
with indwelling alteplase may increase the likelihood of 
eradication. Antibiotic lock therapy with high concen-
trations of antibiotic, with or without heparin in addi-
tion to systemic therapy, may improve efficacy. Sepsis 
with hypotension should precipitate catheter removal in 
either the temporary or permanent TPN setting.
Enteral Nutrition
Tube Placement and  
Patient Monitoring
The types of enteral feeding tubes, methods of inser-
tion, their clinical uses, and potential complications are 
outlined in Table 56-9. The different types of enteral 
formulas are listed in Table 56-10. Patients receiving 
EN are at risk for many of the same metabolic com-
plications as those who receive PN and should be 
monitored in the same manner. EN can be a source of 
­similar problems, but not to the same degree, because 
the insulin response to EN is about half of that seen 
with PN. Enteral feeding formulas have fixed electro-
lyte compositions that are generally modest in sodium 
and somewhat higher in potassium content. Acid-base 
disturbances can be addressed to a more limited extent 
with EN. Acetate salts can be added to the formula 
to treat chronic metabolic acidosis. Calcium chloride 
can be added to treat mild chronic metabolic alkalosis. 
Medications and other additives to enteral feeding for-
mulas can clog the tubes (e.g., calcium chloride may 
interact with casein-based formulas to produce insoluble 
calcium caseinate products) and may reduce the efficacy 
of some drugs (e.g., phenytoin). Since small-bore tubes 
are easily displaced, tube position should be checked at 
intervals by aspirating and measuring the pH of the gut 
fluid (<4 in the stomach, >6 in the jejunum).
Complications
Aspiration
The debilitated patient with poor gastric emptying 
and impairment of swallowing and cough is at risk for 
aspiration; this is particularly true for those who are 
mechanically ventilated. Tracheal suctioning induces 
coughing and gastric regurgitation, and cuffs on endo-
tracheal or tracheostomy tubes seldom protect against 
aspiration. Preventive measures include elevating the 
head of the bed to 30 degrees, using nurse-directed 
algorithms for formula advancement, combining enteral 
with parenteral feeding, and using post–ligament of 
Treitz feeding. Tube feeding should not be discontin-
ued for gastric residuals of <300 mL unless there are 
other signs of gastrointestinal intolerance such as nausea, 
vomiting, or abdominal distention. Continuous feed-
ing using pumps is better tolerated intragastrically and is 
essential for feeding into the jejunum. For small-bowel 
feeding, residuals are not assessed but abdominal pain 
and distention should be monitored.
Diarrhea
Enteral feeding often leads to diarrhea, especially if 
bowel function is compromised by disease or drugs, 
particularly broad-spectrum antibiotics. Diarrhea may 
be controlled by the use of a continuous drip, with a 
fiber-containing formula, or by adding an antidiar-
rheal agent to the formula. However, Clostridium dif-
ficile, which is a common cause of diarrhea in patients 
being tube fed, should be ruled out before using antidi-
arrheal agents. H2 blockers may also assist in reducing 
 
CHAPTER 56
Enteral and Parenteral Nutrition Therapy 
621
Table 56-9
Enteral Feeding Tubes
Type/Insertion Technique
Clinical Uses
Potential Complications
Nasogastric Tube
External measurement: nostril, ear, 
xiphisternum; tube stiffened by ice 
water or stylet; position verified by 
injecting air and auscultating, or by 
x-ray
Short-term clinical situation (weeks) 
or longer periods with intermittent 
­insertion; bolus feeding simpler, but 
continuous drip with pump better 
­tolerated
Aspiration; ulceration of nasal and 
esophageal tissues, leading to stricture
Nasoduodenal Tube
External measurement: nostril, ear, 
anterior superior iliac spine; tube stiff-
ened by stylet and passed through 
pylorus under fluoroscopy or with 
endoscopic loop
Short-term clinical situations where 
gastric emptying impaired or proximal 
leak suspected; requires continuous 
drip with pump
Spontaneous pulling back into stomach 
(position verified by aspirating content, 
pH >6); diarrhea common, fiber- 
containing formulas may help
Gastrostomy Tube
Percutaneous placement endoscopi-
cally, radiologically, or surgically; after 
tract established, can be converted to 
a gastric “button”
Long-term clinical situations, swallow-
ing disorders, or impaired small-bowel 
absorption requiring continuous drip
Aspiration; irritation around tube exit 
site; peritoneal leak; balloon migration 
and obstruction of pylorus
Jejunostomy Tube
Percutaneous placement endoscopi-
cally or radiologically via pylorus or 
endoscopically or surgically directly 
into the jejunum
Long-term clinical situations where 
gastric emptying impaired; requires 
continuous drip with pump; direct 
endoscopic placement (PEJ) is the 
most comfortable for patient
Clogging or displacement of tube; 
­jejunal fistula if large-bore tube used; 
diarrhea from dumping; irritation of 
surgical anchoring suture
Combined Gastrojejunostomy Tube
Percutaneous placement endoscopi-
cally, radiologically, or surgically; 
intragastric arm for continuous or 
­intermittent gastric suction; jejunal arm 
for enteral feeding
Used for patients with impaired ­gastric 
emptying and at high risk for aspiration 
or patients with acute ­pancreatitis or 
proximal leaks
Clogging: especially of small-bore 
­jejunal tube
Note: All small tubes are at risk for clogging, especially if used for crushed medications. In long-term enteral patients, gastrostomy and jejunos-
tomy tubes can be exchanged for a low-profile “button” once the tract is established. PEJ, percutaneous endoscopic jejunostomy.
Source: Adapted from chapter in Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 16e, by Lyn Howard, MD.
Table 56-10
Enteral Formulas
Composition Characteristics
Clinical Indications
Standard Enteral Formula
1.  Complete dietary products (+)a
     a.  Caloric density 1 kcal/mL
     b.  Protein ∼14% cals, caseinates, soy, lactalbumin
     c.  CHO ∼60% cals, hydrolyzed corn starch, maltodextrin, sucrose
     d.  Fat ∼30% cals, corn, soy, safflower oils
     e.  Recommended daily intake of all minerals and vitamins in 
  >1500 kcal/d
     f.  Osmolality (mosmol/kg): ∼300
Suitable for most patients requiring tube feeding; 
some can be used orally
Modified Enteral Formulas
1.  Caloric density 1.5–2 kcal/mL (+)
Fluid-restricted patients
2.  a.  High protein ∼20–25% protein (+)
Critically ill patients
    b.  Hydrolyzed protein to small peptides (+)
Impaired absorption
(continued)
Section X
Nutrition
622
Table 56-10
Enteral Formulas (Continued)
Composition Characteristics
Clinical Indications
Modified Enteral Formulas
    c.  ↑ Arginine, glutamine, nucleotides, ω3 fat (+++)
Immune-enhancing diets
    d.  ↑ Branched-chain amino acids, ↓ aromatic amino acids (+++)
Liver failure patients intolerant of 0.8 g/kg protein
    e.  Low protein of high biologic value
Renal failure patient for brief periods if critically ill
3.  a.  Low-fat partial MCT substitution (+)
Fat malabsorption
     b.  ↑ Fat >40% cals (++)
Pulmonary failure with CO2 retention on standard 
formula, limited utility
     c.  ↑ Fat from MUFA (++)
Improvement in glycemic index control in diabetes
    d.  ↑ Fat from ω3 and ↓ ω6 linoleic acid (+++)
Improved ventilation in ARDS
4.  Fiber provided as soy polysaccharide (+)
Improved laxation
aCost: +, inexpensive; ++, moderately expensive; +++, very expensive.
Abbreviations: ARDS, acute respiratory distress syndrome; CHO, carbohydrate; MCT, medium-chain triglyceride; MUFA, monounsaturated fatty 
acids; ω3 or ω6, polyunsaturated fat with first double bond at carbon 3 (fish oils) or carbon 6 (vegetable oils).
Source: Adapted from chapter in Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 16e, by Lyn Howard, MD.
the net fluid presented to the colon. Diarrhea associ-
ated with enteral feeding does not necessarily imply 
inadequate absorption of nutrients other than water 
and ­electrolytes. Amino acids and glucose are particu-
larly well absorbed in the upper small bowel except 
in the most diseased or shortest bowel. Since luminal 
nutrients exert trophic effects on the gut mucosa, it is 
often appropriate to persist with tube feeding, despite 
the diarrhea, even when this necessitates supplemental 
­parenteral fluid support.
Global Considerations
In the United States the only parenteral lipid 
emulsion available is made with soybean oil, 
and it has been suggested that its constituent 
fatty acids may be immunosuppressive under certain 
circumstances. In Europe and Japan there are a num-
ber of other lipid emulsions available, including those 
containing fish oil only; mixtures of fish oil, medium-
chain triglycerides, and long-chain triglycerides as olive 
oil and/or soybean oil; mixtures of medium-chain tri-
glycerides and long-chain triglycerides as soybean oil; 
and long-chain triglyceride mixtures of olive oil and 
soybean oil, which may be more beneficial in terms of 
metabolism and hepatic and immune function. Further-
more, a glutamine-containing dipeptide for inclusion in 
TPN formulas is available in Europe and may be helpful 
in terms of immune function and ­resistance to infection.
Acknowledgment
The authors acknowledge the contributions of Lyn Howard, 
MD, the author in earlier editions of Harrison’s Principles of 
Internal Medicine, to material in this chapter.
Obesity and Eating 
Disorders 
SECTION XI
 Jeffrey s. Flier 
I  eleftheria Maratos-Flier 
624
 In a world where food supplies are intermittent, the 
ability to store energy in excess of what is required for 
immediate use is essential for survival. Fat cells, resid-
ing within widely distributed adipose tissue depots, are 
adapted to store excess energy effi ciently as triglycer-
ide and, when needed, to release stored energy as free 
fatty acids for use at other sites. This physiologic sys-
tem, orchestrated through endocrine and neural path-
ways, permits humans to survive starvation for as long 
as several months. However, in the presence of nutri-
tional abundance and a sedentary lifestyle, and infl u-
enced importantly by genetic endowment, this system 
increases adipose energy stores and produces adverse 
health consequences. 
 dEfINITION aNd mEaSuREmENT 
Obesity is a state of excess adipose tissue mass. Although 
often viewed as equivalent to increased body weight, 
this need not be the case—lean but very muscular 
individuals may be overweight by numerical standards 
without having increased adiposity. Body weights are 
distributed continuously in populations, so that choice 
of a medically meaningful distinction between lean and 
obese is somewhat arbitrary. Obesity is therefore more 
effectively defi ned by assessing its linkage to morbidity 
or mortality. 
 Although not a direct measure of adiposity, the most 
widely used method to gauge obesity is the  body mass 
index (BMI), which is equal to weight/height 2 (in kg/m 2 ) 
 ( Fig. 57-1 ) . Other approaches to quantifying obesity 
include anthropometry (skinfold thickness), densitom-
etry (underwater weighing), CT or MRI, and electri-
cal impedance. Using data from the Metropolitan Life 
Tables, BMIs for the midpoint of all heights and frames 
among both men and women range from 19 to 26 kg/
m 2 ; at a similar BMI, women have more body fat than 
men. Based on data of substantial morbidity, a BMI of 
30 is most commonly used as a threshold for obesity 
 BIOLOGY OF OBESITY 
 CHAPTER 57 
in both men and women. Large-scale epidemiologic 
 studies suggest that all-cause, metabolic, cancer, and 
cardiovascular morbidity begin to rise (albeit at a slow 
rate) when BMIs are ≥25, suggesting that the cutoff 
for obesity should be lowered. Most authorities use the 
term  overweight (rather than obese) to describe individu-
als with BMIs between 25 and 30. A BMI between 
25 and 30 should be viewed as medically signifi cant and 
worthy of therapeutic intervention, especially in the 
presence of risk factors that are infl uenced by adiposity 
such as hypertension and glucose intolerance. 
 The distribution of adipose tissue in different anatomic 
depots also has substantial implications for morbidity. 
Specifi cally, intraabdominal and abdominal subcutane-
ous fat have more signifi cance than subcutaneous fat 
present in the buttocks and lower extremities. This dis-
tinction is most easily made clinically by determining 
the waist-to-hip ratio, with a ratio >0.9 in women and 
>1.0 in men being abnormal. Many of the most impor-
tant complications of obesity such as insulin resistance, 
diabetes, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and hyper-
androgenism in women, are linked more strongly to 
intraabdominal and/or upper body fat than to overall 
adiposity  ( Chap. 60 ) . The mechanism underlying this 
association is unknown but may relate to the fact that 
intraabdominal adipocytes are more lipolytically active 
than those from other depots. Release of free fatty acids 
into the portal circulation has adverse metabolic actions, 
especially on the liver. Whether adipokines and cyto-
kines secreted by visceral adipocytes play an additional 
role in systemic complications of obesity is an area of 
active investigation. 
 PREValENCE 
 Data from the National Health and Nutrition Exami-
nation Surveys (NHANES) show that the percent-
age of the American adult population with obesity 
(BMI >30) has increased from 14.5% (between 1976 
 
CHAPTER 57
Biology of Obesity
625
Figure 57-1
Nomogram for determining body mass index. To use this 
nomogram, place a ruler or other straight edge between the 
body weight (without clothes) in kilograms or pounds located 
on the left-hand line and the height (without shoes) in 
Weight
kg         lb
Height
cm         in.
Body Mass Index
[kg/m2]
WOMEN
MEN
RELATIVE
RISK
VERY HIGH
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
HIGH
MODERATE
LOW
 VERY LOW
RELATIVE
RISK
VERY HIGH
HIGH
MODERATE
LOW
 VERY LOW
50
125
130
55
135
140
60
65
70
75
80
85
150
145
155
160
165
170
175
180
185
190
195
200
205
210
150
140
340
130
120
110
100
95
75
80
85
90
65
70
60
55
50
45
40
35
30
25
320
300
280
260
240
220
200
190
180
170
160
150
140
130
120
110
100
  95
  90
  85
  80
  75
  70
  65
  60
  55
  50
and 1980) to 33.9% (between 2007 and 2008). As many 
as 68% of U.S. adults aged ≥20 years were overweight 
(defined as BMI >25) between the years of 2007 and 
2008. Extreme obesity (BMI ≥40) has also increased and 
affects 5.7% of the population. The increasing preva-
lence of medically significant obesity raises great con-
cern. Obesity is more common among women and in 
the poor, and among blacks and Hispanics; the preva-
lence in children is also rising at a worrisome rate.
Physiologic Regulation  
of  Energy Balance
Substantial evidence suggests that body weight is regu-
lated by both endocrine and neural components that 
ultimately influence the effector arms of energy intake 
and expenditure. This complex regulatory system 
is necessary because even small imbalances between 
energy intake and expenditure will ultimately have large 
effects on body weight. For example, a 0.3% positive 
imbalance over 30 years would result in a 9-kg (20-lb) 
weight gain. This exquisite regulation of energy bal-
ance cannot be monitored easily by calorie-counting 
in relation to physical activity. Rather, body weight 
regulation or dysregulation depends on a complex 
interplay of hormonal and neural signals. Alterations in 
stable weight by forced overfeeding or food depriva-
tion induce physiologic changes that resist these pertur-
bations: with weight loss, appetite increases and energy 
expenditure falls; with overfeeding, appetite falls and 
centimeters or inches located on the right-hand line. The 
body mass index is read from the middle of the scale and is 
in metric units. (ghgh 1979, George A. Bray, MD; used 
with permission.)
Section XI
Obesity and Eating Disorders
626
energy expenditure increases. This latter compensatory 
mechanism frequently fails, however, permitting obesity 
to develop when food is abundant and physical activity 
is limited. A major regulator of these adaptive responses 
is the adipocyte-derived hormone leptin, which acts 
through brain circuits (predominantly in the hypothal-
amus) to influence appetite, energy expenditure, and 
neuroendocrine function (discussed later).
Appetite is influenced by many factors that are inte-
grated by the brain, most importantly within the hypo-
thalamus (Fig. 57-2). Signals that impinge on the 
hypothalamic center include neural afferents, hormones, 
and metabolites. Vagal inputs are particularly important, 
bringing information from viscera, such as gut disten-
tion. Hormonal signals include leptin, insulin, cortisol, 
and gut peptides. Among the latter is ghrelin, which is 
made in the stomach and stimulates feeding, and pep-
tide YY (PYY) and cholecystokinin, which is made in 
the small intestine and signal to the brain through direct 
action on hypothalamic control centers and/or via the 
vagus nerve. Metabolites, including glucose, can influ-
ence appetite, as seen by the effect of hypoglycemia 
to induce hunger; however, glucose is not normally a 
major regulator of appetite. These diverse hormonal, 
metabolic, and neural signals act by influencing the 
expression and release of various hypothalamic peptides 
(e.g., neuropeptide Y [NPY], Agouti-related peptide 
[AgRP], α-melanocyte-stimulating hormone [α-MSH], 
and melanin-concentrating hormone [MCH]) that are 
integrated with serotonergic, catecholaminergic, endocan-
nabinoid, and opioid signaling pathways (discussed later). 
Psychological and cultural factors also play a role in the 
Figure 57-2 
The factors that regulate appetite through effects on 
central neural circuits. Some factors that increase or 
decrease appetite are listed. NPY, neuropeptide Y; MCH, 
melanin-concentrating hormone; AgRP, Agouti-related pep-
tide; α-MSH, α-melanocyte-stimulating hormone; CART, 
cocaine- and amphetamine-related transcript; GLP-1, glucagon-
related peptide-1; CCK, cholecystokinin.
Cultural 
  factors
Increase
Decrease
NPY
MCH
AgRP
Orexin
Endocannabinoid
α-MSH
CART
GLP-1
Serotonin
appetite
Hormones
  Leptin
  Insulin
  Cortisol
Metabolites
  Glucose
  Ketones
Gut peptides
  CCK
  Ghrelin
  PYY
Neural afferents
  (vagal)
Psychological
  factors
Central controllers
of appetite
final expression of appetite. Apart from rare genetic syn-
dromes involving leptin, its receptor, and the melano-
cortin system, specific defects in this complex appetite 
control network that influence common cases of obesity 
are not well defined.
Energy expenditure includes the following compo-
nents: (1) resting or basal metabolic rate; (2) the energy 
cost of metabolizing and storing food; (3) the ther-
mic effect of exercise; and (4) adaptive thermogenesis, 
which varies in response to long-term caloric intake 
(rising with increased intake). Basal metabolic rate 
accounts for ∼70% of daily energy expenditure, whereas 
active physical activity contributes 5–10%. Thus, a sig-
nificant component of daily energy consumption is 
fixed.
Genetic models in mice indicate that mutations 
in certain genes (e.g., targeted deletion of the insulin 
receptor in adipose tissue) protect against obesity, appar-
ently by increasing energy expenditure. Adaptive ther-
mogenesis occurs in brown adipose tissue (BAT), which 
plays an important role in energy metabolism in many 
mammals. In contrast to white adipose tissue, which is 
used to store energy in the form of lipids, BAT expends 
stored energy as heat. A mitochondrial uncoupling protein 
(UCP-1) in BAT dissipates the hydrogen ion gradient 
in the oxidative respiration chain and releases energy as 
heat. The metabolic activity of BAT is increased by a 
central action of leptin, acting through the sympathetic 
nervous system that heavily innervates this tissue. In 
rodents, BAT deficiency causes obesity and diabetes; 
stimulation of BAT with a specific adrenergic agonist 
(β3 agonist) protects against diabetes and obesity. BAT 
exists in humans (especially neonates), and although its 
physiologic role is not yet established, identification of 
functional BAT in many adults using PET imaging has 
increased interest in the implications of the tissue for 
pathogenesis and therapy of obesity.
The Adipocyte and Adipose Tissue
Adipose tissue is composed of the lipid-storing adi-
pose cell and a stromal/vascular compartment in which 
cells including preadipocytes and macrophages reside. 
Adipose mass increases by enlargement of adipose cells 
through lipid deposition, as well as by an increase in the 
number of adipocytes. Obese adipose tissue is also char-
acterized by increased numbers of infiltrating macro-
phages. The process by which adipose cells are derived 
from a mesenchymal preadipocyte involves an orches-
trated series of differentiation steps mediated by a cas-
cade of specific transcription factors. One of the key 
transcription factors is peroxisome proliferator-activated 
receptor γ (PPARγ), a nuclear receptor that binds the thi-
azolidinedione class of insulin-sensitizing drugs used in 
the treatment of type 2 diabetes.
 
CHAPTER 57
Biology of Obesity
627
Although the adipocyte has generally been regarded 
as a storage depot for fat, it is also an endocrine cell that 
releases numerous molecules in a regulated fashion 
(Fig. 57-3). These include the energy balance–­regulating 
hormone leptin, cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor 
(TNF)-α and interleukin (IL)-6, complement factors such 
as factor D (also known as adipsin), prothrombotic agents 
such as plasminogen activator inhibitor I, and a compo-
nent of the blood pressure–regulating system, angiotensin-
ogen. Adiponectin, an abundant adipose-derived ­protein 
whose levels are reduced in obesity, enhances insulin 
sensitivity and lipid oxidation and it has vascular-pro-
tective effects, whereas resistin and RBP4, whose lev-
els are increased in obesity, may induce insulin resistance. 
These factors, and others not yet identified, play a role 
in the physiology of lipid homeostasis, insulin sensitivity, 
blood pressure control, coagulation, and vascular health, 
and are likely to contribute to obesity-related pathologies.
Etiology of Obesity
Although the molecular pathways regulating energy 
balance are beginning to be illuminated, the causes of 
obesity remain elusive. In part, this reflects the fact that 
obesity is a heterogeneous group of disorders. At one 
level, the pathophysiology of obesity seems simple: a 
chronic excess of nutrient intake relative to the level of 
energy expenditure. However, due to the complexity 
of the neuroendocrine and metabolic systems that regu-
late energy intake, storage, and expenditure, it has been 
difficult to quantitate all the relevant parameters (e.g., 
food intake and energy expenditure) over time in human 
subjects.
Role of genes versus environment
Obesity is commonly seen in families, and the heritability 
of body weight is similar to that for height. Inheritance 
is usually not Mendelian, however, and it is ­difficult to 
distinguish the role of genes and environmental factors. 
Adoptees more closely resemble their biologic than adop-
tive parents with respect to obesity, providing strong 
support for genetic influences. Likewise, identical twins 
have very similar BMIs whether reared together or apart, 
and their BMIs are much more strongly correlated than 
those of dizygotic twins. These genetic effects appear to 
relate to both energy intake and expenditure.
Whatever the role of genes, it is clear that the envi-
ronment plays a key role in obesity, as evidenced by 
the fact that famine prevents obesity in even the 
most obesity-prone individual. In addition, the recent 
increase in the prevalence of obesity in the United 
States is far too rapid to be due to changes in the gene 
pool. Undoubtedly, genes influence the susceptibil-
ity to obesity in response to specific diets and avail-
ability of nutrition. Cultural factors are also impor-
tant—these relate to both availability and composition 
of the diet and to changes in the level of physical activ-
ity. In industrial societies, obesity is more common 
among poor women, whereas in underdeveloped coun-
tries, wealthier women are more often obese. In chil-
dren, obesity correlates to some degree with time spent 
watching television. Although the role of diet compo-
sition in obesity continues to generate controversy, it 
appears that high-fat diets may promote obesity when 
combined with diets rich in simple, rapidly absorbed 
carbohydrates.
Additional environmental factors may contribute to 
the increasing obesity prevalence. Both epidemiologic 
correlations and experimental data suggest that sleep 
deprivation leads to increased obesity. Changes in gut 
microbiome with capacity to alter energy balance are 
receiving experimental support from animal studies, and 
a possible role for obesigenic viral infections continues 
to receive sporadic attention.
Specific genetic syndromes
For many years, obesity in rodents has been known to 
be caused by a number of distinct mutations distributed 
through the genome. Most of these single-gene muta-
tions cause both hyperphagia and diminished energy 
expenditure, suggesting a physiologic link between 
these two parameters of energy homeostasis. Identi-
fication of the ob gene mutation in genetically obese 
(ob/ob) mice represented a major breakthrough in the 
field. The ob/ob mouse develops severe obesity, insulin 
resistance, and hyperphagia, as well as efficient metab-
olism (e.g., it gets fat even when ingesting the same 
number of calories as lean litter mates). The product of 
the ob gene is the peptide leptin, a name derived from 
the Greek root leptos, meaning thin. Leptin is secreted 
by adipose cells and acts primarily through the hypo-
thalamus. Its level of production provides an index of 
adipose energy stores (Fig. 57-4). High leptin ­levels 
decrease food intake and increase energy expendi-
ture. Another mouse mutant, db/db, which is resis-
tant to leptin, has a mutation in the leptin receptor and 
Figure 57-3 
Factors released by the adipocyte that can affect periph-
eral tissues. PAI, plasminogen activator inhibitor; TNF, tumor 
necrosis factor; RBP4, retinal binding protein 4.
Cytokines
  TFN-
  IL-6
Substrates
  Free fatty acids
  Glycerol
Enzymes
  Aromatase
  11-HSD-1
Others
  PAI-1
  Angiotensinogen
  RBP4
Complement factors
  Factor D/adipsin
Hormones
  Leptin
  Adiponectin
  Resistin
Adipocyte
Section XI
Obesity and Eating Disorders
628
Figure 57-4
The physiologic system regulated by leptin. Rising or fall-
ing leptin levels act through the hypothalamus to influence 
appetite, energy expenditure, and neuroendocrine function 
and through peripheral sites to influence systems such as 
the immune system.
Hunger/satiety
Glucose and lipid metabolism
Brain
Hypothalamus
Thermogenesis/autonomic system
Neuroendocrine function
Peripheral targets
Beta cells
Immune cells
Others
Adipocyte
Fed state/obesity
Fasted state
Leptin
Leptin
Blood-brain barrier
develops a similar syndrome. The ob gene is present in 
humans where it is also expressed in fat. Several fami-
lies with morbid, early-onset obesity caused by inacti-
vating mutations in either leptin or the leptin receptor 
have been described, thus demonstrating the biologic 
Table 57-1
Some Obesity Genes in Humans and Mice
Gene
Gene Product
Mechanism of Obesity
In Human
In Rodent
Lep (ob)
Leptin, a fat-derived hormone
Mutation prevents leptin from delivering  
satiety signal; brain perceives starvation
Yes
Yes
LepR (db)
Leptin receptor
Same as above
Yes
Yes
POMC
Proopiomelanocortin, a precursor of 
several hormones and neuropeptides
Mutation prevents synthesis of melanocyte-
stimulating hormone (MSH), a satiety signal
Yes
Yes
MC4R
Type 4 receptor for MSH
Mutation prevents reception of satiety signal 
from MSH
Yes
Yes
AgRP
Agouti-related peptide, a neuropeptide 
expressed in the hypothalamus
Overexpression inhibits signal through MC4R
No
Yes
PC-1
Prohormone convertase 1, a 
­processing enzyme
Mutation prevents synthesis of neuropeptide, 
probably MSH
Yes
No
Fat
Carboxypeptidase E, a processing 
enzyme
Same as above
No
Yes
Tub
Tub, a hypothalamic protein of 
unknown function
Hypothalamic dysfunction
No
Yes
TrkB
TrkB, a neurotrophin receptor
Hyperphagia due to uncharacterized 
­hypothalamic defect
Yes
Yes
relevance of the leptin pathway in humans. Obesity in 
these individuals begins shortly after birth, is severe, and 
is accompanied by neuroendocrine abnormalities. The 
most prominent of these is hypogonadotropic hypo-
gonadism, which is reversed by leptin replacement in 
the leptin-deficient subset. Central hypothyroidism 
and growth retardation are seen in the mouse model, 
but their occurrence in leptin-deficient humans is less 
clear. To date, there is no evidence that mutations in 
the leptin or leptin receptor genes play a prominent role 
in common forms of obesity.
Mutations in several other genes cause severe obe-
sity in humans (Table 57-1); each of these syndromes 
is rare. Mutations in the gene encoding proopiomela-
nocortin (POMC) cause severe obesity through fail-
ure to synthesize α-MSH, a key neuropeptide that 
inhibits appetite in the hypothalamus. The absence of 
POMC also causes secondary adrenal insufficiency due 
to absence of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), 
as well as pale skin and red hair due to absence of 
α-MSH. Proenzyme convertase 1 (PC-1) mutations 
are thought to cause obesity by preventing synthesis of 
α-MSH from its precursor peptide, POMC. α-MSH 
binds to the type 4 melanocortin receptor (MC4R), a 
key hypothalamic receptor that inhibits eating. Het-
erozygous loss-of-function mutations of this receptor 
account for as much as 5% of severe obesity. These five 
genetic defects define a pathway through which leptin 
(by stimulating POMC and increasing α-MSH) restricts 
food intake and limits weight (Fig. 57-5). The results 
of genomewide association studies to identify genetic 
loci responsible for obesity in the general population 
have so far been disappointing. More than 10 replicated 
 
CHAPTER 57
Biology of Obesity
629
Figure 57-5 
A central pathway through which leptin acts to regulate 
appetite and body weight. Leptin signals through pro­
opiomelanocortin (POMC) neurons in the hypothalamus to 
induce increased production of α-melanocyte-stimulating 
hormone (α-MSH), requiring the processing enzyme PC-1 
(proenzyme convertase 1). α-MSH acts as an agonist on 
melanocortin-4 receptors to inhibit appetite, and the neuro-
peptide AgRp (Agouti-related peptide) acts as an antagonist 
of this receptor. Mutations that cause obesity in humans are 
indicated by the solid green arrows.
PC-1 processing enzyme
Leptin
AgRP
Leptin
receptor
signal
Known
mutations in
man
Proopio-
melanocortin
(POMC)
expression
-MSH
Melanocortin 4
receptor
signal
Decreased
appetite
loci linked to obesity have been identified, but together 
they account for less than 3% of interindividual varia-
tion in BMI. The most replicated of these is a gene 
named FTO, which is of unknown function, but like 
many of the other recently described candidates, is 
expressed in the brain. Since the heritability of obesity is 
estimated to be 40–70%, it is likely that many more loci 
remain to be identified.
In addition to these human obesity genes, stud-
ies in rodents reveal several other molecular candidates 
for hypothalamic mediators of human obesity or lean-
ness. The tub gene encodes a hypothalamic peptide of 
unknown function; mutation of this gene causes late-
onset obesity. The fat gene encodes carboxypeptidase 
E, a peptide-processing enzyme; mutation of this gene 
is thought to cause obesity by disrupting production of 
one or more neuropeptides. AgRP is coexpressed with 
NPY in arcuate nucleus neurons. AgRP antagonizes 
α-MSH action at MC4 receptors, and its overexpres-
sion induces obesity. In contrast, a mouse deficient in 
the peptide MCH, whose administration causes feeding, 
is lean.
A number of complex human syndromes with defined 
inheritance are associated with obesity (Table 57-2). 
Although specific genes have limited definition at pres-
ent, their identification will likely enhance our under-
standing of more common forms of human obesity. In 
the Prader-Willi syndrome, a multigenic neurodevel-
opmental disorder, obesity coexists with short stature, 
mental retardation, hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, 
hypotonia, small hands and feet, fish-shaped mouth, 
and hyperphagia. Most patients have a deletion in the 
15q11-13 chromosomal region, and reduced expression 
of the signaling protein necdin may be an important 
cause of defective hypothalamic neural development in 
this disorder. Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is a geneti-
cally heterogeneous disorder characterized by obesity, 
mental retardation, retinitis pigmentosa, diabetes, renal 
and cardiac malformations, ­polydactyly, and hypogo-
nadotropic hypogonadism. At least 12 genetic loci have 
been identified, and most of the encoded proteins form 
two multiprotein complexes that are involved in ciliary 
function and microtubule-based intracellular transport. 
Recent evidence suggests that mutations might disrupt 
leptin receptor trafficking in key hypothalamic neurons, 
causing leptin resistance.
Other specific syndromes  
associated with obesity
Cushing’s syndrome
Although obese patients commonly have central obe-
sity, hypertension, and glucose intolerance, they lack 
other specific stigmata of Cushing’s syndrome. None-
theless, a potential diagnosis of Cushing’s syndrome 
is often entertained. Cortisol production and urinary 
metabolites (17OH steroids) may be increased in simple 
obesity. Unlike in Cushing’s syndrome, however, cor-
tisol levels in blood and urine in the basal state and in 
response to corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) or 
ACTH are normal; the overnight 1-mg dexamethasone 
suppression test is normal in 90%, with the remain-
der being normal on a standard 2-day low-dose dexa-
methasone suppression test. Obesity may be associated 
with excessive local reactivation of cortisol in fat by 
11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 1, an enzyme that 
converts inactive cortisone to cortisol.
Hypothyroidism
The possibility of hypothyroidism should be considered, 
but it is an uncommon cause of obesity; hypothyroid-
ism is easily ruled out by measuring thyroid-stimulating 
hormone (TSH). Much of the weight gain that occurs 
in hypothyroidism is due to myxedema.
Insulinoma
Patients with insulinoma often gain weight as a result 
of overeating to avoid hypoglycemic symptoms. The 
increased substrate plus high insulin levels promote 
energy storage in fat. This can be marked in some indi-
viduals but is modest in most.
Craniopharyngioma and other disorders 
involving the hypothalamus
Whether through tumors, trauma, or inflammation, 
hypothalamic dysfunction of systems controlling sati-
ety, hunger, and energy expenditure can cause vary-
ing degrees of obesity. It is uncommon to identify 
a discrete anatomic basis for these disorders. Subtle 
Section XI
Obesity and Eating Disorders
630
Table 57-2
A Comparison of Syndromes of Obesity—Hypogonadism and Mental Retardation
Syndrome
Feature
Prader-Willi
Laurence-Moon-Biedl
Ahlstrom’s
Cohen’s
Carpenter’s
Inheritance
Sporadic; ­two-thirds 
have defect
Autosomal ­recessive
Autosomal 
­recessive
Probably  
autosomal  
recessive
Autosomal 
­recessive
Stature
Short
Normal; ­infrequently 
short
Normal; 
­infrequently 
short
Short or tall
Normal
Obesity
Generalized
Generalized
Truncal
Truncal
Truncal, gluteal
Moderate to severe
Onset 1–3 years
Early onset, 1–2 years
Early onset, 
2–5 years
Mid-childhood, 
age 5
Craniofacies
Narrow bifrontal 
diameter
Not distinctive
Not distinctive
High nasal bridge
Arched palate
Open mouth
Short philtrum
Acrocephaly
Flat nasal bridge
High-arched 
­palate
Almond-shaped 
eyes
Strabismus
V-shaped mouth
High-arched  
palate
Limbs
Small hands and feet
Hypotonia
Polydactyly
No 
­abnormalities
Hypotonia
Narrow hands and 
feet
Polydactyly
Syndactyly
Genu valgum
Reproductive 
status
1° Hypogonadism
1° Hypogonadism
Hypogonadism 
in males but 
not in females
Normal gonadal 
function or hypo-
gonadotrophic  
hypogonadism
2° Hypogonadism
Other 
­features
Enamel hypoplasia
Hyperphagia
Temper tantrums
Nasal speech
Dysplastic ears
Delayed puberty
Mental 
­retardation
Mild to moderate
Normal 
­intelligence
Mild
Slight
hypothalamic dysfunction is probably a more common 
cause of obesity than can be documented using cur-
rently available imaging techniques. Growth hormone 
(GH), which exerts lipolytic activity, is diminished in 
obesity and is increased with weight loss. Despite low 
GH levels, insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-I (somato-
medin) production is normal, suggesting that GH 
suppression is a compensatory response to increased 
nutritional supply.
Pathogenesis of common obesity
Obesity can result from increased energy intake, 
decreased energy expenditure, or a combination of the 
two. Thus, identifying the etiology of obesity should 
involve measurements of both parameters. However, it 
is difficult to perform direct and accurate measurements 
of energy intake in free-living individuals; and the obese, 
in particular, often underreport intake. Measurements 
of chronic energy expenditure are possible using doubly 
labeled water or metabolic chamber/rooms. In subjects 
at stable weight and body composition, energy intake 
equals expenditure. Consequently, these techniques allow 
assessment of energy intake in free-living individuals. 
The level of energy expenditure differs in established 
obesity, during periods of weight gain or loss, and in the 
pre- or postobese state. Studies that fail to take note of 
this phenomenon are not easily interpreted.
There is continued interest in the concept of a body 
weight “set point.” This idea is supported by physio-
logic mechanisms centered around a sensing system in 
adipose tissue that reflects fat stores and a receptor, or 
 
CHAPTER 57
Biology of Obesity
631
“adipostat,” that is in the hypothalamic centers. When 
fat stores are depleted, the adipostat signal is low, and 
the hypothalamus responds by stimulating hunger and 
decreasing energy expenditure to conserve energy. 
Conversely, when fat stores are abundant, the signal is 
increased, and the hypothalamus responds by decreasing 
hunger and increasing energy expenditure. The recent 
discovery of the ob gene, and its product leptin, and the 
db gene, whose product is the leptin receptor, provides 
important elements of a molecular basis for this physi-
ologic concept (discussed earlier).
What is the status of food intake in obesity? 
(Do the obese eat more than the lean?)
This question has stimulated much debate, due in part 
to the methodologic difficulties inherent in determin-
ing food intake. Many obese individuals believe that 
they eat small quantities of food, and this claim has 
often been supported by the results of food intake ques-
tionnaires. However, it is now established that average 
energy expenditure increases as individuals get more 
obese, due primarily to the fact that metabolically active 
lean tissue mass increases with obesity. Given the laws 
of thermodynamics, the obese person must therefore 
eat more than the average lean person to maintain their 
increased weight. It may be the case, however, that a 
subset of individuals who are predisposed to obesity 
have the capacity to become obese initially without an 
absolute increase in caloric consumption.
What is the state of energy  
expenditure in obesity?
The average total daily energy expenditure is higher 
in obese than lean individuals when measured at stable 
weight. However, energy expenditure falls as weight 
is lost, due in part to loss of lean body mass and to 
decreased sympathetic nerve activity. When reduced to 
near-normal weight and maintained there for awhile, 
(some) obese individuals have lower energy expenditure 
than (some) lean individuals. There is also a tendency 
for those who will develop obesity as infants or children 
to have lower resting energy expenditure rates than 
those who remain lean.
The physiologic basis for variable rates of energy 
expenditure (at a given body weight and level of energy 
intake) is essentially unknown. A mutation in the 
human β3-adrenergic receptor may be associated with 
increased risk of obesity and/or insulin resistance in cer-
tain (but not all) populations.
One recently described component of thermogenesis, 
called nonexercise activity thermogenesis (NEAT), has been 
linked to obesity. It is the thermogenesis that accom-
panies physical activities other than volitional exercise 
such as the activities of daily living, fidgeting, sponta-
neous muscle contraction, and maintaining posture. 
NEAT accounts for about two-thirds of the increased 
daily energy expenditure induced by overfeeding. The 
wide variation in fat storage seen in overfed individuals 
is predicted by the degree to which NEAT is induced. 
The molecular basis for NEAT and its regulation is 
unknown.
Leptin in typical obesity
The vast majority of obese persons have increased 
leptin levels but do not have mutations of either leptin 
or its receptor. They appear, therefore, to have a form 
of functional “leptin resistance.” Data suggesting that 
some individuals produce less leptin per unit fat mass 
than others or have a form of relative leptin deficiency 
that predisposes to obesity are at present contradictory 
and unsettled. The mechanism for leptin resistance, 
and whether it can be overcome by raising leptin levels 
or combining leptin with other treatments in a subset 
of obese individuals, is not yet established. Some data 
suggest that leptin may not effectively cross the blood-
brain barrier as levels rise. It is also apparent from ani-
mal studies that leptin signaling inhibitors, such as 
SOCS3 and PTP1b, are involved in the leptin-resistant 
state.
Pathologic Consequences 
of Obesity
(See also Chap. 58) Obesity has major adverse effects on 
health. Obesity is associated with an increase in mor-
tality, with a 50–100% increased risk of death from all 
causes compared to normal-weight individuals, mostly 
due to cardiovascular causes. Obesity and overweight 
together are the second leading cause of preventable 
death in the United States, accounting for 300,000 
deaths per year. Mortality rates rise as obesity increases, 
particularly when obesity is associated with increased 
intraabdominal fat (discussed earlier). Life expectancy 
of a moderately obese individual could be shortened by 
2–5 years, and a 20- to 30-year-old male with a BMI 
>45 may lose 13 years of life. It is also apparent that 
the degree to which obesity affects particular organ sys-
tems is influenced by susceptibility genes that vary in 
the population.
Insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes mellitus
Hyperinsulinemia and insulin resistance are pervasive 
features of obesity, increasing with weight gain and 
diminishing with weight loss (Chap. 60). Insulin resis-
tance is more strongly linked to intraabdominal fat than 
to fat in other depots. Molecular links between obesity 
Section XI
Obesity and Eating Disorders
632
and insulin resistance in fat, muscle, and liver have been 
sought for many years. Major factors include: (1) insu-
lin itself, by inducing receptor downregulation; (2) free 
fatty acids that are increased and capable of impairing 
insulin action; (3) intracellular lipid accumulation; and 
(4) several circulating peptides produced by adipocytes, 
including the cytokines TNF-α and IL-6, RBP4, and 
the “adipokines” adiponectin and resistin that have 
altered expression in obese adipocytes, and can ­modify 
insulin action. Additional mechanisms are obesity-
linked inflammation, including infiltration of macro-
phages into tissues including fat, and induction of the 
endoplasmic reticulum stress response, that can bring 
about resistance to insulin action in cells. Despite the 
prevalence of insulin resistance, most obese individu-
als do not develop diabetes, suggesting that diabetes 
requires an interaction between obesity-induced insu-
lin resistance and other factors such as impaired insulin 
secretion. Obesity, however, is a major risk factor for 
diabetes, and as many as 80% of patients with type 2 
diabetes mellitus are obese. Weight loss and exercise, 
even of modest degree, increase insulin sensitivity and 
often improve glucose control in diabetes.
Reproductive disorders
Disorders that affect the reproductive axis are associated 
with obesity in both men and women. Male hypogo-
nadism is associated with increased adipose tissue, often 
distributed in a pattern more typical of females. In men 
whose weight is >160% ideal body weight (IBW), 
plasma testosterone and sex hormone–binding globulin 
(SHBG) are often reduced, and estrogen levels (derived 
from conversion of adrenal androgens in adipose tissue) 
are increased. Gynecomastia may be seen. However, 
masculinization, libido, potency, and spermatogenesis 
are preserved in most of these individuals. Free testos-
terone may be decreased in morbidly obese men whose 
weight is >200% IBW.
Obesity has long been associated with menstrual 
abnormalities in women, particularly in women with 
upper body obesity. Common findings are increased 
androgen production, decreased SHBG, and increased 
peripheral conversion of androgen to estrogen. Most 
obese women with oligomenorrhea have the polycystic 
ovarian syndrome (PCOS), with its associated anovu-
lation and ovarian hyperandrogenism; 40% of women 
with PCOS are obese. Most nonobese women with 
PCOS are also insulin-resistant, suggesting that insulin 
resistance, hyperinsulinemia, or the combination of the 
two are causative or contribute to the ovarian patho-
physiology in PCOS in both obese and lean individuals. 
In obese women with PCOS, weight loss or treatment 
with insulin-sensitizing drugs often restores normal 
menses. The increased conversion of androstenedi-
one to estrogen, which occurs to a greater degree in 
women with lower body obesity, may contribute to the 
increased incidence of uterine cancer in postmenopausal 
women with obesity.
Cardiovascular disease
The Framingham Study revealed that obesity was an 
independent risk factor for the 26-year incidence of 
cardiovascular disease in men and women (including 
coronary disease, stroke, and congestive heart failure 
[CHF]). The waist-to-hip ratio may be the best predic-
tor of these risks. When the additional effects of hyper-
tension and glucose intolerance associated with obesity 
are included, the adverse impact of obesity is even more 
evident. The effect of obesity on cardiovascular mor-
tality in women may be seen at BMIs as low as 25. 
­Obesity, especially abdominal obesity, is associated with 
an atherogenic lipid profile; with increased low-density 
lipoprotein cholesterol, very low density lipoprotein, 
and triglyceride; and with decreased high-density lipo-
protein cholesterol and decreased levels of the vascular 
protective adipokine adiponectin. ­Obesity is also associ-
ated with hypertension. Measurement of blood pres-
sure in the obese requires use of a larger cuff size to 
avoid artifactual increases. Obesity-induced hyperten-
sion is associated with increased peripheral resistance 
and cardiac output, increased sympathetic nervous sys-
tem tone, increased salt sensitivity, and insulin-mediated 
salt retention; it is often responsive to modest weight 
loss.
Pulmonary disease
Obesity may be associated with a number of pulmo-
nary abnormalities. These include reduced chest wall 
compliance, increased work of breathing, increased 
minute ventilation due to increased metabolic rate, 
and decreased functional residual capacity and expi-
ratory reserve volume. Severe obesity may be associ-
ated with obstructive sleep apnea and the “obesity 
hypoventilation syndrome” with attenuated hypoxic 
and hypercapnic ventilatory responses. Sleep apnea can 
be obstructive (most common), central, or mixed and 
is associated with hypertension. Weight loss (10–20 kg) 
can bring substantial improvement, as can major 
weight loss following gastric bypass or restrictive sur-
gery. Continuous positive airway pressure has been 
used with some success.
Hepatobiliary disease
Obesity is frequently associated with the common dis-
order nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). This 
hepatic fatty infiltration of NAFLD can progress in a 
subset to inflammatory nonalcoholic steatohepatitis 
(NASH) and more rarely to cirrhosis and hepatocellular 
 
CHAPTER 57
Biology of Obesity
633
carcinoma. Steatosis has been noted to improve follow-
ing weight loss, secondary to diet or bariatric surgery. 
The mechanism for the association remains unclear. 
Obesity is associated with enhanced biliary secretion of 
cholesterol, supersaturation of bile, and a higher inci-
dence of gallstones, particularly cholesterol gallstones 
(Chap. 45). A person 50% above IBW has about a six-
fold increased incidence of symptomatic gallstones. 
Paradoxically, fasting increases supersaturation of bile 
by decreasing the phospholipid component. Fasting-
induced cholecystitis is a complication of extreme diets.
Cancer
Obesity in males is associated with higher mortality 
from cancer, including cancer of the esophagus, colon, 
rectum, pancreas, liver, and prostate; obesity in females 
is associated with higher mortality from cancer of the 
gallbladder, bile ducts, breasts, endometrium, cervix, 
and ovaries. Some of the latter may be due to increased 
rates of conversion of androstenedione to estrone in 
adipose tissue of obese individuals. Other possible 
mechanistic links are other hormones whose levels are 
linked to nutritional state, including insulin, leptin, adi-
ponectin, and IGF-I. It has been estimated that obesity 
accounts for 14% of cancer deaths in men and 20% in 
women in the United States.
Bone, joint, and cutaneous disease
Obesity is associated with an increased risk of osteo-
arthritis, no doubt partly due to the trauma of added 
weight bearing, but potentially linked as well to acti-
vation of inflammatory pathways that could promote 
synovial pathology. The prevalence of gout may also 
be increased. Among the skin problems associated with 
obesity is acanthosis nigricans, manifested by darken-
ing and thickening of the skinfolds on the neck, elbows, 
and dorsal interphalangeal spaces. Acanthosis reflects the 
severity of underlying insulin resistance and diminishes 
with weight loss. Friability of skin may be increased, 
especially in skinfolds, enhancing the risk of fungal and 
yeast infections. Finally, venous stasis is increased in the 
obese.
 Robert F. Kushner 
634
 Over 66% of U.S. adults are categorized as overweight 
or obese, and the prevalence of obesity is increasing 
rapidly in most of the industrialized world. Children 
and adolescents also are becoming more obese, indi-
cating that the current trends will accelerate over time. 
Obesity is associated with an increased risk of mul-
tiple health problems, including hypertension, type 2 
diabetes, dyslipidemia, degenerative joint disease, and 
some malignancies. Thus, it is important for physicians 
to identify, evaluate, and treat patients for obesity and 
associated comorbid conditions. 
 eValuaTIon 
 Physicians should screen all adult patients for obesity and 
offer intensive counseling and behavioral interventions 
to promote sustained weight loss. The fi ve main steps 
in the evaluation of obesity, as described in the fol-
lowing sections, are (1) focused obesity-related history, 
(2) physical examination to determine the degree and 
type of  obesity, (3) comorbid conditions, (4) fi tness level, 
and (5) the patient’s readiness to adopt lifestyle changes. 
 The obesity-focused history 
 Information from the history should address the follow-
ing six questions: 
•  What factors contribute to the patient’s obesity? 
•  How is the obesity affecting the patient’s health? 
•  What is the patient’s level of risk from obesity? 
•  What are the patient’s goals and expectations? 
•  Is the patient motivated to begin a weight 
 management program? 
•  What kind of help does the patient need? 
 Although the vast majority of cases of obesity can 
be attributed to behavioral features that affect diet and 
physical activity patterns, the history may suggest sec-
ondary causes that merit further evaluation.  Disorders to 
consider include polycystic ovarian syndrome, hypothy-
roidism, Cushing’s syndrome, and hypothalamic disease. 
 Drug-induced weight gain also should be considered. 
Common causes include medications for diabetes (insulin, 
sulfonylureas, thiazolidinediones); steroid hormones; psy-
chotropic agents; mood stabilizers (lithium); antidepres-
sants (tricyclics, monoamine oxidase inhibitors, paroxetine, 
mirtazapine); and antiepileptic drugs (valproate, gabapen-
tin, carbamazepine). Other medications, such as nonsteroi-
dal anti- inﬂ ammatory drugs and calcium channel blockers, 
may cause peripheral edema but do not increase body fat. 
 The patient’s current diet and physical activity pat-
terns may reveal factors that contribute to the develop-
ment of obesity in addition to identifying behaviors to 
target for treatment. This type of historic information is 
best obtained by using a questionnaire in combination 
with an interview. 
 BMI and waist circumference 
 Three key anthropometric measurements are important 
to evaluate the degree of obesity: weight, height, and 
waist circumference. The body mass index (BMI), calcu-
lated as weight (kg)/height (m) 2 , or weight (lbs)/height 
(inches) 2 × 703, is used to classify weight status and risk 
of disease  ( Tables 58-1 and  58-2 ) . BMI is used since it 
provides an estimate of body fat and is related to risk of 
disease. Lower BMI thresholds for overweight and obe-
sity have been proposed for the Asia-Pacifi c region since 
this population appears to be at risk for glucose and lipid 
abnormalities at lower body weights. 
 Excess abdominal fat, assessed by measurement of 
waist circumference or waist-to-hip ratio, is indepen-
dently associated with higher risk for diabetes mellitus 
and cardiovascular disease. Measurement of the waist 
circumference is a surrogate for visceral adipose tissue 
and should be performed in the horizontal plane above 
the iliac crest  ( Table 58-3 ) . 
 EVALUATION AND MANAGEMENT 
OF OBESITY 
 CHAPTER 58 
 
CHAPTER 58
Evaluation and Management of Obesity 
635
Table 58-1
Body Mass Index (BMI) Table
BMI
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
Height, 
inches
Body Weight, pounds
58
91
96
100
105
110
115
119
124
129
134
138
143
148
153
158
162
167
59
94
99
104
109
114
119
124
128
133
138
143
148
153
158
163
168
173
60
97
102
107
112
118
123
128
133
138
143
148
153
158
163
168
174
179
61
100
106
111
116
122
127
132
137
143
148
153
158
164
169
174
180
185
62
104
109
115
120
126
131
136
142
147
153
158
164
169
175
180
186
191
63
107
113
118
124
130
135
141
146
152
158
163
169
175
180
186
191
197
64
110
116
122
128
134
140
145
151
157
163
169
174
180
186
192
197
204
65
114
120
126
132
138
144
150
156
162
168
174
180
186
192
198
204
210
66
118
124
130
136
142
148
155
161
167
173
179
186
192
198
204
210
216
67
121
127
134
140
146
153
159
166
172
178
185
191
198
204
211
217
223
68
125
131
138
144
151
158
164
171
177
184
190
197
203
210
216
223
230
69
128
135
142
149
155
162
169
176
182
189
196
203
209
216
223
230
236
70
132
139
146
153
160
167
174
181
188
195
202
209
216
222
229
236
243
71
136
143
150
157
165
172
179
186
193
200
208
215
222
229
236
243
250
72
140
147
154
162
169
177
184
191
199
206
213
221
228
235
242
250
258
73
144
151
159
166
174
182
189
197
204
212
219
227
235
242
250
257
265
74
148
155
163
171
179
186
194
202
210
218
225
233
241
249
256
264
272
75
152
160
168
176
184
192
200
208
216
224
232
240
248
256
264
272
279
76
156
164
172
180
189
197
205
213
221
230
238
246
254
263
271
279
287
BMI
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
58
172
177
181
186
191
196
201
205
210
215
220
224
229
234
239
244
248
253
258
59
178
183
188
193
198
203
208
212
217
222
227
232
237
242
247
252
257
262
267
60
184
189
194
199
204
209
215
220
225
230
235
240
245
250
255
261
266
271
276
61
190
195
201
206
211
217
222
227
232
238
243
248
254
259
264
269
275
280
285
62
196
202
207
213
218
224
229
235
240
246
251
256
262
267
273
278
284
289
295
63
203
208
214
220
225
231
237
242
248
254
259
265
270
278
282
287
293
299
304
64
209
215
221
227
232
238
244
250
256
262
267
273
279
285
291
296
302
308
314
65
216
222
228
234
240
246
252
258
264
270
276
282
288
294
300
306
312
318
324
66
223
229
235
241
247
253
260
266
272
278
284
291
297
303
309
315
322
328
334
67
230
236
242
249
255
261
268
274
280
287
293
299
306
312
319
325
331
338
344
68
236
243
249
256
262
269
276
282
289
295
302
308
315
322
328
335
341
348
354
69
243
250
257
263
270
277
284
291
297
304
311
318
324
331
338
345
351
358
365
70
250
257
264
271
278
285
292
299
306
313
320
327
334
341
348
355
362
369
376
71
257
265
272
279
286
293
301
308
315
322
329
338
343
351
358
365
372
379
386
72
265
272
279
287
294
302
309
316
324
331
338
346
353
361
368
375
383
390
397
73
272
280
288
295
302
310
318
325
333
340
348
355
363
371
378
386
393
401
408
74
280
287
295
303
311
319
326
334
342
350
358
365
373
381
389
396
404
412
420
75
287
295
303
311
319
327
335
343
351
359
367
375
383
391
399
407
415
423
431
76
295
304
312
320
328
336
344
353
361
369
377
385
394
402
410
418
426
435
443
Physical fitness
Several prospective studies have demonstrated that 
physical fitness, reported by questionnaire or measured 
by a maximal treadmill exercise test, is an important 
predictor of all-cause mortality rate independent of BMI 
and body composition. These observations highlight the 
importance of taking an exercise history during exami-
nation as well as emphasizing physical activity as a treat-
ment approach.
Obesity-associated comorbid conditions
The evaluation of comorbid conditions should be based 
on presentation of symptoms, risk factors, and index of 
suspicion. All patients should have a fasting lipid panel 
(total, low-density lipoprotein [LDL], and high-density 
lipoprotein [HDL] cholesterol and triglyceride levels) 
and fasting blood glucose along with blood pressure 
determination. Symptoms and diseases that are directly 
or indirectly related to obesity are listed in Table 58-4. 
Obesity and Eating Disorders
636
Section XI
Although individuals vary, the number and severity of 
organ-specific comorbid conditions usually rise with 
increasing levels of obesity. Patients at very high abso-
lute risk include those with the following: established 
coronary heart disease; presence of other atherosclerotic 
diseases, such as peripheral arterial disease, abdominal 
aortic aneurysm, and symptomatic carotid artery disease; 
type 2 diabetes; and sleep apnea.
Table 58-2 
Classification of Weight Status and  
Risk of Disease
BMI (kg/m2)
Obesity 
Class
Risk of 
Disease
Underweight
<18.5
Healthy weight
18.5–24.9
Overweight
25.0–29.9
Increased
Obesity
30.0–34.9
I
High
Obesity
35.0–39.9
II
Very high
Extreme 
­Obesity
≥40
III
Extremely 
high
Source: Adapted from National Institutes of Health, National Heart, 
Lung, and Blood Institute: Clinical Guidelines on the Identification, 
Evaluation, and Treatment of Overweight and Obesity in Adults. U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, 
1998.
Table 58-3
Ethnic-Specific Values for Waist 
Circumference
Ethnic Group
Waist Circumference
Europeans
  Men
>94 cm (37 in)
  Women
>80 cm (31.5 in)
South Asians and Chinese
  Men
>90 cm (35 in)
  Women
>80 cm (31.5 in)
Japanese
  Men
>85 cm (33.5 in)
  Women
>90 cm (35 in)
Ethnic South and Central 
Americans
Use south Asian recommen-
dations until more specific 
data are available.
Sub-Saharan Africans
Use European data until more 
specific data are available.
Eastern Mediterranean 
and Middle East (Arab) 
­populations
Use European data until more 
specific data are available.
Source: From KGMM Alberti et al for the IDF Epidemiology Task 
Force Consensus Group: Lancet 366:1059, 2005.
Table 58-4
Obesity-Related Organ Systems Review
Cardiovascular
  Hypertension
  Congestive heart failure
  Cor pulmonale
  Varicose veins
  Pulmonary embolism
  Coronary artery disease
Endocrine
  Metabolic syndrome
  Type 2 diabetes
  Dyslipidemia
  Polycystic ovarian 
  syndrome
Musculoskeletal
  Hyperuricemia and gout
  Immobility
  Osteoarthritis (knees and 
  hips)
  Low back pain
  Carpal tunnel syndrome
Psychological
  Depression/low 
  self-esteem
  Body image disturbance 
Social stigmatization
Integument
  Striae distensae
  Stasis pigmentation of 
  legs
  Lymphedema
  Cellulitis
  Intertrigo, carbuncles
  Acanthosis nigricans
  Acrochordon (skin tags)
  Hidradenitis suppurativa
Respiratory
  Dyspnea
  Obstructive sleep apnea
  Hypoventilation syndrome
  Pickwickian syndrome
  Asthma
Gastrointestinal
  Gastroesophageal reflux 
  disease
  Nonalcoholic fatty liver 
  disease
  Cholelithiasis
  Hernias
  Colon cancer
Genitourinary
  Urinary stress 
  incontinence
  Obesity-related  
  glomerulopathy
  Hypogonadism (male)
  Breast and uterine cancer
  Pregnancy complications
Neurologic
  Stroke
  Idiopathic intracranial 
  hypertension
  Meralgia paresthetica
  Dementia
Assessing the patient’s readiness 
to change
An attempt to initiate lifestyle changes when the patient 
is not ready usually leads to frustration and may hamper 
future weight-loss efforts. Assessment includes patient 
motivation and support, stressful life events, psychiatric 
status, time availability and constraints, and appropriate-
ness of goals and expectations. Readiness can be viewed 
as the balance of two opposing forces: (1) motivation, 
or the patient’s desire to change, and (2) resistance, or 
the patient’s resistance to change.
A helpful method to begin a readiness assessment is to 
“anchor” the patient’s interest and confidence to change on 
a numerical scale. With this technique, the patient is asked 
to rate his or her level of interest and confidence on a scale 
from 0 to 10, with 0 being not so important (or confident) 
and 10 being very important (or confident) to lose weight 
 
CHAPTER 58
Evaluation and Management of Obesity 
637
at this time. This exercise helps establish readiness to change 
and also serves as a basis for further dialogue.
Treatment	
Obesity
The Goal of Therapy  The primary goal of 
treatment is to improve obesity-related comorbid 
conditions and reduce the risk of developing future 
­comorbidities. Information obtained from the history, 
physical ­examination, and diagnostic tests is used to 
determine risk and develop a treatment plan (Fig. 58-1). 
The decision of how aggressively to treat the patient and 
which modalities to use is determined by the patient’s 
risk status, expectations, and available resources. Therapy 
for obesity always begins with lifestyle management and 
may include pharmacotherapy or surgery, depending on 
BMI risk category (Table 58-5). Setting an initial weight-
loss goal of 10% over 6 months is a realistic ­target.
Figure 58-1 
Treatment algorithm. This algorithm applies only to the 
assessment for overweight and obesity and subsequent 
decisions on that assessment. It does not reflect any initial 
overall assessment for other conditions that the physician 
may wish to perform. BMI, body mass index; Ht, height; 
Hx, history; Wt, weight. (From National, Heart, Lung, and 
Blood Institute: Clinical guidelines on the identification, eval-
uation, and treatment of overweight and obesity in adults: 
The evidence report. Washington, DC, U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services, 1998.)
Patient encounter
Hx of ≥ 25 BMI?
BMI
measured in
past 2 years?
• Measure weight,
   height and waist
   circumference
• Calculate BMI
BMI ≥ 25 OR
waist circumference
> 88 cm (F)
>102 cm (M)
Hx BMI ≥ 25?
Brief reinforcement/
educate on weight
management
Advise to maintain
weight, address 
other risk factors
Assess risk
factors
BMI ≥ 30 OR
{[BMI 26 to 29.9
OR waist circumference > 88
cm (F) >102 cm (M)]
AND ≥ 2 risk factors}
Does
patient want to
lose weight?
Progress being 
made/goal 
achieved?
Maintenance counseling:
• Dietary therapy
• Behavior therapy
• Physical therapy
Assess reasons
for failure to lose 
weight  
Examination
Treatment
Periodic weight check
1
2
3
4
No
Yes
5
6
Yes
7
Yes
Yes
No
8
9
12
11
10
No
Yes
13
15
14
No
Yes
16
No
No
ALGORITHM FOR TREATMENT OF OBESITY
Clinician and patient devise goals 
and treatment strategy for weight loss 
and risk factor control
Section XI
Obesity and Eating Disorders
638
Lifestyle Management  Obesity care involves 
attention to three essential elements of lifestyle: dietary 
habits, physical activity, and behavior modification. 
Because obesity is fundamentally a disease of energy 
imbalance, all patients must learn how and when 
energy is consumed (diet), how and when energy is 
expended (physical activity), and how to incorporate 
this information into their daily lives (behavior therapy). 
Lifestyle management has been shown to result in a 
modest (typically 3–5 kg) weight loss compared with no 
treatment or usual care.
Diet Therapy  The primary focus of diet therapy is 
to reduce overall calorie consumption. The National 
Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI) guidelines rec-
ommend initiating treatment with a calorie deficit of 
500–1000 kcal/d compared with the patient’s habitual 
diet. This reduction is consistent with a goal of losing 
approximately 1–2 lb per week. This calorie deficit can 
be accomplished by suggesting substitutions or alter-
natives to the diet. Examples include choosing smaller 
portion sizes, eating more fruits and vegetables, con-
suming more whole-grain cereals, selecting leaner cuts 
of meat and skimmed dairy products, reducing fried 
foods and other added fats and oils, and drinking water 
instead of caloric beverages. It is important that the 
dietary counseling remain patient-centered and that 
the goals be practical, realistic, and achievable.
The macronutrient composition of the diet will vary 
with the patient’s preference and medical condition. The 
2005 U.S. Department of Agriculture Dietary Guidelines 
for Americans (Chap. 53), which focus on health promo-
tion and risk reduction, can be applied to treatment of 
overweight or obese patients. The recommendations 
include maintaining a diet rich in whole grains, fruits, 
vegetables, and dietary fiber; consuming two serv-
ings (8 oz) of fish high in omega-3 fatty acids per week; 
decreasing sodium to <2300 mg/d; consuming 3 cups 
of milk (or equivalent low-fat or fat-free dairy products) 
per day; limiting cholesterol to <300 mg/d; and keeping 
total fat between 20 and 35% of daily calories and satu-
rated fats to <10% of daily calories. Application of these 
Table 58-5
A Guide to Selecting Treatment
BMI Category
Treatment
25–26.9
27–29.9
30–35
35–39.9
≥40
Diet, exercise, behavior therapy
With comorbidities
With comorbidities
+
+
+
Pharmacotherapy
With comorbidities
+
+
+
Surgery
With comorbidities
+
Source: From National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, North American Association for the Study of Obesity: Practical guide: Identification, 
evaluation, and treatment of overweight and obesity in adults. Bethesda, MD, National Institutes of Health pub number 00-4084, Oct. 2000. 
Available online at www.nhlbi.nih.gov/guidelines/obesity/practgde.htm.
guidelines to specific calorie goals can be found on the 
website www.mypyramid.gov. The revised Dietary Refer-
ence Intakes for Macronutrients released by the Insti-
tute of Medicine recommends 45–65% of calories from  
carbohydrates, 20–35% from fat, and 10–35% from 
protein. The guidelines also recommend daily fiber 
intake of 38 g (men) and 25 g (women) for persons over 
50 years of age and 30 g (men) and 21 g (women) for 
those under age 50.
Since portion control is one of the most difficult 
strategies for patients to manage, the use of pre-
prepared products such as meal replacements is a 
simple and convenient suggestion. Examples include 
frozen entrees, canned beverages, and bars. Use of meal 
replacements in the diet has been shown to result in a 
7–8% weight loss.
An ongoing area of investigation is the use of low-
carbohydrate, high-protein diets for weight loss. These 
diets are based on the concept that carbohydrates are 
the primary cause of obesity and lead to insulin 
resistance. Most low-carbohydrate diets (e.g., South 
Beach, Zone, and Sugar Busters!) recommend a carbo-
hydrate level of approximately 40–46% of energy. The 
Atkins diet contains 5–15% carbohydrate, depending 
on the phase of the diet. Low-carbohydrate, high-pro-
tein diets appear to be more effective in lowering BMI; 
improving coronary heart disease risk factors, including 
an increase in HDL cholesterol and a decrease in triglyc-
eride levels; and controlling satiety in the short term 
compared with low-fat diets. However, after 12 months, 
there is no significance difference among diets. Multiple 
studies have shown that sustained adherence to the 
diet rather than diet type is likely to be the best predic-
tor of weight-loss outcome.
Another dietary approach to consider is the concept 
of energy density, which refers to the number of 
calories (energy) a food contains per unit of weight. 
People tend to ingest a constant volume of food 
regardless of caloric or macronutrient content. Add-
ing water or fiber to a food decreases its energy density 
by increasing weight without affecting caloric content. 
 
CHAPTER 58
Evaluation and Management of Obesity 
639
Examples of foods with low-energy density include 
soups, fruits, vegetables, oatmeal, and lean meats. Dry 
foods and high-fat foods such as pretzels, cheese, egg 
yolks, potato chips, and red meat have a high-energy 
density. Diets containing low-energy dense foods have 
been shown to control hunger and result in decreased 
caloric intake and weight loss.
Occasionally, very low calorie diets (VLCDs) are pre-
scribed as a form of aggressive dietary therapy. The 
primary purpose of a VLCD is to promote a rapid and 
significant (13–23 kg) short-term weight loss over a 
3- to 6-month period. These propriety formulas typi-
cally supply ≤800 kcal, 50–80 g protein, and 100% 
of the recommended daily intake for vitamins and  
minerals. According to a review by the National Task 
Force on the Prevention and Treatment of Obesity, indi-
cations for initiating a VLCD include well-motivated 
individuals who are moderately to severely obese (BMI 
>30), have failed at more conservative approaches to 
weight loss, and have a medical condition that would 
be immediately improved with rapid weight loss. These 
conditions include poorly controlled type 2 diabetes, 
hypertriglyceridemia, obstructive sleep apnea, and 
symptomatic peripheral edema. The risk for gallstone 
formation increases exponentially at rates of weight loss 
>1.5 kg/week (3.3 lb/week). Prophylaxis against gall-
stone formation with ursodeoxycholic acid, 600 mg/d, 
is effective in reducing this risk. Because of the need 
for close metabolic monitoring, these diets usually are  
prescribed by physicians specializing in obesity care.
Physical 
Activity 
Therapy  Although exercise 
alone is only moderately effective for weight loss, the 
combination of dietary modification and exercise is 
the most effective behavioral approach for the treat-
ment of obesity. The most important role of exercise 
appears to be in the maintenance of the weight loss. 
The 2008 Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans 
recommends that adults should engage in 150 min  
a week of moderate-intensity or 75 min a week of  
vigorous-intensity aerobic physical activity performed 
in episodes of at least 10 min, preferably spread 
throughout the week. The guidelines can be found at 
www.health.gov/paguidelines. Focusing on simple ways 
to add physical activity into the normal daily routine 
through leisure activities, travel, and domestic work 
should be suggested. Examples include walking, using 
the stairs, doing home and yard work, and engaging in 
sport activities. Asking the patient to wear a pedometer 
to monitor total accumulation of steps as part of the 
activities of daily living is a useful strategy. Step counts 
are highly correlated with activity level. Studies have 
demonstrated that lifestyle activities are as effective as 
structured exercise programs for improving cardiore-
spiratory fitness and weight loss. A high amount of 
physical activity (more than 300 min of moderate-inten-
sity activity a week) is often needed to lose weight and 
sustain weight loss. These exercise recommendations 
are daunting to most patients and need to be imple-
mented gradually. Consultation with an exercise physi-
ologist or personal trainer may be helpful.
Behavioral Therapy  Cognitive behavioral therapy 
is used to help change and reinforce new dietary and 
physical activity behaviors. Strategies include self-
monitoring techniques (e.g., journaling, weighing, and 
measuring food and activity); stress management; 
stimulus control (e.g., using smaller plates, not eating 
in front of the television or in the car); social support; 
problem solving; and cognitive restructuring to help 
patients develop more positive and realistic thoughts 
about themselves. When recommending any behav-
ioral lifestyle change, have the patient identify what, 
when, where, and how the behavioral change will be 
performed. The patient should keep a record of the 
anticipated behavioral change so that progress can be 
reviewed at the next office visit. Because these tech-
niques are time-consuming to implement, they are 
often provided by ancillary office staff such as a nurse 
clinician or registered dietitian.
Pharmacotherapy  Adjuvant pharmacologic 
treatments should be considered for patients with a BMI 
>30 kg/m2 or a BMI >27 kg/m2 for those who also have 
concomitant obesity-related diseases and for whom 
dietary and physical activity therapy has not been suc-
cessful. When an antiobesity medication is prescribed, 
patients should be actively engaged in a lifestyle pro-
gram that provides the strategies and skills needed to 
use the drug effectively since this support increases 
total weight loss.
There are several potential targets of pharmaco-
logic therapy for obesity. The most thoroughly explored 
treatment is suppression of appetite via centrally active 
medications that alter monoamine neurotransmitters. A 
second strategy is to reduce the absorption of selective 
macronutrients from the gastrointestinal (GI) tract, such 
as fat.
Centrally 
Acting 
Anorexiant 
Medications  
Appetite-suppressing drugs, or anorexiants, affect 
satiety—the absence of hunger after eating—and 
hunger—a biologic sensation that initiates eating. By 
increasing satiety and decreasing hunger, these agents 
help patients reduce caloric intake without a sense of 
deprivation. The target site for the actions of anorexi-
ants is the ventromedial and lateral hypothalamic 
regions in the central nervous system (Chap. 57). Their 
biologic effect on appetite regulation is produced by 
augmenting the neurotransmission of three mono-
amines: norepinephrine; serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine 
Section XI
Obesity and Eating Disorders
640
[5-HT]); and, to a lesser degree, dopamine. The classic 
sympathomimetic adrenergic agents (benzphetamine, 
phendimetrazine, diethylpropion, mazindol, and phen-
termine) function by stimulating norepinephrine release 
or by blocking its reuptake. In contrast, sibutramine 
(Meridia) functions as a serotonin and norepinephrine 
reuptake inhibitor. Unlike other previously used anorexi-
ants, sibutramine is not pharmacologically related to 
amphetamine and has no addictive potential.
Sibutramine was the only available anorexiant 
approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA) for long-term use until it was voluntarily with-
drawn from the U.S. market by the manufacturer in 
October 2010, due to an increased risk of nonfatal myo-
cardial infarction and nonfatal stroke among individuals 
with preexisting cardiovascular disease.
Peripherally 
Acting 
Medications  Orlistat 
(Xenical) is a synthetic hydrogenated derivative of a 
naturally occurring lipase inhibitor, lipostatin, produced 
by the mold Streptomyces toxytricini. Orlistat is a potent, 
slowly reversible inhibitor of pancreatic, gastric, and 
carboxylester lipases and phospholipase A2, which are 
required for the hydrolysis of dietary fat into fatty acids 
and monoacylglycerols. The drug acts in the lumen of 
the stomach and small intestine by forming a covalent 
bond with the active site of these lipases. Taken at a 
therapeutic dose of 120 mg tid, orlistat blocks the diges-
tion and absorption of about 30% of dietary fat. After 
discontinuation of the drug, fecal fat usually returns to 
normal concentrations within 48–72 h.
Multiple randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled  
studies have shown that after 1 year, orlistat produces 
a weight loss of about 9–10%, compared with a 4–6% 
weight loss in the placebo-treated groups. Because 
orlistat is minimally (<1%) absorbed from the GI tract, 
it has no systemic side effects. Tolerability to the drug 
is related to the malabsorption of dietary fat and subse-
quent passage of fat in the feces. GI tract adverse effects 
are reported in at least 10% of orlistat-treated patients. 
These effects include flatus with discharge, fecal 
urgency, fatty/oily stool, and increased defecation. These 
side effects generally are experienced early, diminish as 
patients control their dietary fat intake, and infrequently 
cause patients to withdraw from clinical trials. Psyllium 
mucilloid is helpful in controlling the orlistat-induced GI 
side effects when taken concomitantly with the medica-
tion. Serum concentrations of the fat-soluble vitamins 
D and E and β-carotene may be reduced, and vitamin 
supplements are recommended to prevent potential 
deficiencies. Orlistat was approved for over-the-counter 
use in 2007.
The 
Endocannabinoid 
System  Cannabinoid 
receptors and their endogenous ligands have been 
implicated in a variety of physiologic functions, 
including feeding, modulation of pain, emotional 
behavior, and peripheral lipid metabolism. Canna-
bis and its main ingredient, Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol 
(THC), is an exogenous cannabinoid compound. Two 
endocannabinoids have been identified: anandamide 
and 2-arachidonyl glyceride. Two cannabinoid recep-
tors have been identified: CB1 (abundant in the brain) 
and CB2 (present in immune cells). The brain endocan-
nabinoid system is thought to control food intake by 
reinforcing motivation to find and consume foods with 
high incentive value and to regulate actions of other 
mediators of appetite. The first selective cannabinoid 
CB1 receptor antagonist, rimonabant, was discovered in 
1994. The medication antagonizes the orexigenic effect 
of THC and suppresses appetite. Several large prospec-
tive, randomized controlled trials have demonstrated 
the effectiveness of rimonabant as a weight-loss agent 
with concomitant improvements in waist circumfer-
ence and cardiovascular risk factors. However, increased 
risk of neurologic and psychiatric side effects— 
seizures, depression, anxiety, insomnia, aggressiveness, 
and suicidal thoughts among patients randomized to 
rimonabant—resulted in a ruling against approval of 
the drug by the FDA in June 2007. Although the drug 
was available in 56 countries around the world in 2008, 
approval was officially withdrawn by the European Med-
icines Agency (EMEA) in January 2009, stating that the 
benefits of rimonabant no longer outweighed its risks. 
Development of CB1 antagonists that do not enter the 
brain and selectively target the peripheral endocannabi-
noid system is needed.
Antiobesity 
Drugs 
in 
Development  An 
emerging theme in pharmacotherapy for obesity is to 
target several points in the regulatory pathways that 
control body weight. Several combination drug thera-
pies have completed phase III trials and have been 
submitted to the FDA for approval. Bupropion and 
naltrexone (Contrave), a dopamine and norepineph-
rine reuptake inhibitor and an opioid receptor antagonist, 
respectively, are combined to dampen the motivation/  
reinforcement that food brings (dopamine effect) 
and the pleasure/palatability of eating (opioid effect). 
Another formulation of bupropion with zonisamide 
(Empatic) combines bupropion with an anticonvul-
sant that has serotonergic and dopaminergic activity. 
Lastly, a formulation of phentermine and topiramate 
(Qnexa) combines a catecholamine releaser and an 
anticonvulsant, respectively, that have independently 
been shown to result in weight loss. The mechanism 
responsible for topiramate’s weight loss is uncertain 
but is thought to be mediated through its modulation 
of γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptors, inhibition of 
carbonic anhydrase, and antagonism of glutamate to 
reduce food intake. In October 2010, the FDA rejected 
 
CHAPTER 58
Evaluation and Management of Obesity 
641
Qnexa’s initial ­application as a new drug, citing clini-
cal concerns regarding the potential teratogenic risks 
of topiramate in women of childbearing age. An addi-
tional investigational drug, lorcaserin, a 5-HT2C recep-
tor agonist, has completed phase III trials as a single 
agent. The FDA rejected lorcaserin’s initial application 
as a new drug, citing clinical concerns that the weight 
loss efficacy in overweight and obese individuals with-
out type 2 diabetes is marginal and nonclinical con-
cerns related to mammary adenocarcinomas in female 
rats.
Surgery  Bariatric surgery can be considered for 
patients with severe obesity (BMI ≥40 kg/m2) or those 
with moderate obesity (BMI ≥35 kg/m2) associated with 
a serious medical condition. Surgical weight loss func-
tions by reducing caloric intake and, depending on the 
procedure, macronutrient absorption.
Weight-loss surgeries fall into one of two categories: 
restrictive and restrictive-malabsorptive (Fig. 58-2). 
Restrictive surgeries limit the amount of food the stom-
ach can hold and slow the rate of gastric emptying. The 
vertical banded gastroplasty (VBG) is the prototype 
of this category but is currently performed on a very 
limited basis due to lack of effectiveness in long-term  
trials. Laparoscopic adjustable silicone gastric banding  
(LASGB) has replaced the VBG as the most commonly 
performed restrictive operation. The first banding 
device, the LAP-BAND, was approved for use in the 
United States in 2001, and the second, the REALIZE 
band, in 2007. In contrast to previous devices, the diam-
eters of these bands are adjustable by way of their con-
nection to a reservoir that is implanted under the skin. 
Injection or removal of saline into the reservoir tightens 
or loosens the band’s internal diameter, thus changing 
the size of the gastric opening.
The three restrictive-malabsorptive bypass proce-
dures combine the elements of gastric restriction and 
selective malabsorption. These procedures include 
Roux-en-Y gastric bypass (RYGB), biliopancreatic 
diversion (BPD), and biliopancreatic diversion 
with duodenal switch (BPDDS) (Fig. 58-2). RYGB is 
the most commonly performed and accepted bypass  
procedure. It may be performed with an open incision 
or laparoscopically.
Although no recent randomized controlled trials com-
pare weight loss after surgical and nonsurgical inter-
ventions, data from meta-analyses and large databases,  
primarily obtained from observational studies, suggest 
that bariatric surgery is the most effective weight-loss 
therapy for those with clinically severe obesity. These 
procedures generally produce a 30–35% average total 
body weight loss that is maintained in nearly 60% of 
patients at 5 years. In general, mean weight loss is greater 
after the combined restrictive-malabsorptive procedures 
Figure 58-2 
Bariatric surgical procedures. Examples of operative 
interventions used for surgical manipulation of the gastroin-
testinal tract. A. Laparoscopic gastric band (LAGB). B. The 
Roux-en-Y gastric bypass. C. Biliopancreatic diversion with 
duodenal switch. D. Biliopancreatic diversion. (From ML 
Kendrick, GF Dakin: Mayo Clin Proc 815:518, 2006; with 
permission.)
x
x
y
y
z
z
100 cm
150 cm
A
B
C
D
than after the restrictive procedures. An abundance of 
data supports the positive impact of bariatric surgery 
on obesity-related morbid conditions, including diabe-
tes mellitus, hypertension, obstructive sleep apnea, dys-
lipidemia, and nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. The rapid 
improvement seen in diabetes after restrictive-malab-
sorptive procedures is thought to be due to surgery-spe-
cific, weight-independent effects on glucose homeostasis 
brought about by alteration of gut hormones.
Surgical mortality rate from bariatric surgery is gen-
erally <1% but varies with the procedure, patient’s age 
and comorbid conditions, and experience of the surgi-
cal team. The most common surgical complications 
include stomal stenosis or marginal ulcers (occurring 
in 5–15% of patients) that present as prolonged nau-
sea and vomiting after eating or inability to advance 
the diet to solid foods. These complications typically 
Section XI
Obesity and Eating Disorders
642
are treated by endoscopic balloon dilatation and 
acid suppression therapy, respectively. For patients 
who undergo LASGB, there are no intestinal absorp-
tive abnormalities other than mechanical reduction 
in gastric size and outflow. Therefore, selective defi-
ciencies occur uncommonly unless eating habits 
become unbalanced. In contrast, the restrictive- 
malabsorptive procedures increase risk for micronutri-
ent deficiencies of vitamin B12, iron, folate, calcium, and 
vitamin D. Patients with restrictive-malabsorptive pro-
cedures require lifelong supplementation with these  
micronutrients.
 B. Timothy Walsh I  Evelyn Attia 
643
 Anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa are character-
ized by severe disturbances of eating behavior. The 
salient feature of  anorexia nervosa (AN) is a voluntary 
restriction of food intake relative to caloric require-
ments leading to an inappropriately low body weight. 
 Bulimia nervosa (BN) is characterized by recurrent epi-
sodes of binge eating followed by abnormal compensa-
tory behaviors, such as self-induced vomiting. AN and 
BN are distinct clinical syndromes but share common 
features. Both disorders occur primarily among previ-
ously healthy young women who become overly con-
cerned with body shape and weight. Many patients 
with BN have past histories of AN, and many patients 
with AN engage in binge eating and purging behavior. 
In the current diagnostic system, the critical distinc-
tion between AN and BN depends on body weight: 
patients with AN are, by defi nition, signifi cantly under-
weight, whereas patients with BN have body weights in 
the normal range or above.  Binge eating disorder (BED) 
is a more recently described syndrome characterized 
by repeated episodes of binge eating, similar to those 
of BN, in the absence of inappropriate compensatory 
behavior. 
 aNoreXia Nervosa 
 ePidemiology 
 Among women, the lifetime prevalence of the full syn-
drome of AN is approximately 1%. AN is much less 
common in males. AN is more prevalent in  cultures 
where food is plentiful and being thin is associated 
with attractiveness. Individuals who pursue interests 
that place a premium on thinness, such as ballet and 
modeling, are at greater risk. The incidence of AN has 
increased in recent decades. 
 etiology 
 The etiology of AN is unknown but appears to involve 
a combination of psychological, biologic, and cultural 
risk factors. Some factors, such as sexual or physical 
abuse and a family history of mood disturbance, are best 
viewed as nonspecifi c risk factors that increase vulner-
ability to a range of psychiatric disorders, including AN. 
 Patients who develop AN are inclined to be more 
obsessional and perfectionist than their peers. The dis-
order often begins as a diet not distinguishable at the 
outset from those undertaken by many adolescents 
and young women. As weight loss progresses, the fear 
of gaining weight grows; dieting becomes stricter; and 
psychological, behavioral, and medical aberrations 
increase. Eating disorders, including AN, may develop 
among individuals with type 1 diabetes mellitus and 
are associated with poorer glycemic control and an 
increased frequency of complications . 
 Numerous physiologic disturbances, including abnor-
malities in a variety of neurotransmitter systems, have 
been described in AN (discussed later). It is diffi cult to 
distinguish neurochemical, metabolic, and hormonal 
changes that may have a role in the initiation or perpetua-
tion of the syndrome from those that are secondary to the 
 disorder. The resolution of most of these abnormalities 
with weight restoration argues against an etiologic role. 
 Genetic factors contribute to the risk of develop-
ment of AN, as its incidence is greater in families with 
one affected member and the concordance in monozy-
gotic twins is greater than in dizygotic twins. However, 
 specifi c genes or risk factor loci have not been identifi ed. 
 CliniCal features 
 AN typically begins in mid to late adolescence, some-
times in association with a stressful life event such as 
leaving home for school  ( Table 59-1 ) . The disorder 
 EATING DISORDERS 
 CHaPter 59 
Section XI
Obesity and Eating Disorders
644
Table 59-1 
Common Characteristics of Anorexia Nervosa, Bulimia Nervosa, and Binge Eating Disorder
Anorexia Nervosaa
Bulimia Nervosa
Binge Eating Disorderb
Clinical Characteristics
Onset
Mid-adolescence
Late adolescence/early adulthood
Late adolescence/early 
adulthood
Female:male
10:1
10:1
2:1
Lifetime prevalence
1% of women
1–3% of women
4% of men and women
Weight
Markedly decreased
Usually normal
Usually obese
Menstruation
Absent
Usually normal
Usually normal
Binge eating
25–50%
Required for diagnosis
Required for diagnosis
Mortality
∼5% per decade
Low
Low
Physical and Laboratory Findingsa
Skin/extremities
Lanugo
Callus/abrasion on dorsum of hand
Acrocyanosis
Edema
Cardiovascular
Bradycardia
Hypotension
Gastrointestinal
Salivary gland enlargement
Salivary gland enlargement
Slow gastric emptying
Dental erosion
Constipation
Elevated liver enzymes
Hematopoietic
Normochromic, normocytic 
anemia
Leukopenia
Fluid/Electrolyte
Increased BUN, creatinine
Hypokalemia
Hypokalemia
Hypochloremia
Hypophosphatemia,
Alkalosis
Hypomagnesemia
Endocrine
Hypoglycemia
Low estrogen or testosterone
Low LH and FSH
Low-normal thyroxine
Normal TSH
Increased cortisol
Bone
Osteopenia
aPatients with anorexia nervosa who frequently induce purging may also exhibit the physical and laboratory findings associated with bulimia 
­nervosa.
bObese patients with binge eating disorder are at risk for complications of obesity.
Abbreviations: BUN, blood urea nitrogen; FSH, follicle-stimulating hormone; LH, luteinizing hormone; TSH, thyroid-stimulating hormone.
occasionally develops in early puberty, before men-
arche, but seldom begins after age 40. Despite being 
underweight, patients with AN are irrationally afraid of 
gaining weight. They also exhibit a distortion of body 
image; despite being emaciated, patients with AN may 
believe that their body as a whole, or some part of their 
body, is too fat. Further weight loss is viewed by the 
patient as a fulfilling accomplishment, whereas weight 
gain is seen as a personal failure. Patients with AN 
rarely complain of hunger or fatigue and often exercise 
extensively. Despite the denial of hunger, one-quarter 
to one-half of patients with AN engage in eating binges. 
Patients tend to become socially withdrawn and increas-
ingly committed to work or study, dieting, and exercise. 
As weight loss progresses, thoughts of food dominate 
mental life and idiosyncratic rules develop around eating. 
Patients with AN may obsessively collect cookbooks and 
recipes and be drawn to food-related occupations.
 
CHAPTER 59
Eating Disorders
645
Physical features
Patients with AN typically have few physical complaints 
but may note cold intolerance. Gastrointestinal motil-
ity is diminished, leading to reduced gastric empty-
ing and constipation. Some women who develop AN 
after menarche report that their menses ceased before 
significant weight loss occurred. Weight and height 
should be measured to allow calculation of body mass 
index (BMI; kg/m2). Vital signs may reveal bradycardia, 
hypotension, and mild hypothermia. Soft, downy hair 
growth (lanugo) sometimes occurs, as does ­alopecia. 
Salivary gland enlargement, which is associated with 
starvation as well as with binge eating and vomiting, 
may make the face appear surprisingly full in contrast 
to the marked general wasting. Acrocyanosis of the 
digits is common, and peripheral edema can be seen 
in the absence of hypoalbuminemia, particularly when 
the  patient begins to regain weight. Consumption of 
large amounts of vegetables containing vitamin A can 
result in a yellow tint to the skin (hypercarotenemia), 
which is especially notable on the palms.
Laboratory abnormalities
Mild normochromic, normocytic anemia is frequent, as 
is mild to moderate leukopenia, with a disproportion-
ate reduction of polymorphonuclear leukocytes. Dehy-
dration may result in slightly increased levels of blood 
urea nitrogen and creatinine. Serum transaminase lev-
els may increase, especially during the early phases of 
refeeding. The level of serum proteins is usually normal. 
Blood sugar is often low and serum cholesterol may 
be moderately elevated. Hypokalemia, often accompa-
nied by alkalosis, suggests self-induced vomiting or use 
of diuretics. Hyponatremia is common and may result 
from excess fluid intake and disturbances in the secre-
tion of antidiuretic hormone. Hypophosphatemia and 
hypomagnesemia may be present in severe AN, espe-
cially as part of a refeeding syndrome.
Endocrine abnormalities
The regulation of virtually every endocrine system 
is altered in AN, but the most striking changes occur 
in the reproductive system. Amenorrhea is hypotha-
lamic in origin and reflects diminished production of 
­gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH). The result-
ing gonadotropin deficiency causes low plasma estrogen 
in women and reduced testosterone in men. The hypo-
thalamic GnRH pulse generator is exquisitely sensi-
tive, particularly in women, to body weight, stress, and 
exercise, each of which may contribute to hypothalamic 
amenorrhea in AN.
Serum leptin levels are markedly reduced in AN as a 
result of undernutrition and decreased body-fat mass. 
The reduction in leptin is the primary factor responsible 
for the disturbances of the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal 
axis, and an important mediator of the other neuroendo-
crine abnormalities characteristic of AN (Chap. 57).
Serum cortisol and 24-h urine-free cortisol levels 
are generally elevated but without characteristic clinical 
signs of cortisol excess. Thyroid function tests resemble 
the pattern seen in euthyroid sick syndrome. Thyroxine 
(T4) and free T4 levels are usually in the low-
normal range, triiodothyronine (T3) levels are reduced, 
and reverse T3 (rT3) is elevated. The level of thyroid-
stimulating hormone (TSH) is normal or partially sup-
pressed. Growth hormone is increased, but insulin-like 
growth factor I (IGF-I), which is produced mainly by 
the liver, is reduced, as in other conditions of starvation. 
Diminished bone density is routinely observed in AN 
and reflects the effects of multiple nutritional deficien-
cies, reduced gonadal steroids, increased cortisol, and 
reduced IGF-I. The degree of bone-density reduction 
is proportional to the length of the illness, and patients 
are at risk for the development of symptomatic fractures. 
The occurrence of AN during adolescence may lead to 
the premature cessation of linear bone growth and a 
failure to achieve expected adult height.
Cardiac abnormalities
Cardiac output is reduced, and congestive heart ­failure 
occurs rarely during rapid refeeding. The electrocar-
diogram usually shows sinus bradycardia, reduced QRS 
voltage, and nonspecific ST-T-wave abnormalities. 
Some patients develop a prolonged QTc interval, which 
may predispose to serious arrhythmias, particularly 
when electrolyte abnormalities are present.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of AN is based on the presence of char-
acteristic behavioral, psychological, and physical attri-
butes (Table 59-2). Widely accepted diagnostic criteria 
are provided by the American Psychiatric Association’s 
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-
IV). These criteria include maintenance of a less than 
minimally normal body weight for age and height. 
Weights less than 85% of that expected, roughly equiva-
lent to a BMI of 18.5 kg/m2, are commonly considered 
to meet this criterion, but a patient weighing somewhat 
more who meets all other diagnostic criteria would still 
merit the diagnosis of AN. The current diagnostic crite-
ria require that women with AN not have spontaneous 
menses, patients who have other characteristics of AN but 
report menstrual activity probably merit the diagnosis.
The diagnosis of AN can usually be made confi-
dently in a patient with a history of weight loss accom-
plished by restrictive dieting and excessive exercise 
Section XI
Obesity and Eating Disorders
646
accompanied by a marked reluctance to gain weight. 
Patients with AN often deny that they have a serious 
problem and may be brought to medical attention by 
concerned family or friends. Especially in atypical pre-
sentations, other causes of significant weight loss in 
previously healthy young people should be considered, 
including inflammatory bowel disease, gastric outlet 
obstruction, diabetes mellitus, CNS tumors, or neo-
plasm (Chap. 10).
Prognosis
The course and outcome of AN are highly variable. 
One-quarter to one-half of patients eventually recover 
fully, with few psychological or physical sequelae. 
However, many patients have persistent difficulties 
with weight maintenance, depression, and eating dis-
turbances, including BN. The development of obesity 
following AN is rare. The long-term mortality of AN 
is among the highest associated with any psychiatric 
­disorder. Approximately 5% of patients die per decade 
of follow-up, primarily due to the physical effects of 
chronic starvation or by suicide.
Virtually all of the physiologic abnormalities associ-
ated with AN are observed in other forms of starvation 
and markedly improve or disappear with weight gain. 
A worrisome exception is the reduction in bone mass, 
which may not recover fully, particularly if AN occurs 
during adolescence when peak bone mass is normally 
achieved.
Treatment	
Anorexia Nervosa
Because of the profound physiologic and psychologi-
cal effects of starvation, there is a broad consensus that 
weight restoration to at least 90% of predicted weight is 
the primary goal in the treatment of AN. Unfortunately, 
because most patients resist this goal, the manage-
ment of AN is often accompanied by frustration for the 
patient, the family, and the physician. Patients typically 
Table 59-2
Diagnostic Features of Anorexia Nervosa
Refusal to maintain body weight at or above a minimally 
normal weight for age and height. (This includes a ­failure 
to achieve weight gain expected during a period of 
growth leading to an abnormally low body weight.)
Intense fear of weight gain or becoming fat.
Distortion of body image (e.g., feeling fat despite an 
­objectively low weight or minimizing the seriousness of 
low weight).
Amenorrhea. (This criterion is met if menstrual ­periods 
occur only following hormone—e.g., estrogen—­
administration.)
exaggerate their food intake and minimize their symp-
toms. Some patients resort to subterfuge to make their 
weights appear higher, for example, by water-loading 
before they are weighed. In attempting to engage 
the patient in treatment, it may be useful to elicit the 
patient’s physical concerns (e.g., about osteoporosis, 
weakness, or fertility), and provide education about the 
importance of normalizing nutritional status in order 
to address those concerns. The physician should reas-
sure the patient that weight gain will not be permitted 
to get out of control but simultaneously emphasize 
that weight restoration is medically and psychologically 
imperative.
The intensity of the initial treatment, including the 
need for hospitalization, is determined by the patient’s 
current weight, the rapidity of recent weight loss, and 
the severity of medical and psychological complications 
(Fig. 59-1). Hospitalization should be strongly consid-
ered for patients weighing <75% of that expected age 
and height, even if the results of routine blood stud-
ies are within normal limits. Acute medical problems, 
such as severe electrolyte imbalances, should be iden-
tified and addressed. Nutritional restoration can almost 
Meets criteria for anorexia nervosa or bulimia nervosa?
Weight <75% of
  expected body weight
  for age and height?*
Medically unstable?
  (e.g., heart rate <40 bpm,
  potassium <2.5 mmol/L)
Other psychiatric problems
  requiring intensive treatment?
  (e.g., serious suicidal
  ideation, substance abuse)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Outpatient Treatment
Inpatient
Treatment
or
Partial
Hospitalization
No
If unsuccessful
TREATMENT ALGORITHM FOR EATING DISORDERS
Figure 79-1
An algorithm for basic treatment decisions regarding 
patients with anorexia nervosa or bulimia nervosa. Based 
on the American Psychiatric Association practice guidelines 
for the treatment of patients with eating disorders. *Although 
outpatient management may be considered for patients with 
anorexia nervosa weighing more than 75% of expected, 
there should be a low threshold for using more intensive 
interventions if the weight loss has been rapid or if current 
weight is <80% of expected.
 
CHAPTER 59
Eating Disorders
647
always be successfully accomplished by oral feeding, 
and parenteral methods are rarely required. For severely 
underweight patients, sufficient calories (approxi-
mately 1200–1800 kcal/d) should be provided initially 
in divided meals as food or liquid supplements to main-
tain weight and permit physiological stabilization. Calo-
ries can then be gradually increased to achieve a weight 
gain of 1–2 kg (2–4 lb) per week, typically requiring an 
intake of 3000–4000 kcal/d. Meals must be supervised, 
ideally by personnel who are firm regarding the neces-
sity of food consumption, empathic regarding the chal-
lenges entailed, and reassuring about the patient’s 
eventual recovery. Patients have great psychological 
difficulty complying with the need for increased caloric 
consumption, and the assistance of psychiatrists or 
­psychologists experienced in the treatment of AN is 
usually necessary.
Less severely affected patients may be treated in a 
partial hospitalization program where medical and psy-
chiatric supervision is available and several meals can 
be monitored each day. Outpatient treatment may suf-
fice for mildly ill patients. Weight must be monitored 
at frequent intervals, and explicit goals agreed on for 
weight gain, with the understanding that more inten-
sive treatment will be required if the level of care ini-
tially employed is not successful. For younger patients, 
the active involvement of the family in treatment is cru-
cial regardless of treatment setting. Outpatient inter-
ventions that help parents refeed their child have been 
be quite successful at achieving weight restoration.
Psychiatric treatment focuses primarily on two issues. 
First, patients require much emotional support dur-
ing the period of weight gain. They often intellectually 
agree with the need to gain weight, but strenuously 
resist increases in caloric intake, and often surrepti-
tiously discard food that is provided. Second, patients 
must learn to base their self-esteem not on the achieve-
ment of an inappropriately low weight, but on the 
development of satisfying personal relationships and 
the attainment of reasonable academic and occupa-
tional goals. While this is often possible, some patients 
with AN develop other serious emotional and behav-
ioral symptoms such as depression, self-mutilation, 
obsessive-compulsive behavior, and suicidal ideation. 
These symptoms may require additional therapeutic 
interventions, in the form of psychotherapy, medication, 
or hospitalization.
Medical complications occasionally occur during 
refeeding. Especially in the early stages of treatment, 
severely malnourished patients may develop a ­“refeeding 
syndrome” characterized by hypophosphatemia, hypo-
magnesemia, and cardiovascular instability. Acute gas-
tric dilatation has been described when refeeding is 
rapid. As in other forms of malnutrition, fluid retention 
and peripheral edema may occur, but they generally do 
not require specific treatment in the absence of cardiac, 
renal, or hepatic dysfunction. Transient modest eleva-
tions in serum liver enzyme levels occasionally occur. 
Multivitamins should be given, and an adequate intake 
of vitamin D (400 IU/d) and calcium (1500 mg/d) should 
be provided.
No psychotropic medications are of established 
value in the treatment of AN, although there is recent 
­preliminary evidence that the atypical antipsychotic 
medication olanzapine may assist some patients by 
increasing the rate of weight gain and decreasing 
obsessive thinking. Medications that may prolong the 
QTc interval should be avoided. The alterations of cor-
tisol and thyroid ­hormone metabolism do not require 
specific treatment and correct with weight gain. Estro-
gen treatment appears to offer no benefit to bone den-
sity in ­underweight patients, and the small benefit of 
bisphosphonate treatment appears to be outweighed 
by the potential risks of such agents in young women.
Bulimia Nervosa
Epidemiology
In women, the full syndrome of BN occurs with a life-
time prevalence of 1–3%. Variants of the disorder, such 
as occasional binge eating or purging, are much more 
common and occur in 5–10% of young women. The 
frequency of BN among men is less than one-tenth of 
that among women. The prevalence of BN increased 
dramatically in the early 1970s and 1980s but may have 
leveled off or declined somewhat in recent years.
Etiology
As with AN, the etiology of BN is likely to be multi-
factorial. Patients who develop BN describe a higher-
than-expected prevalence of childhood and parental 
obesity, suggesting that a predisposition toward obesity 
may increase vulnerability to this eating disorder. The 
marked increase in the number of cases of BN during 
the past 30 years and the rarity of BN in underdevel-
oped countries imply that cultural factors are important.
Clinical Features
The typical patient presenting for treatment of BN is 
a woman of normal weight in her mid-twenties who 
reports binge eating and purging 5–10 times a week 
for 5–10 years (Table 59-3). The disorder usually 
begins in late adolescence or early adulthood during 
or following a diet, often in association with depressed 
mood. The self-imposed caloric restriction leads to 
increased hunger and to overeating. In an attempt to 
Section XI
Obesity and Eating Disorders
648
avoid weight gain, the patient induces vomiting, takes 
laxatives or diuretics, or engages in some other form of 
compensatory behavior. During binges, patients with 
this disorder tend to consume large amounts of sweet 
foods with a high fat content, such as dessert items. The 
most frequent compensatory behaviors are self-induced 
vomiting and laxative abuse, but a wide variety of tech-
niques have been described, including the omission 
of insulin injections by individuals with type 1 diabetes 
mellitus. Initially, patients may experience a sense of 
satisfaction that appealing food can be eaten with-
out weight gain. However, as the disorder progresses, 
patients perceive diminished control overeating. Binges 
increase in size and frequency and are provoked by a 
variety of stimuli, such as transient depression, anxiety, 
or a sense that too much food has been consumed in 
a normal meal. Between binges, patients restrict caloric 
intake, which increases hunger and sets the stage for the 
next binge. Typically, patients with BN are ashamed 
of their behavior and endeavor to keep their disorder 
hidden from family and friends. Like patients with AN, 
those with BN place an unusual emphasis on weight 
and shape as a basis for their self-esteem. Many patients 
with BN have mild symptoms of depression. Some 
patients exhibit serious mood and behavioral distur-
bances, such as suicide attempts, sexual promiscuity, 
and drug and alcohol abuse. Although vomiting may 
be triggered initially by manual stimulation of the gag 
reflex, most patients with BN develop the ability to 
induce vomiting at will. Rarely, patients resort to the 
regular use of syrup of ipecac. Laxatives and diuret-
ics are frequently taken in impressive quantities, such as 
30 or 60 laxative pills on a single occasion. The result-
ing fluid loss produces dehydration and a feeling of 
emptiness but has little impact on caloric balance.
The physical abnormalities associated with BN 
primarily result from the purging behavior. Pain-
less bilateral salivary gland hypertrophy (sialadenosis) 
may be noted. A scar or callus on the dorsum of the 
hand may develop due to repeated trauma from the 
teeth among patients who manually stimulate the gag 
Table 59-3
Diagnostic Features of Bulimia Nervosa
Recurrent episodes of binge eating, which is ­characterized 
by the consumption of a large amount of food in a short 
period of time and a feeling that the eating is out of 
­control.
Recurrent inappropriate behavior to compensate for the 
binge eating, such as self-induced vomiting.
The occurrence of both the binge eating and the 
­inappropriate compensatory behavior at least twice 
weekly, on average, for 3 months.
Overconcern with body shape and weight.
Note: If the diagnostic criteria for anorexia nervosa are simultane-
ously met, only the diagnosis of anorexia nervosa is given.
reflex. Recurrent vomiting and the exposure of the lin-
gual surfaces of the teeth to stomach acid lead to loss 
of dental enamel and eventually to chipping and ero-
sion of the front teeth. Laboratory abnormalities are sur-
prisingly infrequent, but hypokalemia, hypochloremia, 
and hyponatremia are observed occasionally. Repeated 
vomiting may lead to alkalosis, whereas repeated laxa-
tive abuse may produce a mild metabolic acidosis. Serum 
amylase may be slightly elevated due to an increase in 
the salivary isoenzyme.
Serious physical complications resulting from BN 
are rare. Oligomenorrhea and amenorrhea are more 
frequent than among women without eating disorders. 
Arrhythmias occasionally occur secondary to electro-
lyte disturbances. Tearing of the esophagus and rup-
ture of the stomach have been reported and constitute 
life-threatening events. Some patients who chronically 
abuse laxatives or diuretics develop transient peripheral 
edema when this behavior ceases, presumably due to 
high levels of aldosterone secondary to persistent fluid 
and electrolyte depletion.
Diagnosis
The critical diagnostic features of BN are repeated epi-
sodes of binge eating followed by inappropriate behav-
iors aimed at avoiding weight gain (Table 59-3). The 
diagnosis of BN requires a candid history from the 
patient detailing frequent, large eating binges followed 
by the purposeful use of inappropriate mechanisms to 
avoid weight gain. Most patients with BN who pres-
ent for treatment are distressed by their inability to con-
trol their eating behavior and are able to provide such 
details if queried in a supportive and nonjudgmental 
fashion.
Prognosis
The prognosis of BN is much more favorable than that 
of AN. Mortality is low, and full recovery occurs in 
approximately 50% of patients within 10 years. Approxi-
mately 25% of patients have persistent symptoms of BN 
over many years. Few patients progress from BN to AN.
Treatment	
Bulimia Nervosa
BN can usually be treated on an outpatient basis  
(Fig. 59-1). Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) is a 
short-term (4–6 months) psychological treatment that 
focuses on the intense concern with shape and weight, 
the persistent dieting, and the binge eating and purg-
ing that characterize this disorder. Patients are directed 
to monitor the circumstances, thoughts, and emotions 
associated with binge/purge episodes, to eat regularly, 
 
CHAPTER 59
Eating Disorders
649
and to challenge their assumptions linking weight to 
self-esteem. CBT produces symptomatic remission in 
25–50% of patients.
Numerous double-blind, placebo-controlled trials 
have documented that antidepressant medications are 
useful in the treatment of BN but are probably some-
what less effective than CBT. Although efficacy has 
been established for virtually all chemical classes of 
­antidepressants, only the selective serotonin reuptake 
inhibitor fluoxetine (Prozac) has been approved for use 
in BN by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Antide-
pressant medications are helpful even for patients with 
BN who are not depressed, and the dose of fluoxetine 
recommended for BN (60 mg/d) is higher than that typi-
cally used to treat depression. These observations sug-
gest that different mechanisms may underlie the utility 
of these medications in BN and in depression.
A subset of patients does not respond to CBT, antide-
pressant medication, or their combination. More inten-
sive forms of treatment, including hospitalization, may 
be required.
Binge Eating Disorder
Binge eating disorder (BED) is characterized by fre-
quent episodes of eating unusually large amounts of 
food accompanied by feeling loss of control. In contrast 
to those with BN, patients with BED do not frequently 
engage in appropriate behavior to compensate for binge 
eating. In addition, BED is commonly associated with 
obesity (Table 59-1). BED occurs more frequently than 
AN and BN in both clinical and community popula-
tion samples, and males constitute a greater fraction of 
affected individuals. Compared with obese individu-
als without BED, those with BED have higher rates 
of anxiety, depression, and health care use. A range of 
psychological treatments, such as CBT and interpersonal 
therapy (IPT) and medications, including antidepres-
sants and weight-loss agents, appear helpful in reducing 
binge eating. Surprisingly, cessation of binge eating is 
not routinely followed by loss of weight.
Global Considerations
Eating disorders are more common in cultures 
where food is available and thinness is ­idealized. 
Nevertheless, eating disorders have been reported 
across the world, including in many parts of Asia and 
Africa. Cultural variation may contribute to differing 
presentations of eating disorder symptoms. For example, 
in some cultural groups, the rationale for food refusal of 
low weight individuals who exhibit many symptoms of 
AN may not include the DSM IV criterion, “intense fear 
of ­gaining weight or becoming fat.”
 Robert H. Eckel 
650
 The metabolic syndrome (syndrome X, insulin resis-
tance syndrome) consists of a constellation of metabolic 
abnormalities that confer increased risk of cardiovas-
cular disease (CVD) and diabetes mellitus (DM). The 
criteria for the metabolic syndrome have evolved since 
the original defi nition by the World Health Organiza-
tion in 1998, refl ecting growing clinical evidence and 
analysis by a variety of consensus conferences and profes-
sional organizations. The major features of the metabolic 
syndrome include central obesity, hypertriglyceridemia, 
low high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol, hyper-
glycemia, and hypertension  ( Table 60-1 ) . 
 EPiDEMiology 
The prevalence of metabolic syndrome varies 
around the world, in part refl ecting the age and 
ethnicity of the populations studied and the diag-
nostic criteria applied. In general, the prevalence of 
metabolic syndrome increases with age. The highest 
recorded prevalence worldwide is in Native Americans, 
with nearly 60% of women ages 45–49 and 45% of men 
ages 45–49 meeting National Cholesterol Education 
Program and Adult Treatment Panel III (NCEP:ATPIII) 
criteria. In the United States, metabolic syndrome is less 
 THE METABOLIC SYNDROME 
 CHAPTER 60 
TABLe 60-1
 NcEP:atPiii 2001 aND iDF cRitERia FoR tHE MEtaBolic syNDRoME 
NcEP:atPiii 2001
iDF cRitERia FoR cENtRal aDiPosity a 
 three or more of the following: 
 Central obesity: Waist circumference 
>102 cm (M), >88 cm (F) 
 Hypertriglyceridemia: Triglycerides
 ≥150 mg/dL or specifi c medication 
 Low HDL cholesterol: <40 mg/dL and 
<50 mg/dL, respectively, or specifi c 
medication 
 Hypertension: Blood pressure ≥130 mm 
systolic or ≥85 mm diastolic or specifi c 
medication 
 Fasting plasma glucose ≥100 mg/dL or 
specifi c medication or previously 
diagnosed type 2 diabetes 
 
 
 a In this analysis, the following thresholds for waist circumference were used: white men, ≥94 cm; African-American men, ≥94 cm; Mexican-
American men, ≥90 cm; white women, ≥80 cm; African-American women, ≥80 cm; Mexican-American women, ≥80 cm. For participants whose 
designation was “other race—including multiracial,” thresholds that were once based on Europid cut points (≥94 cm for men and ≥80 cm for 
women) and once based on South Asian cut points (≥90 cm for men and ≥80 cm for women) were used. For participants who were considered 
“other Hispanic,” the IDF thresholds for ethnic South and Central Americans were used.
 Abbreviations: HDL, high-density lipoprotein; IDF, International Diabetes Foundation; NCEP:ATPIII, National Cholesterol Education Program, 
Adult Treatment Panel III.
Waist ciRcuMFERENcE
MEN
WoMEN
EtHNicity
≥94 cm
≥80 cm
Europid, Sub-Saharan African, Eastern and 
Middle Eastern
≥90 cm
≥80 cm
South Asian, Chinese, and ethnic South and 
Central American
≥85 cm
≥90 cm
Japanese
two or more of the following:
 Fasting triglycerides >150 mg/dL or specifi c medication 
 HDL cholesterol <40 mg/dL and <50 mg/dL for men and women, respectively, or 
specifi c medication 
 Blood pressure >130 mm systolic or >85 mm diastolic or previous diagnosis or 
specifi c medication 
Fasting plasma glucose ≥100 mg/dL or previously diagnosed type 2 diabetes
 
CHAPTER 60
The Metabolic Syndrome
651
common in African-American men and more common 
in Mexican-American women. Based on data from the 
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 
(NHANES) 1999–2000, the age-adjusted prevalence of 
the metabolic syndrome in United States adults who did 
not have diabetes is 28% for men and 30% for women. 
In France, a cohort 30 to 60 years old has shown a 
<10% prevalence for each sex, although 17.5% are 
affected in the age range 60–64. Greater industrialization 
worldwide is associated with rising rates of obesity, 
which is anticipated to increase prevalence of the meta-
bolic syndrome dramatically, especially as the population 
ages. Moreover, the rising prevalence and severity of 
obesity in children is initiating features of the metabolic 
syndrome in a younger population.
The frequency distribution of the five components of 
the syndrome for the U.S. population (NHANES III) is 
summarized in Fig. 60-1. Increases in waist circumfer-
ence predominate in women, whereas fasting triglycerides 
>150 mg/dL and hypertension are more likely in men.
Risk Factors
Overweight/obesity
Although the first description of the metabolic syndrome 
occurred in the early twentieth century, the worldwide 
overweight/obesity epidemic has been the driving force 
for more recent recognition of the syndrome. Cen-
tral adiposity is a key feature of the syndrome, reflect-
ing the fact that the syndrome’s prevalence is driven by 
the strong relationship between waist circumference and 
increasing adiposity. However, despite the importance 
Figure 60-1
Prevalence of the metabolic syndrome components, 
from NHANES III. NHANES, National Health and Nutrition 
­Examination Survey; TG, triglyceride; HDL, high-density lipo-
protein; BP, blood pressure. The prevalence of elevated glucose 
includes individuals with known diabetes mellitus. ­(Created 
from data in ES Ford et al: Diabetes Care 27:2444, 2004.)
Men
Women
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Waist circ
TG150
HDL chol
BP
Glucose
Population prevalence (%)
of obesity, patients who are normal weight may also be 
insulin-resistant and have the syndrome.
Sedentary lifestyle
Physical inactivity is a predictor of CVD events and 
related mortality rate. Many components of the meta-
bolic syndrome are associated with a sedentary ­lifestyle, 
including increased adipose tissue (predominantly central), 
reduced HDL cholesterol, and a trend toward increased tri-
glycerides, high blood pressure, and increased glucose in 
the genetically susceptible. Compared with individuals 
who watched television or ­videos or used the computer 
<1 h daily, those who carried out those behaviors for 
>4 h daily had a twofold increased risk of the metabolic 
syndrome.
Aging
The metabolic syndrome affects 44% of the U.S. popula-
tion older than age 50. A greater percentage of women 
over age 50 have the syndrome than men. The age 
dependency of the syndrome’s prevalence is seen in most 
populations around the world.
Diabetes mellitus
DM is included in both the NCEP and International 
Diabetes Foundation (IDF) definitions of the meta-
bolic syndrome. It is estimated that the great majority 
(∼75%) of patients with type 2 diabetes or impaired 
glucose tolerance (IGT) have the metabolic syndrome. 
The presence of the metabolic syndrome in these popu-
lations relates to a higher prevalence of CVD compared 
with patients with type 2 diabetes or IGT without the 
syndrome.
Coronary heart disease
The approximate prevalence of the metabolic syn-
drome in patients with coronary heart disease (CHD) 
is 50%, with a prevalence of 37% in patients with pre-
mature coronary artery disease (age ≤45), particularly 
in women. With appropriate cardiac rehabilitation and 
changes in lifestyle (e.g., nutrition, physical activity, 
weight reduction, and, in some cases, pharmacologic 
agents), the prevalence of the syndrome can be reduced.
Lipodystrophy
Lipodystrophic disorders in general are associated with the 
metabolic syndrome. Both genetic (e.g., ­Berardinelli-Seip 
congenital lipodystrophy, Dunnigan familial partial lipo-
dystrophy) and acquired (e.g., HIV-related lipodystrophy 
in patients treated with highly active antiretroviral ther-
apy) forms of lipodystrophy may give rise to severe insulin 
Section XI
Obesity and Eating Disorders
652
resistance and many of the components of the metabolic 
syndrome.
Etiology
Insulin resistance
The most accepted and unifying hypothesis to describe 
the pathophysiology of the metabolic syndrome is 
insulin resistance, which is caused by an incompletely 
understood defect in insulin action. The onset of insulin 
resistance is heralded by postprandial hyperinsulinemia, 
followed by fasting hyperinsulinemia and, ultimately, 
hyperglycemia.
An early major contributor to the development of 
insulin resistance is an overabundance of circulating 
fatty acids (Fig. 60-2). Plasma albumin-bound free fatty 
acids (FFAs) are derived predominantly from adipose 
tissue triglyceride stores released by lipolytic enzymes 
lipase. Fatty acids are also derived from the lipolysis of 
triglyceride-rich lipoproteins in tissues by lipoprotein 
lipase (LPL). Insulin mediates both antilipolysis and the 
stimulation of LPL in adipose tissue. Of note, the inhi-
bition of lipolysis in adipose tissue is the most sensitive 
pathway of insulin action. Thus, when insulin resistance 
develops, increased lipolysis produces more fatty acids, 
which further decrease the antilipolytic effect of insu-
lin. Excessive fatty acids enhance substrate availability 
and create insulin resistance by modifying downstream 
signaling. Fatty acids impair insulin-mediated glucose 
uptake and accumulate as triglycerides in both skeletal 
and cardiac muscle, whereas increased glucose produc-
tion and triglyceride accumulation are seen in liver.
The oxidative stress hypothesis provides a unifying 
theory for aging and the predisposition to the metabolic 
Figure 60-2
Pathophysiology of the metabolic syndrome. Free fatty 
acids (FFAs) are released in abundance from an expanded 
adipose tissue mass. In the liver, FFAs result in an increased 
production of glucose and triglycerides and secretion of very 
low density lipoproteins (VLDLs). Associated lipid/lipoprotein 
abnormalities include reductions in high-density lipoprotein 
(HDL) cholesterol and an increased density of low-density 
lipoproteins (LDLs). FFAs also reduce insulin sensitivity in 
muscle by inhibiting insulin-mediated glucose uptake. Asso-
ciated defects include a reduction in glucose partitioning to 
glycogen and increased lipid accumulation in triglyceride 
(TG). Increases in circulating glucose, and to some extent 
FFA, increase pancreatic insulin secretion, resulting in hyper-
insulinemia. Hyperinsulinemia may result in enhanced sodium 
reabsorption and increased sympathetic nervous system 
(SNS) activity and contribute to the hypertension, as might 
increased levels of circulating FFAs. The proinflammatory state 
is superimposed and contributory to the insulin resistance 
produced by excessive FFAs. The enhanced secretion of inter-
leukin 6 (IL-6) and tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α) produced 
by adipocytes and monocyte-derived macrophages results in 
more insulin resistance and lipolysis of adipose tissue triglyc-
eride stores to circulating FFAs. IL-6 and other cytokines also 
enhance hepatic glucose production, VLDL production by the 
liver, and insulin resistance in muscle. Cytokines and FFAs 
also increase the hepatic production of fibrinogen and adipo-
cyte production of plasminogen activator inhibitor 1 (PAI-1), 
resulting in a prothrombotic state. Higher levels of circulating 
cytokines also stimulate the hepatic production of C-reactive 
protein (CRP). Reduced production of the anti-inflammatory 
and insulin-sensitizing cytokine adiponectin is also associated 
with the metabolic syndrome. (Reprinted from RH Eckel et al: 
Lancet 365:1415, 2005, with permission from Elsevier.)
SNS
IL-6
Insulin
Insulin
FFA
Hypertension
TG
VLDL
FFA
Fibrinogen
PAI-1
Prothrombotic
state
Adiponectin
Glycogen
Triglyceride
(intramuscular droplet)
FFA
Glucose
TNF-α
IL-6
Small dense LDL
HDL cholesterol
−
−
−
−
−
−
C-III
B-100 and
C-II
CRP
CO2
 
CHAPTER 60
The Metabolic Syndrome
653
syndrome. In studies carried out in insulin-resistant sub-
jects with obesity or type 2 diabetes, the offspring of 
patients with type 2 diabetes, and the elderly, a defect 
has been identified in mitochondrial oxidative phos-
phorylation, leading to the accumulation of triglycerides 
and related lipid molecules in muscle. The accumu-
lation of lipids in muscle is associated with insulin 
resistance.
Increased waist circumference
Waist circumference is an important component of the 
most recent and frequently applied diagnostic criteria 
for the metabolic syndrome. However, measuring waist 
circumference does not reliably distinguish increases in 
subcutaneous adipose tissue vs. visceral fat; this distinc-
tion requires CT or MRI. With increases in visceral 
adipose tissue, adipose tissue-derived FFAs are directed 
to the liver. In contrast, increases in abdominal subcu-
taneous fat release lipolysis products into the systemic 
circulation and avoid more direct effects on hepatic 
metabolism. Relative increases in visceral versus sub-
cutaneous adipose tissue with increasing waist circum-
ference in Asians and Asian Indians may explain the 
greater prevalence of the syndrome in those populations 
compared with African-American men in whom subcu-
taneous fat predominates. It is also possible that visceral 
fat is a marker for, but not the source of, excess post-
prandial FFAs in obesity.
Dyslipidemia
In general, FFA flux to the liver is associated with 
increased production of apoB-containing, triglyceride-
rich very low density lipoproteins (VLDLs). The effect 
of insulin on this process is complex, but hypertriglyc-
eridemia is an excellent marker of the insulin-resistant 
condition.
The other major lipoprotein disturbance in the meta-
bolic syndrome is a reduction in HDL cholesterol. This 
reduction is a consequence of changes in HDL compo-
sition and metabolism. In the presence of hypertriglyc-
eridemia, a decrease in the cholesterol content of HDL 
is a consequence of reduced cholesteryl ester content 
of the lipoprotein core in combination with cholesteryl 
ester transfer protein–mediated alterations in triglycer-
ide, making the particle small and dense. This change in 
lipoprotein composition also results in increased clear-
ance of HDL from the circulation. The relationships of 
these changes in HDL to insulin resistance are proba-
bly indirect, occurring in concert with the changes in 
triglyceride-rich lipoprotein metabolism.
In addition to HDL, low-density lipoproteins (LDLs) 
are modified in composition. With fasting serum 
triglycerides >2.0 mM (∼180 mg/dL), there is almost 
always a predominance of small dense LDLs. Small 
dense LDLs are thought to be more atherogenic. They 
may be toxic to the endothelium, and they are able to 
transit through the endothelial basement membrane and 
adhere to glycosaminoglycans. They also have increased 
susceptibility to oxidation and are selectively bound to 
scavenger receptors on monocyte-derived macrophages. 
Subjects with increased small dense LDL particles and 
hypertriglyceridemia also have increased cholesterol 
content of both VLDL1 and VLDL2 subfractions. This 
relatively cholesterol-rich VLDL particle may contrib-
ute to the atherogenic risk in patients with metabolic 
syndrome.
Glucose intolerance
The defects in insulin action lead to impaired suppres-
sion of glucose production by the liver and kidney 
and reduced glucose uptake and metabolism in insulin-
sensitive tissues, i.e., muscle and adipose tissue. The 
relationship between impaired fasting glucose (IFG) 
or impaired glucose tolerance (IGT) and insulin resis-
tance is well supported by human, nonhuman primate, 
and rodent studies. To compensate for defects in insu-
lin action, insulin secretion and/or clearance must be 
modified to sustain euglycemia. Ultimately, this com-
pensatory mechanism fails, usually because of defects in 
insulin secretion, resulting in progress from IFG and/or 
IGT to DM.
Hypertension
The relationship between insulin resistance and hyper-
tension is well established. Paradoxically, under normal 
physiologic conditions, insulin is a vasodilator with sec-
ondary effects on sodium reabsorption in the kidney. 
However, in the setting of insulin resistance, the vaso-
dilatory effect of insulin is lost but the renal effect on 
sodium reabsorption is preserved. Sodium reabsorption 
is increased in whites with the metabolic syndrome 
but not in Africans or Asians. Insulin also increases the 
activity of the sympathetic nervous system, an effect 
that also may be preserved in the setting of the insulin 
resistance. Finally, insulin resistance is characterized by 
pathway-specific impairment in phosphatidylinositol-
3-kinase signaling. In the endothelium, this may cause 
an imbalance between the production of nitric oxide 
and the secretion of endothelin 1, leading to decreased 
blood flow. Although these mechanisms are provoca-
tive, when insulin action is assessed by levels of fast-
ing insulin or by the Homeostasis Model Assessment 
(HOMA), insulin resistance contributes only modestly 
to the increased prevalence of hypertension in the met-
abolic syndrome.
Section XI
Obesity and Eating Disorders
654
Proinflammatory cytokines
The increases in proinflammatory cytokines, including 
interleukin (IL)-1, IL-6, IL-18, resistin, tumor necrosis 
factor (TNF) α, and C-reactive protein (CRP), reflect 
overproduction by the expanded adipose tissue mass 
(Fig. 60-2). Adipose tissue-derived macrophages may be 
the primary source of proinflammatory cytokines locally 
and in the systemic circulation. It remains unclear, 
however, how much of the insulin resistance is caused 
by the paracrine vs. endocrine effects of these cytokines.
Adiponectin
Adiponectin is an anti-inflammatory cytokine produced 
exclusively by adipocytes. Adiponectin enhances insu-
lin sensitivity and inhibits many steps in the inflammatory 
process. In the liver, adiponectin inhibits the expression of 
gluconeogenic enzymes and the rate of glucose production. 
In muscle, adiponectin increases glucose transport and 
enhances fatty acid oxidation, partially due to activation of 
adenosine monophosphate (AMP) kinase. Adiponectin is 
reduced in the metabolic syndrome. The relative contri-
bution of adiponectin deficiency versus overabundance of 
the proinflammatory cytokines is unclear.
Clinical features
Symptoms and signs
The metabolic syndrome is typically not associated with 
symptoms. On physical examination, waist circumfer-
ence may be expanded and blood pressure elevated. 
The presence of one or either of these signs should alert 
the clinician to search for other biochemical abnor-
malities that may be associated with the metabolic 
syndrome. Less frequently, lipoatrophy or acanthosis 
nigricans is found on examination. Because these physi-
cal findings typically are associated with severe insulin 
resistance, other components of the metabolic syndrome 
should be expected.
Associated diseases
Cardiovascular disease
The relative risk for new-onset CVD in patients with the 
metabolic syndrome, in the absence of diabetes, aver-
ages between 1.5-fold and threefold. However, in an 
8-year follow-up of middle-aged men and women in 
the Framingham Offspring Study (FOS), the population- 
attributable risk for patients with the metabolic syn-
drome to develop CVD was 34% in men and only 16% 
in women. In the same study, both the metabolic syn-
drome and diabetes predicted ischemic stroke, with 
greater risk for patients with the metabolic syndrome 
than for those with diabetes alone (19% vs. 7%), partic-
ularly in women (27% vs. 5%). Patients with metabolic 
syndrome are also at increased risk for peripheral vascu-
lar disease.
Type 2 diabetes
Overall, the risk for type 2 diabetes in patients with the 
metabolic syndrome is increased three- to fivefold. In 
the FOS’s 8-year follow-up of middle-aged men and 
women, the population-attributable risk for developing 
type 2 diabetes was 62% in men and 47% in women.
Other associated conditions
In addition to the features specifically associated with 
metabolic syndrome, insulin resistance is accompanied 
by other metabolic alterations. Those alterations include 
increases in apoB and apoC-III, uric acid, prothrombotic 
factors (fibrinogen, plasminogen activator inhibitor 1), 
serum viscosity, asymmetric dimethylarginine, homo-
cysteine, white blood cell count, proinflammatory 
cytokines, CRP, microalbuminuria, nonalcoholic fatty 
liver disease (NAFLD) and/or nonalcoholic steatohep-
atitis (NASH), polycystic ovarian disease (PCOS), and 
obstructive sleep apnea (OSA).
Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease
(See also Chap. 44) Fatty liver is relatively common. 
However, in NASH, both triglyceride accumulation 
and inflammation coexist. NASH is now present in 
2–3% of the population in the United States and other 
Western countries. As the prevalence of overweight/
obesity and the metabolic syndrome increases, NASH 
may become one of the more common causes of end-
stage liver disease and hepatocellular carcinoma.
Hyperuricemia
Hyperuricemia reflects defects in insulin action on the 
renal tubular reabsorption of uric acid, whereas the 
increase in asymmetric dimethylarginine, an endogenous 
inhibitor of nitric oxide synthase, relates to endothe-
lial dysfunction. Microalbuminuria also may be caused 
by altered endothelial pathophysiology in the insulin-
resistant state.
Polycystic ovary syndrome
PCOS is highly associated with the metabolic syndrome, 
with a prevalence between 40 and 50%. Women with 
PCOS are 2–4 times more likely to have the metabolic 
syndrome than are women without PCOS.
Obstructive sleep apnea
OSA is commonly associated with obesity, hyperten-
sion, increased circulating cytokines, IGT, and insulin 
resistance. With these associations, it is not surpris-
ing that the metabolic syndrome is frequently present. 
Moreover, when biomarkers of insulin resistance are 
compared between patients with OSA and weight-
matched controls, insulin resistance is more severe in 
 
CHAPTER 60
The Metabolic Syndrome
655
patients with OSA. Continuous positive airway pressure 
(CPAP) treatment in OSA patients improves insulin 
sensitivity.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of the metabolic syndrome relies on sat-
isfying the criteria listed in Table 60-1 by using tools 
at the bedside and in the laboratory. The medical 
history should include evaluation of symptoms for OSA 
in all patients and PCOS in premenopausal women. 
Family history will help determine risk for CVD and 
DM. Blood pressure and waist circumference measure-
ments provide information necessary for the diagnosis.
Laboratory tests
Fasting lipids and glucose are needed to determine if 
the metabolic syndrome is present. The measurement of 
additional biomarkers associated with insulin resistance 
can be individualized. Such tests might include apoB, 
high-sensitivity CRP, fibrinogen, uric acid, urinary 
microalbumin, and liver function tests. A sleep study 
should be performed if symptoms of OSA are present. 
If PCOS is suspected on the basis of clinical features 
and anovulation, testosterone, luteinizing hormone, and 
follicle-stimulating hormone should be measured.
Treatment	
The Metabolic Syndrome
Lifestyle  (See also Chap. 58) Obesity is the 
driving force behind the metabolic syndrome. Thus, 
weight reduction is the primary approach to the disor-
der. With weight reduction, the improvement in insulin 
sensitivity is often accompanied by favorable modifica-
tions in many components of the metabolic syndrome. 
In general, recommendations for weight loss include 
a combination of caloric restriction, increased physical 
activity, and behavior modification. For weight reduc-
tion, caloric restriction is the most important compo-
nent, whereas increases in physical activity are impor-
tant for maintenance of weight loss. Some, but not 
all, evidence suggests that the addition of exercise to 
caloric restriction may promote relatively greater weight 
loss from the visceral depot. The tendency for weight 
regain after successful weight reduction underscores 
the need for long-lasting behavioral changes.
Diet  Before prescribing a weight-loss diet, it is impor-
tant to emphasize that it takes a long time for a patient 
to achieve an expanded fat mass; thus, the correction 
need not occur quickly. On the basis of ∼3500 kcal = 
1 lb of fat, ∼500 kcal restriction daily equates to weight 
reduction of 1 lb per week. Diets restricted in carbo-
hydrate typically provide a rapid initial weight loss.  
However, after 1 year, the amount of weight reduction is 
usually unchanged. Thus, adherence to the diet is more 
important than which diet is chosen. Moreover, there is 
concern about diets enriched in saturated fat, particu-
larly for patients at risk for CVD. Therefore, a high-quality 
diet—i.e., enriched in fruits, vegetables, whole grains, 
lean poultry, and fish—should be encouraged to pro-
vide the maximum overall health benefit.
Physical Activity  Before a physical activity recommenda-
tion is provided to patients with the metabolic syndrome, 
it is important to ensure that the increased activity does 
not incur risk. Some high-risk patients should undergo 
formal cardiovascular evaluation before initiating an 
exercise program. For an inactive participant, gradual 
increases in physical activity should be encouraged to 
enhance adherence and avoid injury. Although increases 
in physical activity can lead to modest weight reduction, 
60–90 min of daily activity is required to achieve this goal. 
Even if an overweight or obese adult is unable to achieve 
this level of activity, he or she will still derive a significant 
health benefit from at least 30 min of moderate-intensity 
daily activity. The caloric value of 30 min of a variety of 
activities can be found at http://www.americanheart.org/
presenter.jhtml?identifier=3040364. Of note, a variety of 
routine activities, such as gardening, walking, and house-
cleaning, require moderate caloric expenditure. Thus, 
physical activity need not be defined solely in terms of 
formal exercise such as jogging, swimming, or tennis.
Obesity  (See also Chap. 58) In some patients with the 
metabolic syndrome, treatment options need to extend 
beyond lifestyle intervention. Weight-loss drugs come 
in two major classes: appetite suppressants and absorp-
tion inhibitors. Appetite suppressants approved by the 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration include phentermine 
(for short-term use only, 3 months) and sibutramine. 
Orlistat inhibits fat absorption by ∼30% and is moder-
ately effective compared to placebo (∼5% weight loss). 
Orlistat has been shown to reduce the incidence of 
type 2 diabetes, an effect that was especially evident in 
patients with baseline IGT.
Bariatric surgery is an option for patients with the 
metabolic syndrome who have a body mass index 
(BMI) >40 kg/m2 or >35 kg/m2 with comorbidities. 
Gastric bypass results in a dramatic weight reduction 
and improvement in the features of metabolic syn-
drome. A survival benefit has also been realized.
LDL 
Cholesterol  The rationale for the 
NCEP:ATPIII panel to develop ­criteria for the metabolic 
syndrome was to go beyond LDL cholesterol in identify-
ing and reducing risk for CVD. The working assumption 
by the panel was that LDL cholesterol goals had already 
been achieved, and increasing evidence supports a lin-
ear reduction in CVD events with progressive lowering 
Section XI
Obesity and Eating Disorders
656
of LDL cholesterol. For patients with the metabolic syn-
drome and diabetes, LDL cholesterol should be reduced 
to <100 mg/dL and perhaps further in patients with a 
history of CVD events. For patients with the metabolic 
syndrome without diabetes, the Framingham risk score 
may predict a 10-year CVD risk that exceeds 20%. In 
these subjects, LDL cholesterol should also be reduced 
to <100 mg/dL. With a 10-year risk of <20%, however, 
the targeted LDL cholesterol goal is <130 mg/dL.
Diets restricted in saturated fats (<7% of calories), 
trans-fats (as few as possible), and cholesterol (<200 mg 
daily) should be applied aggressively. If LDL cholesterol 
remains above goal, pharmacologic intervention is 
needed. Statins (HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors), which 
produce a 20–60% lowering of LDL cholesterol, are 
generally the first choice for medication intervention. 
Of note, for each doubling of the statin dose, there is 
only ∼6% additional lowering of LDL cholesterol. Side 
effects are rare and include an increase in hepatic trans-
aminases and/or myopathy. The cholesterol absorption 
inhibitor ezetimibe is well tolerated and should be the 
second choice. Ezetimibe typically reduces LDL choles-
terol by 15–20%. The bile acid sequestrants cholestyr-
amine and colestipol are more effective than ezetimibe 
but must be used with caution in patients with the  
metabolic syndrome because they can increase tri-
glycerides. In general, bile sequestrants should not be 
administered when fasting triglycerides are >200 mg/dL. 
Side effects include gastrointestinal symptoms (palat-
ability, bloating, belching, constipation, anal irritation). 
Nicotinic acid has modest LDL cholesterol–lowering 
capabilities (<20%). Fibrates are best employed to lower 
LDL cholesterol when both LDL cholesterol and triglyc-
erides are elevated. Fenofibrate may be more effective 
than gemfibrozil in this group.
Triglycerides  The NCEP:ATPIII has focused on 
non-HDL cholesterol rather than triglycerides. However, 
a fasting triglyceride value of <150 mg/dL is recom-
mended. In general, the response of fasting triglycerides 
relates to the amount of weight reduction achieved. A 
weight reduction of >10% is necessary to lower fasting 
triglycerides.
A fibrate (gemfibrozil or fenofibrate) is the drug 
of choice to lower fasting triglycerides and typically 
achieve a 35–50% reduction. Concomitant administra-
tion with drugs metabolized by the 3A4 cytochrome 
P450 system (including some statins) greatly increases 
the risk of myopathy. In these cases, fenofibrate may be 
preferable to gemfibrozil. In the Veterans Affairs HDL 
Intervention Trial (VA-HIT), gemfibrozil was adminis-
tered to men with known CHD and levels of HDL choles-
terol <40 mg/dL. A coronary disease event and mortal-
ity rate benefit was experienced predominantly in men 
with hyperinsulinemia and/or diabetes, many of whom 
retrospectively were identified as having the metabolic 
syndrome. Of note, the amount of triglyceride lowering 
in the VA-HIT did not predict benefit. Although levels of 
LDL cholesterol did not change, a decrease in LDL par-
ticle number correlated with benefit. Although several 
additional clinical trials have been performed, they have 
not shown clear evidence that fibrates reduce CVD risk 
as a consequence of triglyceride lowering.
Other drugs that lower triglycerides include statins, 
nicotinic acid, and high doses of omega-3 fatty acids. 
In choosing a statin for this purpose, the dose must be 
high for the “less potent” statins (lovastatin, pravastatin, 
fluvastatin) or intermediate for the “more potent” statins 
(simvastatin, atorvastatin, rosuvastatin). The effect of 
nicotinic acid on fasting triglycerides is dose-related and 
less than that of fibrates (∼20–40%). In patients with the 
metabolic syndrome and diabetes, nicotinic acid may 
increase fasting glucose. Omega-3 fatty acid prepara-
tions that include high doses of docosahexaenoic acid 
and eicosapentaenoic acid (∼3.0–4.5 g daily) lower fast-
ing triglycerides by ∼40%. No interactions with fibrates 
or statins occur, and the main side effect is eructation 
with a fishy taste. This can be partially blocked by inges-
tion of the nutraceutical after freezing. Clinical trials 
of nicotinic acid or high-dose omega-3 fatty acids in 
patients with the metabolic syndrome have not been 
reported.
HDL Cholesterol  Beyond weight reduction, 
there are very few lipid-modifying compounds that 
increase HDL cholesterol. Statins, fibrates, and bile acid 
sequestrants have modest effects (5–10%), and there is 
no effect on HDL cholesterol with ezetimibe or omega-3 
fatty acids. Nicotinic acid is the only currently available 
drug with predictable HDL cholesterol-raising proper-
ties. The response is dose-related and can increase HDL 
cholesterol ∼30% above baseline. There is limited evi-
dence at present that raising HDL has a benefit on CVD 
events independent of lowering LDL cholesterol, partic-
ularly in patients with the metabolic syndrome.
Blood 
Pressure  The 
direct 
relationship 
between blood pressure and all-cause mortality rate has 
been well established, including patients with hyper-
tension (>140/90) versus prehypertension (>120/80 
but <140/90) versus individuals with normal blood 
pressure (<120/80). In patients with the metabolic syn-
drome without diabetes, the best choice for the first 
antihypertensive should usually be an angiotensin-
converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor or an angioten-
sin II receptor blocker, as these two classes of drugs 
appear to reduce the incidence of new-onset type 2 
diabetes. In all patients with hypertension, a sodium-
restricted diet enriched in fruits and vegetables and  
low-fat dairy products should be advocated. Home 
 
CHAPTER 60
The Metabolic Syndrome
657
monitoring of blood pressure may assist in maintaining 
good blood pressure control.
Impaired 
Fasting 
Glucose  In patients 
with the metabolic syndrome and type 2 diabetes, 
aggressive glycemic control may favorably mod-
ify fasting triglycerides and/or HDL cholesterol. In 
patients with IFG without a diagnosis of diabetes, a 
lifestyle intervention that includes weight reduction, 
dietary fat restriction, and increased physical activ-
ity has been shown to reduce the incidence of type 2  
diabetes. Metformin has also been shown to reduce the 
incidence of diabetes, although the effect was less than 
that seen with lifestyle intervention.
Insulin 
Resistance  Several drug classes 
(biguanides, thiazolidinediones [TZDs]) increase insu-
lin sensitivity. Because insulin resistance is the primary 
pathophysiologic mechanism for the metabolic syn-
drome, representative drugs in these classes reduce its 
prevalence. Both metformin and TZDs enhance insulin 
action in the liver and suppress endogenous glucose 
production. TZDs, but not metformin, also improve 
insulin-mediated glucose uptake in muscle and adi-
pose tissue. Benefits of both drugs have also been seen 
in patients with NAFLD and PCOS, and the drugs have 
been shown to reduce markers of inflammation and 
small dense LDL.
This page intentionally left blank 
 Alexander Kratz  I   Michael A. Pesce  I   Robert C. Basner  
I   Andrew J. Einstein 
659
 LABORATORY VALUES OF CLINICAL 
IMPORTANCE 
 appenDiX  
Table 1 
 Hematology and Coagulation 
analyte
SpeCimen
Si unitS
Conventional unitS
Activated clotting time
WB
70–180 s
70–180 s
Activated protein C resistance (factor V Leiden)
P
Not applicable
Ratio >2.1
ADAMTS13 activity
P
≥0.67
≥67%
ADAMTS13 inhibitor activity
P
Not applicable
≤0.4 U
ADAMTS13 antibody
P
Not applicable
≤18 U
Alpha 2 antiplasmin
P
0.87–1.55
87–155%
Antiphospholipid antibody panel
 PTT-LA (lupus anticoagulant screen)
P
Negative
Negative
 Platelet neutralization procedure
P
Negative
Negative
 Dilute viper venom screen
P
Negative
Negative
 Anticardiolipin antibody
S
  IgG
0–15 arbitrary units
0–15 GPL
  IgM
0–15 arbitrary units
0–15 MPL
 This Appendix contains tables of reference values for 
laboratory tests, special analytes, and special function 
tests. A variety of factors can inﬂ uence reference values. 
Such variables include the population studied, the dura-
tion and means of specimen transport, laboratory meth-
ods and instrumentation, and even the type of container 
used for the collection of the specimen. The reference 
or “normal” ranges given in this appendix may there-
fore not be appropriate for all laboratories, and these 
values should only be used as general guidelines. When-
ever possible, reference values provided by the labora-
tory performing the testing should be utilized in the 
interpretation of laboratory data. Values supplied in 
this Appendix reﬂ ect typical reference ranges in adults. 
Pediatric reference ranges may vary signiﬁ cantly from 
adult values. 
 In preparing the Appendix, the authors have taken 
into account the fact that the system of international 
units (SI, système international d’unités) is used in most 
countries and in some medical journals. However, 
clinical laboratories may continue to report values in 
“traditional” or conventional units. Therefore, both 
systems are provided in the Appendix. The dual system 
is also used in the text except for (1) those instances in 
which the numbers remain the same but only the ter-
minology is changed (mmol/L for meq/L or IU/L for 
mIU/mL), when only the SI units are given; and (2) 
most pressure measurements (e.g., blood and cerebrospi-
nal ﬂ uid pressures), when the traditional units (mmHg, 
mmH 2 O) are used. In all other instances in the text the 
SI unit is followed by the traditional unit in parentheses.
 RefeRence Values foR 
laBoRatoRy tests 
(continued)
APPENDIX
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
660
Table 1 
Hematology and Coagulation (CONtinued)
Analyte
Specimen
SI Units
Conventional Units
Antithrombin III
P
  Antigenic
220–390 mg/L
22–39 mg/dL
  Functional
0.7–1.30 U/L
70–130%
Anti-Xa assay (heparin assay)
P
  Unfractionated heparin
0.3–0.7 kIU/L
0.3–0.7 IU/mL
  Low-molecular-weight heparin
0.5–1.0 kIU/L
0.5–1.0 IU/mL
  Danaparoid (Orgaran)
0.5–0.8 kIU/L
0.5–0.8 IU/mL
Autohemolysis test
WB
0.004–0.045
0.4–4.50%
Autohemolysis test with glucose
WB
0.003–0.007
0.3–0.7%
Bleeding time (adult)
<7.1 min
<7.1 min
Bone marrow: See Table 7
Clot retraction
WB
0.50–1.00/2 h
50–100%/2 h
Cryofibrinogen
P
Negative
Negative
D-dimer
P
220–740 ng/mL FEU
220–740 ng/mL FEU
Differential blood count
WB
Relative counts:
  Neutrophils
0.40–0.70
40–70%
  Bands
0.0–0.05
0–5%
  Lymphocytes
0.20–0.50
20–50%
  Monocytes
0.04–0.08
4–8%
  Eosinophils
0.0–0.6
0–6%
  Basophils
0.0–0.02
0–2%
Absolute counts:
  Neutrophils
1.42–6.34 × 109/L
1420–6340/mm3
  Bands
0–0.45 × 109/L
0–450/mm3
  Lymphocytes
0.71–4.53 × 109/L
710–4530/mm3
  Monocytes
0.14–0.72 × 109/L
140–720/mm3
  Eosinophils
0–0.54 × 109/L
0–540/mm3
  Basophils
0–0.18 × 109/L
0–180/mm3
Erythrocyte count
WB
  Adult males
4.30–5.60 × 1012/L
4.30–5.60 × 106/mm3
  Adult females
4.00–5.20 × 1012/L
4.00–5.20 × 106/mm3
Erythrocyte life span
WB
  Normal survival
120 days
120 days
  Chromium labeled, half-life (t1/2)
25–35 days
25–35 days
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate
WB
  Females
0–20 mm/h
0–20 mm/h
  Males
0–15 mm/h
0–15 mm/h
Euglobulin lysis time
P
7200–14400 s
120–240 min
Factor II, prothrombin
P
0.50–1.50
50–150%
Factor V
P
0.50–1.50
50–150%
Factor VII
P
0.50–1.50
50–150%
Factor VIII
P
0.50–1.50
50–150%
Factor IX
P
0.50–1.50
50–150%
Factor X
P
0.50–1.50
50–150%
Factor XI
P
0.50–1.50
50–150%
Factor XII
P
0.50–1.50
50–150 %
Factor XIII screen
P
Not applicable
Present
Factor inhibitor assay
P
<0.5 Bethesda Units
<0.5 Bethesda Units
Fibrin(ogen) degradation products
P
0–1 mg/L
0–1 μg/mL
Fibrinogen
P
2.33–4.96 g/L
233–496 mg/dL
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (erythrocyte)
WB
<2400 s
<40 min
Ham’s test (acid serum)
WB
Negative
Negative
(continued)
 
APPENDIX 
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
661
Table 1 
Hematology and Coagulation (CONtinued)
Analyte
Specimen
SI Units
Conventional Units
Hematocrit
WB
  Adult males
0.388–0.464
38.8–46.4
  Adult females
0.354–0.444
35.4–44.4
Hemoglobin
  Plasma
P
6–50 mg/L
0.6–5.0 mg/dL
  Whole blood:
WB
    Adult males
133–162 g/L
13.3–16.2 g/dL
    Adult females
120–158 g/L
12.0–15.8 g/dL
Hemoglobin electrophoresis
WB
  Hemoglobin A
0.95–0.98
95–98%
  Hemoglobin A2
0.015–0.031
1.5–3.1%
  Hemoglobin F
0–0.02
0–2.0%
  Hemoglobins other than A, A2, or F
Absent
Absent
Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia antibody
P
Negative
Negative
Immature platelet fraction (IPF)
WB
0.011–0.061
1.1–6.1%
Joint fluid crystal
JF
Not applicable
No crystals seen
Joint fluid mucin
JF
Not applicable
Only type I mucin present
Leukocytes
  Alkaline phosphatase (LAP)
WB
0.2–1.6 μkat/L
13–100 μ/L
  Count (WBC)
WB
3.54–9.06 × 109/L
3.54–9.06 × 103/mm3
Mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH)
WB
26.7–31.9 pg/cell
26.7–31.9 pg/cell
Mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration (MCHC)
WB
323–359 g/L
32.3–35.9 g/dL
Mean corpuscular hemoglobin of reticulocytes (CH)
WB
24–36 pg
24–36 pg
Mean corpuscular volume (MCV)
WB
79–93.3 fL
79–93.3 μm3
Mean platelet volume (MPV)
WB
9.00–12.95 fL
9.00–12.95
Osmotic fragility of erythrocytes
WB
  Direct
0.0035–0.0045
0.35–0.45%
  Indirect
0.0030–0.0065
0.30–0.65%
Partial thromboplastin time, activated
P
26.3–39.4 s
26.3–39.4 s
Plasminogen
P
  Antigen
84–140 mg/L
8.4–14.0 mg/dL
  Functional
0.70–1.30
70–130%
Plasminogen activator inhibitor 1
P
4–43 μg/L
4–43 ng/mL
Platelet aggregation
PRP
Not applicable
>65% aggregation in 
response to adenosine 
diphosphate, epinephrine, 
collagen, ristocetin, and ara-
chidonic acid
Platelet count
WB
165–415 × 109/L
165–415 × 103/mm3
Platelet, mean volume
WB
6.4–11 fL
6.4–11.0 μm3
Prekallikrein assay
P
0.50–1.5
50–150%
Prekallikrein screen
P
No deficiency detected
Protein C
P
  Total antigen
0.70–1.40
70–140%
  Functional
0.70–1.30
70–130%
Protein S
P
  Total antigen
0.70–1.40
70–140%
  Functional
0.65–1.40
65–140%
  Free antigen
0.70–1.40
70–140%
Prothrombin gene mutation G20210A
WB
Not applicable
Not present
Prothrombin time
P
12.7–15.4 s
12.7–15.4 s
(continued)
APPENDIX
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
662
Table 1 
Hematology and Coagulation (CONtinued)
Analyte
Specimen
SI Units
Conventional Units
Protoporphyrin, free erythrocyte
WB
0.28–0.64 μmol/L of 
red blood cells
16–36 μg/dL of red blood cells
Red cell distribution width
WB
<0.145
<14.5%
Reptilase time
P
16–23.6 s
16–23.6 s
Reticulocyte count
WB
  Adult males
0.008–0.023 red cells
0.8–2.3% red cells
  Adult females
0.008–0.020 red cells
0.8–2.0% red cells
Reticulocyte hemoglobin content
WB
>26 pg/cell
>26 pg/cell
Ristocetin cofactor (functional von Willebrand factor)
P
  Blood group O
0.75 mean of normal
75% mean of normal
  Blood group A
1.05 mean of normal
105% mean of normal
  Blood group B
1.15 mean of normal
115% mean of normal
  Blood group AB 
1.25 mean of normal
125% mean of normal
Serotonin release assay
S
<0.2 release
<20% release
Sickle cell test
WB
Negative
Negative
Sucrose hemolysis
WB
<0.1
<10% hemolysis
Thrombin time
P
15.3–18.5 s
15.3–18.5 s
Total eosinophils
WB
150–300 × 106/L
150–300/mm3
Transferrin receptor
S, P
9.6–29.6 nmol/L
9.6–29.6 nmol/L
Viscosity
  Plasma
P
1.7–2.1
1.7–2.1
  Serum
S
1.4–1.8
1.4–1.8
von Willebrand factor (vWF) antigen (factor VIII:R  
antigen)
  Blood group O
0.75 mean of normal
75% mean of normal
  Blood group A
1.05 mean of normal
105% mean of normal
  Blood group B
1.15 mean of normal
115% mean of normal
  Blood group AB 
1.25 mean of normal
125% mean of normal
von Willebrand factor multimers
P
Normal distribution
Normal distribution
White blood cells: see “Leukocytes”
Abbreviations: JF, joint fluid; P, plasma; PRP, platelet-rich plasma; S, serum; WB, whole blood.
Table 2 
Clinical Chemistry and Immunology
Analyte
Specimen
SI Units
Conventional Units
Acetoacetate
P
49–294 μmol/L
0.5–3.0 mg/dL
Adrenocorticotropin (ACTH)
P
1.3–16.7 pmol/L
6.0–76.0 pg/mL
Alanine aminotransferase (ALT, SGPT)
S
0.12–0.70 μkat/L
7–41 U/L
Albumin
S
40–50 g/L
4.0–5.0 mg/dL
Aldolase
S
26–138 nkat/L
1.5–8.1 U/L
Aldosterone (adult)
  Supine, normal sodium diet
S, P
<443 pmol/L
<16 ng/dL
  Upright, normal
S, P
111–858 pmol/L
4–31 ng/dL
Alpha fetoprotein (adult)
S
0–8.5 μg/L
0–8.5 ng/mL
Alpha1 antitrypsin
S
1.0–2.0 g/L
100–200 mg/dL
Ammonia, as NH3
P
11–35 μmol/L
19–60 μg/dL
Amylase (method dependent)
S
0.34–1.6 μkat/L
20–96 U/L
(continued)
 
APPENDIX 
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
663
Table 2 
Clinical Chemistry and Immunology (CONTINUED)
Analyte
Specimen
SI Units
Conventional Units
Androstendione (adult)
S
  Males
0.81–3.1 nmol/L
23–89 ng/dL
  Females
    Premenopausal
0.91–7.5 nmol/L
26–214 ng/dL
    Postmenopausal
0.46–2.9 nmol/L
13–82 ng/dL
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE)
S
0.15–1.1 μkat/L
9–67 U/L
Anion gap
S
7–16 mmol/L
7–16 mmol/L
Apolipoprotein A-1
  Male
  Female
S
0.94–1.78 g/L
1.01–1.99 g/L
94–178 mg/dL
101–199 mg/dL
Apolipoprotein B
  Male
  Female
S
0.55–1.40 g/L
0.55–1.25 g/L
55–140 mg/dL
55–125 mg/dL
Arterial blood gases
  [HCO3
–]
  Pco2
  pH
  Po2
WB
22–30 mmol/L
4.3–6.0 kPa
7.35–7.45
9.6–13.8 kPa
22–30 meq/L
32–45 mmHg
7.35–7.45
72–104 mmHg
Aspartate aminotransferase (AST, SGOT)
S
0.20–0.65 μkat/L
12–38 U/L
Autoantibodies
  Anti-centromere antibody IgG
  Anti-double-strand (native) DNA
  Anti-glomerular basement membrane antibodies
    Qualitative IgG, IgA
    Quantitative IgG antibody
  Anti-histone antibodies
  Anti-Jo-1 antibody
  Anti-mitochondrial antibody
    Anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic autoantibodies
    Serine proteinase 3 antibodies
    Myeloperoxidase antibodies
  Antinuclear antibody
  Anti-parietal cell antibody
  Anti-RNP antibody
  Anti-Scl 70 antibody
  Anti-Smith antibody
  Anti–smooth muscle antibody
  Anti-SSA antibody
  Anti-SSB antibody
  Anti-thyroglobulin antibody
  Anti-thyroid peroxidase antibody
S
≤29 AU/mL
<25 IU/L
Negative
≤19 AU/mL
<1.0 U
≤29 AU/mL
Not applicable
Not applicable
≤19 AU/mL
≤19 AU/mL
Not applicable
Not applicable
Not applicable
Not applicable
Not applicable
Not applicable
Not applicable
Not applicable
<40 kIU/L
<35 kIU/L
≤29 AU/mL
<25 IU/L
Negative
≤19 AU/mL
<1.0 U
≤29 AU/mL
<20 Units
<1:20
≤19 AU/mL
≤19 AU/mL
Negative at 1:40
None detected
<1.0 U
<1.0 U
<1.0 U
<1.0 U
<1.0 U
Negative
<40 IU/mL
<35 IU/mL
B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP)
P
Age and gender specific: 
<100 ng/L
Age and gender specific:  
<100 pg/mL
Bence Jones protein, serum qualitative
S
Not applicable
None detected
Bence Jones protein, serum quantitative
  Free kappa
  Free lambda
K/L ratio
S
3.3–19.4 mg/L
5.7–26.3 mg/L
0.26–1.65
0.33–1.94 mg/dL
0.57–2.63 mg/dL
0.26–1.65
Beta-2-microglobulin
S
1.1–2.4 mg/L
1.1–2.4 mg/L
Bilirubin
  Total
  Direct
  Indirect
S
5.1–22 μmol/L
1.7–6.8 μmol/L
3.4–15.2 μmol/L
0.3–1.3 mg/dL
0.1–0.4 mg/dL
0.2–0.9 mg/dL
(continued)
APPENDIX
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
664
Table 2 
Clinical Chemistry and Immunology (CONTINUED)
Analyte
Specimen
SI Units
Conventional Units
C peptide
S
0.27–1.19 nmol/L
0.8–3.5 ng/mL
C1-esterase-inhibitor protein
S
210–390 mg/L
21–39 mg/dL
CA 125
S
<35 kU/L
<35 U/mL
CA 19-9
S
<37 kU/L
<37 U/mL
CA 15-3
S
<33 kU/L
<33 U/mL
CA 27-29
S
0–40 kU/L
0–40 U/mL
Calcitonin
  Male
  Female
S
0–7.5 ng/L
0–5.1 ng/L
0–7.5 pg/mL
0–5.1 pg/mL
Calcium
S
2.2–2.6 mmol/L
8.7–10.2 mg/dL
Calcium, ionized
WB
1.12–1.32 mmol/L
4.5–5.3 mg/dL
Carbon dioxide content (TCO2)
P (sea level)
22–30 mmol/L
22–30 meq/L
Carboxyhemoglobin (carbon monoxide content)
  Nonsmokers
  Smokers
  Loss of consciousness and death
WB
0.0–0.015
0.04–0.09
>0.50
0–1.5%
4–9%
>50%
Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA)
  Nonsmokers
  Smokers
S
0.0–3.0 μg/L
0.0–5.0 μg/L
0.0–3.0 ng/mL
0.0–5.0 ng/mL
Ceruloplasmin
S
250–630 mg/L
25–63 mg/dL
Chloride
S
102–109 mmol/L
102–109 meq/L
Cholesterol: see Table 5
Cholinesterase
S
5–12 kU/L
5–12 U/mL
Chromogranin A
S
0–50 μg/L
0–50 ng/mL
Complement
  C3
  C4
  Complement total
S
0.83–1.77 g/L
0.16–0.47 g/L
60–144 CAE units
83–177 mg/dL
16–47 mg/dL
60–144 CAE units
Cortisol
  Fasting, 8 a.m.–12 noon
  12 noon–8 p.m.
  8 p.m.–8 a.m.
S
138–690 nmol/L
138–414 nmol/L
0–276 nmol/L
5–25 μg/dL
5–15 μg/dL
0–10 μg/dL
C-reactive protein
S
<10 mg/L
<10 mg/L
C-reactive protein, high sensitivity
S
Cardiac risk
  Low: <1.0 mg/L
  Average: 1.0–3.0 mg/L
  High: >3.0 mg/L
Cardiac risk
  Low: <1.0 mg/L
  Average: 1.0–3.0 mg/L
  High: >3.0 mg/L
Creatine kinase (total)
  Females
  Males
S
0.66–4.0 μkat/L
0.87–5.0 μkat/L
39–238 U/L
51–294 U/L
Creatine kinase-MB
  Mass
  Fraction of total activity (by electrophoresis)
S
0.0–5.5 μg/L
0–0.04
0.0–5.5 ng/mL
0–4.0%
Creatinine
  Female
  Male
S
44–80 μmol/L
53–106 μmol/L
0.5–0.9 mg/dL
0.6–1.2 mg/dL
Cryoglobulins
S
Not applicable
None detected
Cystatin C
S
0.5–1.0 mg/L
0.5–1.0 mg/L
(continued)
 
APPENDIX 
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
665
Table 2 
Clinical Chemistry and Immunology (CONTINUED)
Analyte
Specimen
SI Units
Conventional Units
Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) (adult)
  Male
  Female
S
6.2–43.4 nmol/L
4.5–34.0 nmol/L
180–1250 ng/dL
130–980 ng/dL
Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) sulfate
  Male (adult)
  Female (adult, premenopausal)
  Female (adult, postmenopausal)
S
100–6190 μg/L
120–5350 μg/L
300–2600 μg/L
10–619 μg/dL
12–535 μg/dL
30–260 μg/dL
11-Deoxycortisol (adult) (compound S)
S
0.34–4.56 nmol/L
12–158 ng/dL
Dihydrotestosterone
  Male
  Female
S, P
1.03–2.92 nmol/L
0.14–0.76 nmol/L
30–85 ng/dL
4–22 ng/dL
Dopamine
P
0–130 pmol/L
0–20 pg/mL
Epinephrine
  Supine (30 min)
  Sitting
  Standing (30 min)
P
<273 pmol/L
<328 pmol/L
<491 pmol/L
<50 pg/mL
<60 pg/mL
<90 pg/mL
Erythropoietin
S
4–27 U/L
4–27 U/L
Estradiol
  Female
    Menstruating:
      Follicular phase
      Midcycle peak
      Luteal phase
    Postmenopausal
  Male
S, P
74–532 pmol/L
411–1626 pmol/L
74–885 pmol/L
217 pmol/L
74 pmol/L
<20–145 pg/mL
112–443 pg/mL
<20–241 pg/mL
<59 pg/mL
<20 pg/mL
Estrone
  Female
    Menstruating:
      Follicular phase
      Luteal phase
    Postmenopausal
  Male
S, P
<555 pmol/L
<740 pmol/L
11–118 pmol/L
33–133 pmol/L
<150 pg/mL
<200 pg/mL
3–32 pg/mL
9–36 pg/mL
Fatty acids, free (nonesterified)
P
0.1–0.6 mmol/L
2.8–16.8 mg/dL
Ferritin
  Female
  Male
S
10–150 μg/L
29–248 μg/L
10–150 ng/mL
29–248 ng/mL
Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH)
  Female
    Menstruating
      Follicular phase
      Ovulatory phase
      Luteal phase
    Postmenopausal
  Male
S, P
3.0–20.0 IU/L
9.0–26.0 IU/L
1.0–12.0 IU/L
18.0–153.0 IU/L
1.0–12.0 IU/L
3.0–20.0 mIU/mL
9.0–26.0 mIU/mL
1.0–12.0 mIU/mL
18.0–153.0 mIU/mL
1.0–12.0 mIU/mL
Fructosamine
S
<285 umol/L
<285 umol/L
Gamma glutamyltransferase
S
0.15–0.99 μkat/L
9–58 U/L
Gastrin
S
<100 ng/L
<100 pg/mL
Glucagon
P
40–130 ng/L
40–130 pg/mL
(continued)
APPENDIX
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
666
Table 2 
Clinical Chemistry and Immunology (CONTINUED)
Analyte
Specimen
SI Units
Conventional Units
Glucose
Glucose (fasting)
  Normal
  Increased risk for diabetes
  Diabetes mellitus
WB
P
3.6–5.3 mmol/L
4.2–5.6 mmol/L
5.6–6.9 mmol/L
Fasting >7.0 mmol/L
A 2-hour level of >11.1 
mmol/L during an oral 
glucose tolerance test
A random glucose level of 
≥11.1 mmol/L in patients 
with symptoms of hyper-
glycemia
65–95 mg/dL
75–100 mg/dL
100–125 mg/dL
Fasting >126 mg/dL
A 2-hour level of ≥200 mg/dL 
during an oral glucose  
tolerance test
A random glucose level of 
≥200 mg/dL in patients with 
symptoms of hyperglycemia
Growth hormone
S
0–5 μg/L
0–5 ng/mL
Hemoglobin A1c
  Pre-diabetes
  Diabetes mellitus
WB
0.04–0.06 HgB fraction
0.057–0.064 HgB fraction
A hemoglobin A1c level 
of ≥0.065 Hgb fraction 
as suggested by the  
American Diabetes 
Association
4.0–5.6%
5.7–6.4%
A hemoglobin A1c level of 
≥6.5% as suggested by 
the American Diabetes  
Association
Hemoglobin A1c with estimated average glucose 
(eAg)
WB
eAg (mmoL/L) = 1.59 × 
HbA1c − 2.59
eAg (mg/dL) = 28.7 × HbA1c 
− 46.7
High-density lipoprotein (HDL) (see Table 5)
Homocysteine
P
4.4–10.8 μmol/L
4.4–10.8 μmol/L
Human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG)
  Nonpregnant female
  1–2 weeks postconception
  2–3 weeks postconception
  3–4 weeks postconception
  4–5 weeks postconception
  5–10 weeks postconception
  10–14 weeks post conception
  Second trimester
  Third trimester
S
<5 IU/L
9–130 IU/L
75–2600 IU/L
850–20,800 IU/L
4000–100,200 IU/L
11,500–289,000 IU/L
18,300–137,000 IU/L
1400–53,000 IU/L
940–60,000 IU/L
<5 mIU/ml
9–130 mIU/mL
75–2600 mIU/mL
850–20,800 mIU/mL
4000–100,200 mIU/mL
11,500–289,000 mIU/mL
18,300–137,000 mIU/mL
1400–53,000 mIU/mL
940–60,000 mIU/mL
b-Hydroxybutyrate
P
60–170 μmol/L
0.6–1.8 mg/dL
17-Hydroxyprogesterone (adult)
  Male
  Female
    Follicular phase
    Luteal phase
S
<4.17 nmol/L
0.45–2.1 nmol/L
1.05–8.7 nmol/L
<139 ng/dL
15–70 ng/dL
35–290 ng/dL
Immunofixation
S
Not applicable
No bands detected
Immunoglobulin, quantitation (adult)
  IgA
  IgD
  IgE
  IgG
    IgG1
    IgG2
    IgG3
    IgG4
  IgM
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
0.70–3.50 g/L
0–140 mg/L
1–87 kIU/L
7.0–17.0 g/L
2.7–17.4 g/L
0.3–6.3 g/L
0.13–3.2 g/L
0.11–6.2 g/L
0.50–3.0 g/L
70–350 mg/dL
0–14 mg/dL
1–87 IU/mL
700–1700 mg/dL
270–1740 mg/dL
30–630 mg/dL
13–320 mg/dL
11–620 mg/dL
50–300 mg/dL
Insulin
S, P
14.35–143.5 pmol/L
2–20 μU/mL
Iron
S
7–25 μmol/L
41–141 μg/dL
(continued)
 
APPENDIX 
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
667
Table 2 
Clinical Chemistry and Immunology (CONTINUED)
Analyte
Specimen
SI Units
Conventional Units
Iron-binding capacity
S
45–73 μmol/L
251–406 μg/dL
Iron-binding capacity saturation
S
0.16–0.35
16–35%
Ischemia modified albumin
S
<85 KU/L
<85 U/mL
Joint fluid crystal
JF
Not applicable
No crystals seen
Joint fluid mucin
JF
Not applicable
Only type I mucin present
Ketone (acetone)
S
Negative
Negative
Lactate
P, arterial
P, venous
0.5–1.6 mmol/L
0.5–2.2 mmol/L
4.5–14.4 mg/dL
4.5–19.8 mg/dL
Lactate dehydrogenase
S
2.0–3.8 μkat/L
115–221 U/L
Lipase
S
0.51–0.73 μkat/L
3–43 U/L
Lipids: see Table 5
Lipoprotein (a)
S
0–300 mg/L
0–30 mg/dL
Low-density lipoprotein (LDL) (see Table 5)
Luteinizing hormone (LH)
  Female
    Menstruating
      Follicular phase
      Ovulatory phase
      Luteal phase
  Postmenopausal
Male
S, P
2.0–15.0 U/L
22.0–105.0 U/L
0.6–19.0 U/L
16.0–64.0 U/L
2.0–12.0 U/L
2.0–15.0 mIU/mL
22.0–105.0 mIU/mL
0.6–19.0 mIU/mL
16.0–64.0 mIU/mL
2.0–12.0 mIU/mL
Magnesium
S
0.62–0.95 mmol/L
1.5–2.3 mg/dL
Metanephrine
P
<0.5 nmol/L
<100 pg/mL
Methemoglobin
WB
0.0–0.01
0–1%
Myoglobin
  Male
  Female
S
20–71 μg/L
25–58 μg/L
20–71 μg/L
25–58 μg/L
Norepinephrine
  Supine (30 min)
  Sitting
  Standing (30 min)
P
650–2423 pmol/L
709–4019 pmol/L
739–4137 pmol/L
110–410 pg/mL
120–680 pg/mL
125–700 pg/mL
N-telopeptide (cross-linked), NTx
  Female, premenopausal
  Male
  BCE = bone collagen equivalent
S
6.2–19.0 nmol BCE
5.4–24.2 nmol BCE
6.2–19.0 nmol BCE
5.4–24.2 nmol BCE
NT-Pro BNP
S, P
<125 ng/L up to 75 years
<450 ng/L >75 years
<125 pg/mL up to 75 years
<450 pg/mL >75 years
5′ Nucleotidase
S
0.00–0.19 μkat/L
0–11 U/L
Osmolality
P
275–295 mOsmol/kg 
serum water
275–295 mOsmol/kg serum 
water
Osteocalcin
S
11–50 μg/L
11–50 ng/mL
Oxygen content
  Arterial (sea level)
  Venous (sea level)
WB
17–21
10–16
17–21 vol%
10–16 vol%
Oxygen saturation (sea level)
  Arterial
  Venous, arm
WB
Fraction:
0.94–1.0
0.60–0.85
Percent:
94–100%
60–85%
Parathyroid hormone (intact)
S
8–51 ng/L
8–51 pg/mL
(continued)
APPENDIX
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
668
Table 2 
Clinical Chemistry and Immunology (CONTINUED)
Analyte
Specimen
SI Units
Conventional Units
Phosphatase, alkaline
S
0.56–1.63 μkat/L
33–96 U/L
Phosphorus, inorganic
S
0.81–1.4 mmol/L
2.5–4.3 mg/dL
Potassium
S
3.5–5.0 mmol/L
3.5–5.0 meq/L
Prealbumin
S
170–340 mg/L
17–34 mg/dL
Procalcitonin
S
<0.1 μg/L
<0.1 ng/mL
Progesterone
  Female: Follicular
          Midluteal
  Male
S, P
<3.18 nmol/L
9.54–63.6 nmol/L
<3.18 nmol/L
<1.0 ng/mL
3–20 ng/mL
<1.0 ng/mL
Prolactin
  Male
  Female
S
53–360 mg/L
40–530 mg/L
2.5–17 ng/mL
1.9–25 ng/mL
Prostate-specific antigen (PSA)
S
0.0–4.0 μg/L
0.0–4.0 ng/mL
Prostate-specific antigen, free
S
With total PSA between 
4 and 10 μg/L and when 
the free PSA is:
>0.25 decreased risk of 
prostate cancer
<0.10 increased risk of 
prostate cancer
With total PSA between 4 and 
10 ng/mL and when the free 
PSA is:
>25% decreased risk of 
prostate cancer
<10% increased risk of 
prostate cancer
Protein fractions:
  Albumin
  Globulin
  Alpha1
  Alpha2
  Beta
  Gamma
S
35–55 g/L
20–35 g/L
2–4 g/L
5–9 g/L
6–11 g/L
7–17 g/L
3.5–5.5 g/dL (50–60%)
2.0–3.5 g/dL (40–50%)
0.2–0.4 g/dL (4.2–7.2%)
0.5–0.9 g/dL (6.8–12%)
0.6–1.1 g/dL (9.3–15%)
0.7–1.7 g/dL (13–23%)
Protein, total
S
67–86 g/L
6.7–8.6 g/dL
Pyruvate
P
40–130 μmol/L
0.35–1.14 mg/dL
Rheumatoid factor
S
<15 kIU/L
<15 IU/mL
Serotonin
WB
0.28–1.14 umol/L
50–200 ng/mL
Serum protein electrophoresis
S
Not applicable
Normal pattern
Sex hormone–binding globulin (adult)
  Male
  Female
S
11–80 nmol/L
30–135 nmol/L
11–80 nmol/L
30–135 nmol/L
Sodium
S
136–146 mmol/L
136–146 meq/L
Somatomedin-C (IGF-1) (adult)
  16 years
  17 years
  18 years
  19 years
  20 years
  21–25 years
  26–30 years
  31–35 years
  36–40 years
  41–45 years
  46–50 years
  51–55 years
  56–60 years
  61–65 years
S
226–903 μg/L
193–731 μg/L
163–584 μg/L
141–483 μg/L
127–424 μg/L
116–358 μg/L
117–329 μg/L
115–307 μg/L
119–204 μg/L
101–267 μg/L
94–252 μg/L
87–238 μg/L
81–225 μg/L
75–212 μg/L
226–903 ng/mL
193–731 ng/mL
163–584 ng/mL
141–483 ng/mL
127–424 ng/mL
116–358 ng/mL
117–329 ng/mL
115–307 ng/mL
119–204 ng/mL
101–267 ng/mL
94–252 ng/mL
87–238 ng/mL
81–225 ng/mL
75–212 ng/mL
(continued)
 
APPENDIX 
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
669
Table 2 
Clinical Chemistry and Immunology (CONTINUED)
Analyte
Specimen
SI Units
Conventional Units
  66–70 years
  71–75 years
  76–80 years
  81–85 years
69–200 μg/L
64–188 μg/L
59–177 μg/L
55–166 μg/L
69–200 ng/mL
64–188 ng/mL
59–177 ng/mL
55–166 ng/mL
Somatostatin
P
<25 ng/L
<25 pg/mL
Testosterone, free
  Female, adult
  Male, adult
S
10.4–65.9 pmol/L
312–1041 pmol/L
3–19 pg/mL
90–300 pg/mL
Testosterone, total,
  Female
  Male
S
0.21–2.98 nmol/L
9.36–37.10 nmol/L
6–86 ng/dL
270–1070 ng/dL
Thyroglobulin
S
1.3–31.8 μg/L
1.3–31.8 ng/mL
Thyroid-binding globulin
S
13–30 mg/L
1.3–3.0 mg/dL
Thyroid-stimulating hormone
S
0.34–4.25 mIU/L
0.34–4.25 μIU/mL
Thyroxine, free (fT4)
S
9.0–16 pmol/L
0.7–1.24 ng/dL
Thyroxine, total (T4)
S
70–151 nmol/L
5.4–11.7 μg/dL
Thyroxine index (free)
S
6.7–10.9
6.7–10.9
Transferrin
S
2.0–4.0 g/L
200–400 mg/dL
Triglycerides (see Table 5)
S
0.34–2.26 mmol/L
30–200 mg/dL
Triiodothyronine, free (fT3)
S
3.7–6.5 pmol/L
2.4–4.2 pg/mL
Triiodothyronine, total (T3)
S
1.2–2.1 nmol/L
77–135 ng/dL
Troponin I (method dependent)
  99th percentile of a healthy population
S, P
0–0.04 μg/L
0–0.04 ng/mL
Troponin T
  99th percentile of a healthy population
S, P
0–0.01 μg/L
0–0.01 ng/mL
Urea nitrogen
S
2.5–7.1 mmol/L
7–20 mg/dL
Uric acid
  Females
  Males
S
0.15–0.33 mmol/L
0.18–0.41 mmol/L
2.5–5.6 mg/dL
3.1–7.0 mg/dL
Vasoactive intestinal polypeptide
P
0–60 ng/L
0–60 pg/mL
Zinc protoporphyrin
WB
0–400 μg/L
0–40 μg/dL
Zinc protoporphyrin (ZPP)-to-heme ratio
WB
0–69 μmol ZPP/mol heme 0–69 μmol ZPP/mol heme
Abbreviations: P, plasma; S, serum; WB, whole blood.
APPENDIX
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
670
Table 3
Toxicology and Therapeutic Drug Monitoring
Therapeutic Range
Toxic Level
Drug
SI Units
Conventional Units
SI Units
Conventional Units
Acetaminophen
66–199 μmol/L
10–30 μg/mL
>1320 μmol/L
>200 μg/mL
Amikacin
  Peak
  Trough
34–51 μmol/L
0–17 μmol/L
20–30 μg/mL
0–10 μg/mL
>60 μmol/L
>17 μmol/L
>35 μg/mL
>10 μg/mL
Amitriptyline/nortriptyline  
(total drug)
430–900 nmol/L
120–250 ng/mL
>1800 nmol/L
>500 ng/mL
Amphetamine
150–220 nmol/L
20–30 ng/mL
>1500 nmol/L
>200 ng/mL
Bromide
  Mild toxicity
  Severe toxicity
  Lethal
9.4–18.7 mmol/L
75–150 mg/dL
>18.8 mmol/L
6.4–18.8 
mmol/L
>18.8 mmol/L
>37.5 mmol/L
>150 mg/dL
51–150 mg/dL
>150 mg/dL
>300 mg/dL
Caffeine
25.8–103 μmol/L
5–20 μg/mL
>206 μmol/L
>40 μg/mL
Carbamazepine
17–42 μmol/L
4–10 μg/mL
>85 μmol/L
>20 μg/mL
Chloramphenicol
  Peak
  Trough
31–62 μmol/L
15–31 μmol/L
10–20 μg/mL
5–10 μg/mL
>77 μmol/L
>46 μmol/L
>25 μg/mL
>15 μg/mL
Chlordiazepoxide
1.7–10 μmol/L
0.5–3.0 μg/mL
>17μmol/L
>5.0 μg/mL
Clonazepam
32–240 nmol/L
10–75 ng/mL
>320 nmol/L
>100 ng/mL
Clozapine
0.6–2.1 μmol/L
200–700 ng/mL
>3.7 μmol/L
>1200 ng/mL
Cocaine
>3.3 μmol/L
>1.0 μg/mL
Codeine
43–110 nmol/mL
13–33 ng/mL
>3700 nmol/mL
>1100 ng/mL (lethal)
Cyclosporine
  Renal transplant
    0–6 months
    6–12 months after transplant
    >12 months
  Cardiac transplant
    0–6 months
    6–12 months after transplant
    >12 months
208–312 nmol/L
166–250 nmol/L
83–125 nmol/L
208–291 nmol/L
125–208 nmol/L
83–125 nmol/L
250–375 ng/mL
200–300 ng/mL
100–150 ng/mL
250–350 ng/mL
150–250 ng/mL
100–150 ng/mL
>312 nmol/L
>250 nmol/L
>125 nmol/L
>291 nmol/L
>208 nmol/L
>125 nmol/L
>375 ng/mL
>300 ng/mL
>150 ng/mL
>350 ng/mL
>250 ng/mL
150 ng/mL
  Lung transplant 
    0–6 months
  Liver transplant
    Initiation
    Maintenance
250–374 nmol/L
208–291 nmol/L
83–166 nmol/L
300–450 ng/mL
250–350 ng/mL
100–200 ng/mL
>374 nmol/L
>291 nmol/L
>166 nmol/L
>450 ng/mL
>350 ng/mL
>200 ng/mL
Desipramine
375–1130 nmol/L
100–300 ng/mL
>1880 nmol/L
>500 ng/mL
Diazepam (and metabolite)
  Diazepam
  Nordiazepam
0.7–3.5 μmol/L
0.4–6.6 μmol/L
0.2–1.0 μg/mL
0.1–1.8 μg/mL
>7.0 μmol/L
>9.2 μmol/L
>2.0 μg/mL
>2.5 μg/mL
Digoxin
0.64–2.6 nmol/L
0.5–2.0 ng/mL
>5.0 nmol/L
>3.9 ng/mL
Disopyramide
5.3–14.7 μmol/L
2–5 μg/mL
>20.6 μmol/L
>7 μg/mL
Doxepin and nordoxepin
    Doxepin
    Nordoxepin
0.36–0.98 μmol/L
0.38–1.04 μmol/L
101–274 ng/mL
106–291 ng/mL
>1.8 μmol/L
>1.9 μmol/L
>503 ng/mL
>531 ng/mL
Ethanol
  Behavioral changes
  Legal limit
  Critical with acute exposure
>4.3 mmol/L
≥17 mmol/L
>54 mmol/L
>20 mg/dL
≥80 mg/dL
>250 mg/dL
Ethylene glycol
  Toxic
  Lethal
>2 mmol/L
>20 mmol/L
>12 mg/dL
>120 mg/dL
(continued)
 
APPENDIX 
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
671
Table 3
Toxicology and Therapeutic Drug Monitoring (CONTINUED)
Therapeutic Range
Toxic Level
Drug
SI Units
Conventional Units
SI Units
Conventional Units
Ethosuximide
280–700 μmol/L
40–100 μg/mL
>700 μmol/L
>100 μg/mL
Everolimus
3.13–8.35 nmol/L
3–8 ng/mL
>12.5 nmol/L
>12 ng/mL
Flecainide
0.5–2.4 μmol/L
0.2–1.0 μg/mL
>3.6 μmol/L
>1.5 μg/mL
Gentamicin
  Peak
  Trough
10–21 μmol/mL
0–4.2 μmol/mL
5–10 μg/mL
0–2 μg/mL
>25 μmol/mL
>4.2 μmol/mL
>12 μg/mL
>2 μg/mL
Heroin (diacetyl morphine)
>700 μmol/L
>200 ng/mL (as morphine)
Ibuprofen
49–243 μmol/L
10–50 μg/mL
>970 μmol/L
>200 μg/mL
Imipramine (and metabolite)
  Desimipramine
  Total imipramine + 
  desimipramine
375–1130 nmol/L
563–1130 nmol/L
100–300 ng/mL
150–300 ng/mL
>1880 nmol/L
>1880 nmol/L
>500 ng/mL
>500 ng/mL
Lamotrigine
11.7–54.7 μmol/L
3–14 μg/mL
>58.7 μmol/L
>15 μg/mL
Lidocaine
5.1–21.3 μmol/L
1.2–5.0 μg/mL
>38.4 μmol/L
>9.0 μg/mL
Lithium
0.5–1.3 mmol/L
0.5–1.3 meq/L
>2 mmol/L
>2 meq/L
Methadone
1.0–3.2 μmol/L
0.3–1.0 μg/mL
>6.5 μmol/L
>2 μg/mL
Methamphetamine
0.07–0.34 μmol/L
0.01–0.05 μg/mL
>3.35 μmol/L
>0.5 μg/mL
Methanol
>6 mmol/L
>20 mg/dL
Methotrexate
  Low-dose
  High-dose (24h)
  High-dose (48h)
  High-dose (72h)
0.01–0.1 μmol/L
<5.0 μmol/L
<0.50 μmol/L
<0.10 μmol/L
0.01–0.1 μmol/L
<5.0 μmol/L
<0.50 μmol/L
<0.10 μmol/L
>0.1 mmol/L
>5.0 μmol/L
>0.5 μmol/L
>0.1 μmol/L
>0.1 mmol/L
>5.0 μmol/L
>0.5 μmol/L
>0.1 μmol/L
Morphine
232–286 μmol/L
65–80 ng/mL
>720 μmol/L
>200 ng/mL
Mycophenolic acid
3.1–10.9 μmol/L
1.0–3.5 ng/mL
>37 μmol/L
>12 ng/mL
Nitroprusside (as thiocyanate)
103–499 μmol/L
6–29 μg/mL
860 μmol/L
>50 μg/mL
Nortriptyline
190–569 nmol/L
50–150 ng/mL
>1900 nmol/L
>500 ng/mL
Phenobarbital
65–172 μmol/L
15–40 μg/mL
>258 μmol/L
>60 μg/mL
Phenytoin
40–79 μmol/L
10–20 μg/mL
>158 μmol/L
>40 μg/mL
Phenytoin, free
  % Free
4.0–7.9 μg/mL
0.08–0.14
1–2 μg/mL
8–14%
>13.9 μg/mL
>3.5 μg/mL
Primidone and metabolite
  Primidone
  Phenobarbital
23–55 μmol/L
65–172 μmol/L
5–12 μg/mL
15–40 μg/mL
>69 μmol/L
>215 μmol/L
>15 μg/mL
>50 μg/mL
Procainamide
  Procainamide
  NAPA (N-acetylprocainamide)
17–42 μmol/L
22–72 μmol/L
4–10 μg/mL
6–20μg/mL
>43 μmol/L
>126 μmol/L
>10 μg/mL
>35 μg/mL
Quinidine
6.2–15.4 μmol/L
2.0–5.0 μg/mL
>19 μmol/L
>6 μg/mL
Salicylates
145–2100 μmol/L
2–29 mg/dL
>2900 μmol/L
>40 mg/dL
Sirolimus (trough level) 
  Kidney transplant
4.4–15.4 nmol/L
4–14 ng/mL
>16 nmol/L
>15 ng/mL
Tacrolimus (FK506) (trough)
  Kidney and liver
    Initiation
    Maintenance
  Heart
    Initiation
    Maintenance
12–19 nmol/L
6–12 nmol/L
19–25 nmol/L
6–12 nmol/L
10–15 ng/mL
5–10 ng/mL
15–20 ng/mL
5–10 ng/mL
>25 nmol/L
>25 nmol/L
>20 ng/mL
>20 ng/mL
(continued)
APPENDIX
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
672
Table 3
Toxicology and Therapeutic Drug Monitoring (CONTINUED)
Therapeutic Range
Toxic Level
Drug
SI Units
Conventional Units
SI Units
Conventional Units
Theophylline
56–111 μg/mL
10–20 μg/mL
>168 μg/mL
>30 μg/mL
Thiocyanate
  After nitroprusside infusion
  Nonsmoker
  Smoker
103–499 μmol/L
17–69 μmol/L
52–206 μmol/L
6–29 μg/mL
1–4 μg/mL
3–12 μg/mL
860 μmol/L
>50 μg/mL
Tobramycin
  Peak
  Trough
11–22 μg/L
0–4.3 μg/L
5–10 μg/mL
0–2 μg/mL
>26 μg/L
>4.3 μg/L
>12 μg/mL
>2 μg/mL
Valproic acid
346–693 μmol/L
50–100 μg/mL
>693 μmol/L
>100 μg/mL
Vancomycin
  Peak
  Trough
14–28 μmol/L
3.5–10.4 μmol/L
20–40 μg/mL
5–15 μg/mL
>55 μmol/L
>14 μmol/L
>80 μg/mL
>20 μg/mL
Table 4 
Vitamins and Selected Trace Minerals
Reference Range
Specimen
Analyte
SI Units
Conventional Units
Aluminum
S
<0.2 μmol/L
<5.41 μg/L
Arsenic
WB
0.03–0.31 μmol/L
2–23 μg/L
Cadmium
WB
<44.5 nmol/L
<5.0 μg/L
Coenzyme Q10 (ubiquinone)
P
433–1532 μg/L
433–1532 μg/L
β-Carotene
S
0.07–1.43 μmol/L
4–77 μg/dL
Copper
S
11–22 μmol/L
70–140 μg/dL
Folic acid
RC
340–1020 nmol/L cells
150–450 ng/mL cells
Folic acid
S
12.2–40.8 nmol/L
5.4–18.0 ng/mL
Lead (adult)
S
<0.5 μmol/L
<10 μg/dL
Mercury
WB
3.0–294 nmol/L
0.6–59 μg/L
Selenium
S
0.8–2.0 umol/L
63–160 μg/L
Vitamin A
S
0.7–3.5 μmol/L
20–100 μg/dL
Vitamin B1 (thiamine)
S
0–75 nmol/L
0–2 μg/dL
Vitamin B2 (riboflavin)
S
106–638 nmol/L
4–24 μg/dL
Vitamin B6
P
20–121 nmol/L
5–30 ng/mL
Vitamin B12
S
206–735 pmol/L
279–996 pg/mL
Vitamin C (ascorbic acid)
S
23–57 μmol/L
0.4–1.0 mg/dL
Vitamin D3,1,25-dihydroxy, total
S, P
36–180 pmol/L
15–75 pg/mL
Vitamin D3, 25-hydroxy, total
P
75–250 nmol/L
30–100 ng/mL
Vitamin E
S
12–42 μmol/L
5–18 μg/mL
Vitamin K
S
0.29–2.64 nmol/L
0.13–1.19 ng/mL
Zinc
S
11.5–18.4 μmol/L
75–120 μg/dL
Abbreviations: P, plasma; RC, red cells; S, serum; WB, whole blood.
 
APPENDIX 
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
673
Table 5 
Classification of LDL, Total, and HDL 
Cholesterol
LDL Cholesterol
  <70 mg/dL
Therapeutic option for very high 
risk patients
  <100 mg/dL
Optimal
  100–129 mg/dL
Near optimal/above optimal
  130–159 mg/dL
Borderline high
  160–189 mg/dL
High
  ≥190 mg/dL
Very high
Total Cholesterol
  <200 mg/dL
Desirable
  200–239 mg/dL
Borderline high
  ≥240 mg/dL
High
HDL Cholesterol
  <40 mg/dL
Low
  ≥60 mg/dL
High
Abbreviations: LDL, low-density lipoprotein; HDL, high-density 
lipoprotein.
Source: Executive summary of the third report of the National 
Cholesterol Education Program (NCEP) expert panel on detec-
tion, evaluation, and treatment of high blood cholesterol in adults 
(adult treatment panel III). JAMA 2001; 285:2486–97. Implications 
of Recent Clinical Trials for the National Cholesterol Education 
Program Adult Treatment Panel III Guidelines. SM Grundy et al for 
the Coordinating Committee of the National Cholesterol Education 
Program: Circulation 110:227, 2004.
Table 6 
Cerebrospinal Fluida
Reference Range
Constituent
SI Units
Conventional 
Units
Osmolarity
292–297 mmol/kg 
water
292–297 
mOsm/L
Electrolytes
  Sodium
137–145 mmol/L
137–145 meq/L
  Potassium
2.7–3.9 mmol/L
2.7–3.9 meq/L
  Calcium
1.0–1.5 mmol/L
2.1–3.0 meq/L
  Magnesium
1.0–1.2 mmol/L
2.0–2.5 meq/L
  Chloride
116–122 mmol/L
116–122 meq/L
  CO2 content
20–24 mmol/L
20–24 meq/L
Pco2
6–7 kPa
45–49 mmHg
pH
7.31–7.34
Glucose
2.22–3.89 mmol/L
40–70 mg/dL
Lactate
1–2 mmol/L
10–20 mg/dL
Total protein:
  Lumbar
0.15–0.5 g/L
15–50 mg/dL
  Cisternal
0.15–0.25 g/L
15–25 mg/dL
  Ventricular
0.06–0.15 g/L
6–15 mg/dL
  Albumin
0.066–0.442 g/L
6.6–44.2 mg/dL
  IgG
0.009–0.057 g/L
0.9–5.7 mg/dL
  IgG indexb
0.29–0.59
  Oligoclonal  
  bands (OGB)
<2 bands not pres-
ent in matched 
serum sample
Ammonia
15–47 μmol/L
25–80 μg/dL
Creatinine
44–168 μmol/L
0.5–1.9 mg/dL
Myelin basic  
protein
<4 μg/L
CSF pressure
50–180 mmH2O
CSF volume 
(adult)
∼150 mL
Red blood cells
0
0
Leukocytes
  Total
0–5 mononuclear 
cells per μL
  Differential
    Lymphocytes
60–70%
    Monocytes
30–50%
    Neutrophils
None
aSince cerebrospinal fluid concentrations are equilibrium values, 
measurements of the same parameters in blood plasma obtained 
at the same time are recommended. However, there is a time lag in 
attainment of equilibrium, and cerebrospinal levels of plasma con-
stituents that can fluctuate rapidly (such as plasma glucose) may 
not achieve stable values until after a significant lag phase.
bIgG index = CSF IgG (mg/dL) × serum albumin (g/dL)/serum IgG 
(g/dL) × CSF albumin (mg/dL).
Reference Values  
for Specific Analytes
APPENDIX
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
674
Table 7A 
Differential Nucleated Cell Counts of 
Bone Marrow Aspiratesa
Observed 
Range (%)
95% Range 
(%)
Mean (%)
Blast cells
0–3.2
0–3.0
1.4
Promyelocytes
3.6–13.2
3.2–12.4
7.8
Neutrophil 
myelocytes
4–21.4
3.7–10.0
7.6
Eosinophil 
myelocytes
0–5.0
0–2.8
1.3
Metamyelocytes
1–7.0
2.3–5.9
4.1
Neutrophils
  Males
  Females
21.0–45.6
29.6–46.6
21.9–42.3
28.8–45.9
32.1
37.4
Eosinophils
0.4–4.2
0.3–4.2
2.2
Eosinophils 
plus eosinophil 
myelocytes
0.9–7.4
0.7–6.3
3.5
Basophils
0–0.8
0–0.4
0.1
Erythroblasts
  Male
  Females
18.0–39.4
14.0–31.8
16.2–40.1
13.0–32.0
28.1
22.5
Lymphocytes
4.6–22.6
6.0–20.0
13.1
Plasma cells
0–1.4
0–1.2
0.6
Monocytes
0–3.2
0–2.6
1.3
Macrophages
0–1.8
0–1.3
0.4
M:E ratio
  Males
  Females
1.1–4.0
1.6–5.4
1.1–4.1
1.6–5.2
2.1
2.8
aBased on bone marrow aspirate from 50 healthy volunteers 
(30 men, 20 women).
Abbreviation: M:E, myeloid to erythroid ratio.
Source: BJ Bain: Br J Haematol 94:206, 1996.
Table 7B 
Bone Marrow Cellularity
Age
Observed 
Range
95% Range
Mean
Under 10 years
59.0–95.1%
72.9–84.7%
78.8%
10–19 years
41.5–86.6%
59.2–69.4%
64.3%
20–29 years
32.0–83.7%
54.1–61.9%
58.0%
30–39 years
30.3–81.3%
41.1–54.1%
47.6%
40–49 years
16.3–75.1%
43.5–52.9%
48.2%
50–59 years
19.7–73.6%
41.2–51.4%
46.3%
60–69 years
16.3–65.7%
40.8–50.6%
45.7%
70–79 years
11.3–47.1%
22.6–35.2%
28.9%
Source: From RJ Hartsock et al: Am J Clin Pathol 1965; 43:326, 
1965.
Table 8 
Stool Analysis
Reference Range
SI Units
Conventional 
Units
Alpha-1- 
antitrypsin
≤540 mg/L
≤54 mg/dL
Amount
0.1–0.2 kg/d
100–200 g/24 h
Coproporphyrin
611–1832 nmol/d
400–1200 μg/24 h
Fat
  Adult
  Adult on  
  fat-free diet
<7 g/d
<4 g/d
Fatty acids
0–21 mmol/d
0–6 g/24 h
Leukocytes
None
None
Nitrogen
<178 mmol/d
<2.5 g/24 h
pH
7.0–7.5
Potassium
14–102 mmol/L
14–102 mmol/L
Occult blood
Negative
Negative
Osmolality
280–325 mosmol/
kg
280–325 mosmol/
kg
Sodium
7–72 mmol/L
7–72 mmol/L
Trypsin
20–95 U/g
Urobilinogen
85–510 μmol/d
50–300 mg/24 h
Uroporphyrins
12–48 nmol/d
10–40 μg/24 h
Water
<0.75
<75%
Source: Modified from: FT Fishbach, MB Dunning III: A Manual of 
Laboratory and Diagnostic Tests, 7th ed. Philadelphia, Lippincott 
Williams & Wilkins, 2004.
 
APPENDIX 
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
675
Table 9
Urine Analysis and Renal Function Tests
Reference Range
SI Units
Conventional Units
Acidity, titratable
20–40 mmol/d
20–40 meq/d
Aldosterone
Normal diet: 6–25 μg/d
Low-salt diet: 17–44 μg/d
High-salt diet: 0–6 μg/d
Normal diet: 6–25 μg/d
Low-salt diet: 17–44 μg/d
High-salt diet: 0–6 μg/d
Aluminum
0.19–1.11 μmol/L
5–30 μg/L
Ammonia
30–50 mmol/d
30–50 meq/d
Amylase
4–400 U/L
Amylase/creatinine clearance ratio  
[(Clam/Clcr) × 100]
1–5
1–5
Arsenic
0.07–0.67 μmol/d
5–50 μg/d
Bence Jones protein, urine, qualitative
Not applicable
None detected
Bence Jones protein, urine, quantitative
  Free Kappa
  Free Lambda
  K/L ratio
1.4–24.2 mg/L
0.2–6.7 mg/L
2.04–10.37
0.14–2.42 mg/dL
0.02–0.67 mg/dL
2.04–10.37
Calcium (10 meq/d or 200 mg/d dietary 
calcium)
<7.5 mmol/d
<300 mg/d
Chloride
140–250 mmol/d
140–250 mmol/d
Citrate
320–1240 mg/d
320–1240 mg/d
Copper
<0.95 μmol/d
<60 μg/d
Coproporphyrins (types I and III)
0–20 μmol/mol creatinine
0–20 μmol/mol creatinine
Cortisol, free
55–193 nmol/d
20–70 μg/d
Creatine, as creatinine
  Female
  Male
<760 μmol/d
<380 μmol/d
<100 mg/d
<50 mg/d
Creatinine
8.8–14 mmol/d
1.0–1.6 g/d
Dopamine
392–2876 nmol/d
60–440 μg/d
Eosinophils
<100 eosinophils/mL
<100 eosinophils/mL
Epinephrine
0–109 nmol/d
0–20 μg/d
Glomerular filtration rate
>60 mL/min/1.73 m2
For African Americans multiply the 
result by 1.21
>60 mL/min/1.73 m2
For African Americans multiply the result by 
1.21
Glucose (glucose oxidase method)
0.3–1.7 mmol/d
50–300 mg/d
5-Hydroindoleacetic acid [5-HIAA]
0–78.8 μmol/d
0–15 mg/d
Hydroxyproline
53–328 μmol/d
53–328 μmol/d
Iodine, spot urine
  WHO classification of iodine deficiency:
    Not iodine deficient
    Mild iodine deficiency
    Moderate iodine deficiency
    Severe iodine deficiency
>100 μg/L
50–100 μg/L
20–49 μg/L
<20 μg/L
>100 μg/L
50–100 μg/L
20–49 μg/L
<20 μg/L
Ketone (acetone)
Negative
Negative
17 Ketosteroids
3–12 mg/d
3–12 mg/d
Metanephrines
  Metanephrine
  Normetanephrine
30–350 μg/d
50–650 μg/d
30–350 μg/d
50–650 μg/d
(continued)
APPENDIX
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
676
Table 9
Urine Analysis and Renal Function Tests (CONTINUED)
Reference Range
SI Units
Conventional Units
Microalbumin
  Normal
  Microalbuminuria
  Clinical albuminuria
0.0–0.03 g/d
0.03–0.30 g/d
>0.3 g/d
0–30 mg/d
30–300 mg/d
>300 mg/d
Microalbumin/creatinine ratio
  Normal
  Microalbuminuria
  Clinical albuminuria
0–3.4 g/mol creatinine
3.4–34 g/mol creatinine
>34 g/mol creatinine
0–30 μg/mg creatinine
30–300 μg/mg creatinine
>300 μg/mg creatinine
β2-Microglobulin
0–160 μg/L
0–160 μg/L
Norepinephrine
89–473 nmol/d
15–80 μg/d
N-telopeptide (cross-linked), NTx
  Female, premenopausal
  Female, postmenopausal
  Male
  BCE = bone collagen equivalent
17–94 nmol BCE/mmol creatinine
26–124 nmol BCE/mmol creatinine
21–83 nmol BCE/mmol creatinine
17–94 nmol BCE/mmol creatinine
26–124 nmol BCE/mmol creatinine
21–83 nmol BCE/mmol creatinine
Osmolality
100–800 mosm/kg
100–800 mosm/kg
Oxalate
  Male
  Female
80–500 μmol/d
45–350 μmol/d
7–44 mg/d
4–31 mg/d
pH
5.0–9.0
5.0–9.0
Phosphate (phosphorus) (varies with 
intake)
12.9–42.0 mmol/d
400–1300 mg/d
Porphobilinogen
None
None
Potassium (varies with intake)
25–100 mmol/d
25–100 meq/d
Protein
<0.15 g/d
<150 mg/d
Protein/creatinine ratio
Male: 15–68 mg/g
Female: 10–107 mg/g
Male: 15–68 mg/g
Female: 10–107 mg/g
Sediment
  Red blood cells
  White blood cells
  Bacteria
  Crystals
  Bladder cells
  Squamous cells
  Tubular cells
  Broad casts
  Epithelial cell casts
  Granular casts
  Hyaline casts
  Red blood cell casts
  Waxy casts
  White cell casts
0–2/high-power field
0–2/high-power field
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
0–5/low-power field
None
None
None
Sodium (varies with intake)
100–260 mmol/d
100–260 meq/d
Specific gravity:
  After 12-h fluid restriction
  After 12-h deliberate water intake
>1.025
≤1.003
>1.025
≤1.003
Tubular reabsorption, phosphorus
0.79–0.94 of filtered load
79–94% of filtered load
Urea nitrogen
214–607 mmol/d
6–17 g/d
Uric acid (normal diet)
1.49–4.76 mmol/d
250–800 mg/d
Vanillylmandelic acid (VMA)
<30 μmol/d
<6 mg/d
 
APPENDIX 
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
677
Table 10
Normal Pressures in Heart and Great Vessels
Pressure (mmHg)
Average
Range
Right Atrium
Mean
2.8
1–5
a wave
5.6
2.5–7
c wave
3.8
1.5–6
x wave
1.7
0–5
v wave
4.6
2–7.5
y wave
2.4
0–6
Right Ventricle
Peak systolic
25
17–32
End-diastolic
4
1–7
Pulmonary Artery
Mean
15
9–19
Peak systolic
25
17–32
End-diastolic
9
4–13
Pulmonary Artery Wedge
Mean
9
4.5–13
Left Atrium
Mean
7.9
2–12
a wave
10.4
4–16
v wave
12.8
6–21
Left Ventricle
Peak systolic
130
90–140
End-diastolic
8.7
5–12
Brachial Artery
Mean
85
70–105
Peak systolic
130
90–140
End-diastolic
70
60–90
Source: Reproduced from: MJ Kern The Cardiac Catheterization Handbook, 4th ed. 
­Philadelphia, Mosby, 2003.
Special Function Tests
APPENDIX
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
678
Table 11 
Circulatory Function Tests
Results: Reference Range
Test
SI Units (Range)
Conventional Units (Range)
Arteriovenous oxygen difference
30–50 mL/L
30–50 mL/L
Cardiac output (Fick)
2.5–3.6 L/m2 of body surface 
area per min
2.5–3.6 L/m2 of body surface area per min
Contractility indexes
  Max. left ventricular dp/dt (dp/dt)
220 kPa/s (176–250 kPa/s)
1650 mmHg/s (1320–1880 mmHg/s)
DP when DP = 5.3 kPa
(37.6 ± 12.2)/s
(37.6 ± 12.2)/s
(40 mmHg) (DP, developed LV pressure)
3.32 ± 0.84 end-diastolic volumes 
per second
3.32 ± 0.84 end-diastolic volumes per second
  Mean normalized systolic ejection rate  
  (angiography)
  Mean velocity of circumferential fiber  
  shortening (angiography)
1.83 ± 0.56 circumferences per 
second
1.83 ± 0.56 circumferences per second
Ejection fraction: stroke volume/ 
end-diastolic volume (SV/EDV)
0.67 ± 0.08 (0.55–0.78)
0.67 ± 0.08 (0.55–0.78)
End-diastolic volume
70 ± 20.0 mL/m2 (60–88 mL/m2)
70 ± 20.0 mL/m2 (60–88 mL/m2)
End-systolic volume
25 ± 5.0 mL/m2 (20–33 mL/m2)
25 ± 5.0 mL/m2 (20–33 mL/m2)
Left ventricular work
  Stroke work index
50 ± 20.0 (g·m)/m2 (30–110)
50 ± 20.0 (g·m)/m2 (30–110)
  Left ventricular minute work index
1.8–6.6 [(kg·m)/m2]/min
1.8–6.6 [(kg·m)/m2]/min
  Oxygen consumption index
110–150 mL
110–150 mL
Maximum oxygen uptake
35 mL/min (20–60 mL/min)
35 mL/min (20–60 mL/min)
Pulmonary vascular resistance
2–12 (kPa·s)/L
20–130 (dyn·s)/cm5
Systemic vascular resistance
77–150 (kPa·s)/L
770–1600 (dyn·s)/cm5
Source: E Braunwald et al: Heart Disease, 6th ed. Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders Co., 2001.
 
APPENDIX 
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
679
Table 12
 Normal Echocardiographic Reference Limits and Partition Values in Adults
Women 
Reference 
Range
Mildly 
Abnormal
Moderately 
Abnormal
Severely 
Abnormal
Men 
Reference 
Range
Mildly 
Abnormal
Moderately 
Abnormal
Severely 
Abnormal
Left ventricular dimensions
  Septal thickness, cm
0.6–0.9
1.0–1.2
1.3–1.5
≥1.6
0.6–1.0
1.1–1.3
1.4–1.6
≥1.7
  Posterior wall thickness, cm
0.6–0.9
1.0–1.2
1.3–1.5
≥1.6
0.6–1.0
1.1–1.3
1.4–1.6
≥1.7
  Diastolic diameter, cm
3.9–5.3
5.4–5.7
5.8–6.1
≥6.2
4.2–5.9
6.0–6.3
6.4–6.8
≥6.9
  Diastolic diameter/BSA, cm/m2
2.4–3.2
3.3–3.4
3.5–3.7
≥3.8
2.2–3.1
3.2–3.4
3.5–3.6
≥3.7
  Diastolic diameter/height, cm/m
2.5–3.2
3.3–3.4
3.5–3.6
≥3.7
2.4–3.3
3.4–3.5
3.6–3.7
≥3.8
Left ventricular volumes
  Diastolic, mL
56–104
105–117
118–130
≥131
67–155
156–178
179–201
≥202
  Diastolic/BSA, mL/m2
35–75
76–86
87–96
≥97
35–75
76–86
87–96
≥97
  Systolic, mL
19–49
50–59
60–69
≥70
22–58
59–70
71–82
≥83
  Systolic/BSA, mL/m2
12–30
31–36
37–42
≥43
12–30
31–36
37–42
≥43
Left ventricular mass, 2D method
  Mass, g
66–150
151–171
172–182
≥183
96–200
201–227
228–254
≥255
  Mass/BSA, g/m2
44–88
89–100
101–112
≥113
50–102
103–116
117–130
≥131
Left ventricular function
  Endocardial fractional shortening (%)
27–45
22–26
17–21
≤16
25–43
20–24
15–19
≤14
  Midwall fractional shortening (%)
15–23
13–14
11–12
≤10
14–22
12–13
10–11
≤9
  Ejection fraction, 2D method (%)
≥55
45–54
30–44
≤29
≥55
45–54
30–44
≤29
Right heart dimensions (cm)
  Basal RV diameter
2.0–2.8
2.9–3.3
3.4–3.8
≥3.9
2.0–2.8
2.9–3.3
3.4–3.8
≥3.9
  Mid-RV diameter
2.7–3.3
3.4–3.7
3.8–4.1
≥4.2
2.7–3.3
3.4–3.7
3.8–4.1
≥4.2
  Base-to-apex length
7.1–7.9
8.0–8.5
8.6–9.1
≥9.2
7.1–7.9
8.0–8.5
8.6–9.1
≥9.2
  RVOT diameter above aortic valve
2.5–2.9
3.0–3.2
3.3–3.5
≥3.6
2.5–2.9
3.0–3.2
3.3–3.5
≥3.6
  RVOT diameter above pulmonic valve
1.7–2.3
2.4–2.7
2.8–3.1
≥3.2
1.7–2.3
2.4–2.7
2.8–3.1
≥3.2
  Pulmonary artery diameter below  
  pulmonic valve
1.5–2.1
2.2–2.5
2.6–2.9
≥3.0
1.5–2.1
2.2–2.5
2.6–2.9
≥3.0
Right ventricular size and function in 
4-chamber view
  Diastolic area, cm2
11–28
29–32
33–37
≥38
11–28
29–32
33–37
≥38
  Systolic area, cm2
7.5–16
17–19
20–22
≥23
7.5–16
17–19
20–22
≥23
  Fractional area change, %
32–60
25–31
18–24
≤17
32–60
25–31
18–24
≤17
Atrial sizes
  LA diameter, cm
2.7–3.8
3.9–4.2
4.3–4.6
≥4.7
3.0–4.0
4.1–4.6
4.7–5.2
≥5.3
  LA diameter/BSA, cm/m2
1.5–2.3
2.4–2.6
2.7–2.9
≥3.0
1.5–2.3
2.4–2.6
2.7–2.9
≥3.0
  RA minor axis, cm
2.9–4.5
4.6–4.9
5.0–5.4
≥5.5
2.9–4.5
4.6–4.9
5.0–5.4
≥5.5
  RA minor axis/BSA, cm/m2
1.7–2.5
2.6–2.8
2.9–3.1
≥3.2
1.7–2.5
2.6–2.8
2.9–3.1
≥3.2
(continued)
APPENDIX
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
680
Table 12
 Normal Echocardiographic Reference Limits and Partition Values in Adults (CONTINUED)
Women 
Reference 
Range
Mildly 
Abnormal
Moderately 
Abnormal
Severely 
Abnormal
Men 
Reference 
Range
Mildly 
Abnormal
Moderately 
Abnormal
Severely 
Abnormal
  LA area, cm2
<20
20–30
30–40
≥41
<20
20–30
30–40
≥41
  LA volume, mL
22–52
53–62
63–72
≥73
18–58
59–68
69–78
≥79
  LA volume/BSA, mL/m2
16–28
29–33
34–39
≥40
16–28
29–33
34–39
≥40
Aortic stenosis, classification of severity
  Aortic jet velocity, m/s
2.6–2.9
3.0–4.0
>4.0
2.6–2.9
3.0–4.0
>4.0
  Mean gradient, mmHg
<20
20–40
>40
<20
20–40
>40
  Valve area, cm2
>1.5
1.0–1.5
<1.0
>1.5
1.0–1.5
<1.0
  Indexed valve area, cm2/m2
>0.85
0.60–0.85
<0.6
>0.85
0.60–0.85
<0.6
  Velocity ratio
>0.50
0.25–0.50
<0.25
>0.50
0.25–0.50
<0.25
Mitral stenosis, classification of severity
  Valve area, cm2
>1.5
1.0–1.5
<1.0
>1.5
1.0–1.5
<1.0
  Mean gradient, mmHg
<5
5–10
>10
<5
5–10
>10
  Pulmonary artery pressure, mmHg
<30
30–50
>50
<30
30–50
>50
Aortic regurgitation, indices of severity
  Vena contracta width, cm
<0.30
0.30–0.60
≥0.60
<0.30
0.30–0.60
≥0.60
  Jet width/LVOT width, %
<25
25–64
≥65
<25
25–64
≥65
  Jet CSA/LVOT CSA, %
<5
5–59
≥60
<5
5–59
≥60
  Regurgitant volume, mL/beat
<30
30–59
≥60
<30
30–59
≥60
  Regurgitant fraction, %
<30
30–49
≥50
<30
30–49
≥50
  Effective regurgitant orifice area, cm2
<0.10
0.10–0.29
≥0.30
<0.10
0.10–0.29
≥0.30
Mitral regurgitation, indices of severity
  Vena contracta width, cm
<0.30
0.30–0.69
≥0.70
<0.30
0.30–0.69
≥0.70
  Regurgitant volume, mL/beat
<30
30–59
≥60
<30
30–59
≥60
  Regurgitant fraction, %
<30
30–49
≥50
<30
30–49
≥50
  Effective regurgitant orifice area, cm2
<0.20
0.20–0.39
≥0.40
<0.20
0.20–0.39
≥0.40
Abbreviations: BSA, body surface area; CSA, cross-sectional area; LA, left atrium; LVOT, left ventricular outflow tract; RA, right atrium; RV, right ventricle; RVOT, right ventricular outflow tract; 
2D, 2-dimensional.
Source: Values adapted from: American Society of Echocardiography, Guidelines and Standards. http://www.asecho.org/i4a/pages/index.cfm?pageid=3317. Accessed Feb 23, 2010.
 
APPENDIX 
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
681
Table 13 
Summary of Values Useful in Pulmonary Physiology
Typical Values
Symbol
Man Aged 40, 75 kg, 
175 cm Tall
Woman Aged 40,  
60 kg, 160 cm Tall
Pulmonary Mechanics
Spirometry—volume-time curves
  Forced vital capacity
FVC
5.0 L
3.4 L
  Forced expiratory volume in 1 s
FEV1
4.0 L
2.8 L
  FEV1/FVC
FEV1%
80%
78%
  Maximal midexpiratory flow rate
MMEF (FEF 25–75)
4.1 L/s
3.2 L/s
  Maximal expiratory flow rate
MEFR (FEF 200–1200)
9.0 L/s
6.1 L/s
Spirometry—flow-volume curves
  Maximal expiratory flow at 50% of expired vital  
  capacity
Vmax 50 (FEF 50%)
5.0 L/s
4.0 L/s
  Maximal expiratory flow at 75% of expired vital  
  capacity
Vmax 75 (FEF 75%)
2.1 L/s
2.0 L/s
Resistance to airflow:
  Pulmonary resistance
RL (RL)
<3.0 (cmH2O/s)/L
  Airway resistance
Raw
<2.5 (cmH2O/s)/L
  Specific conductance
SGaw
>0.13 cmH2O/s
Pulmonary compliance
  Static recoil pressure at total lung capacity
Pst TLC
25 ± 5 cmH2O
  Compliance of lungs (static)
CL
0.2 L cmH2O
  Compliance of lungs and thorax
C(L + T)
0.1 L cmH2O
  Dynamic compliance of 20 breaths per minute
C dyn 20
0.25 ± 0.05 L/cmH2O
Maximal static respiratory pressures:
  Maximal inspiratory pressure
MIP
>110 cmH2O
>70 cmH2O
  Maximal expiratory pressure
MEP
>200 cmH2O
>140 cmH2O
Lung Volumes
Total lung capacity
TLC
6.9 L
4.9 L
Functional residual capacity
FRC
3.3 L
2.6 L
Residual volume
RV
1.9 L
1.5 L
Inspiratory capacity
IC
3.7 L
2.3 L
Expiratory reserve volume
ERV
1.4 L
1.1 L
Vital capacity
VC
5.0 L
3.4 L
Gas Exchange (Sea Level)
Arterial O2 tension
Pao2
12.7 ± 0.7 kPa (95 ± 5 mmHg)
Arterial CO2 tension
Paco2
5.3 ± 0.3 kPa (40 ± 2 mmHg)
Arterial O2 saturation
Sao2
0.97 ± 0.02 (97 ± 2%)
Arterial blood pH
pH
7.40 ± 0.02
Arterial bicarbonate
HCO3
–
24 + 2 meq/L
Base excess
BE
0 ± 2 meq/L
Diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide  
(single breath)
DLCO
37 mL CO/min/mmHg 27 mL CO/min/mmHg
Dead space volume
VD
2 mL/kg body wt
Physiologic dead space; dead space-tidal  
volume ratio
VD/VT
  Rest
≤35% VT
  Exercise
≤20% VT
Alveolar-arterial difference for O2
P(A – a)O2
≤2.7 kPa ≤20 kPa (≤24 mmHg)
Source: Based on: AH Morris et al: Clinical Pulmonary Function Testing. A Manual of Uniform Laboratory Procedures, 2nd ed. Salt Lake City, 
Utah, Intermountain Thoracic Society, 1984.
APPENDIX
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
682
Table 14 
Gastrointestinal Tests
Results
Test
SI Units
Conventional Units
Absorption tests
  d-Xylose: after overnight fast, 25 g xylose given in oral 
  aqueous solution
    Urine, collected for following 5 h
25% of ingested dose
25% of ingested dose
    Serum, 2 h after dose
2.0–3.5 mmol/L
30–52 mg/dL
  Vitamin A: a fasting blood specimen is obtained and  
  200,000 units of vitamin A in oil is given orally
Serum level should rise to twice 
fasting level in 3–5 h
Serum level should rise to 
twice fasting level in 3–5 h
Bentiromide test (pancreatic function): 500 mg  
bentiromide (chymex) orally; p-aminobenzoic acid 
(PABA) measured
  Plasma
  Urine
>50% recovered in 6 h
>3.6 (±1.1) μg/mL at 90 min
>50% recovered in 6 h
Gastric juice
  Volume
    24 h
2–3 L
2–3 L
    Nocturnal
600–700 mL
600–700 mL
    Basal, fasting
30–70 mL/h
30–70 mL/h
Reaction
    pH
1.6–1.8
1.6–1.8
    Titratable acidity of fasting juice
4–9 μmol/s
15–35 meq/h
Acid output
  Basal
    Females (mean ± 1 SD)
0.6 ± 0.5 μmol/s
2.0 ± 1.8 meq/h
    Males (mean ± 1 SD)
0.8 ± 0.6 μmol/s
3.0 ± 2.0 meq/h
  Maximal (after SC histamine acid phosphate,  
  0.004 mg/kg body weight, and preceded by 50 mg  
  promethazine, or after betazole, 1.7 mg/kg body  
  weight, or pentagastrin, 6 μg/kg body weight)
    Females (mean ± 1 SD)
4.4 ± 1.4 μmol/s
16 ± 5 meq/h
    Males (mean ± 1 SD)
6.4 ± 1.4 μmol/s
23 ± 5 meq/h
  Basal acid output/maximal acid output ratio
≤0.6
≤0.6
Gastrin, serum
0–200 μg/L
0–200 pg/mL
Secretin test (pancreatic exocrine function): 1 unit/kg  
body weight, IV
  Volume (pancreatic juice) in 80 min
>2.0 mL/kg
>2.0 mL/kg
  Bicarbonate concentration
>80 mmol/L
>80 meq/L
  Bicarbonate output in 30 min
>10 mmol
>10 meq
 
APPENDIX 
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
683
Table 15 
Body Fluids and Other Mass Data
Reference Range
SI Units
Conventional Units
Ascitic fluid: See Chap. 9
Body fluid
  Total volume (lean) of body weight
  Intracellular
  Extracellular
50% (in obese) to 70%
30-40% of body weight
20-30% of body weight
Blood
  Total volume
    Males
69 mL/kg body weight
    Females
65 mL/kg body weight
  Plasma volume
    Males
39 mL/kg body weight
    Females
40 mL/kg body weight
  Red blood cell volume
    Males
30 mL/kg body weight
1.15–1.21 L/m2 of body surface area
    Females
25 mL/kg body weight
0.95–1.00 L/m2 of body surface area
Body mass index
18.5–24.9 kg/m2
18.5–24.9 kg/m2
Table 16
Radiation-Derived Units
Quantity
Measures
Old Unit
SI Unit
Special Name 
for SI Unit 
(Abbreviation)
Conversion
Activity
Rate of radioactive decay
curie (Ci)
Disintegrations per 
second (dps)
becquerel (Bq)
1 Ci = 3.7 × 1010 Bq
1 mCi = 37 MBq
1 Bq = 2.703 × 10–11 Ci
Exposure
Amount of ionizations pro-
duced in dry air by x-rays 
or gamma rays, per unit 
of mass
roentgen (R)
Coulomb per  
kilogram (C/kg)
none
1 C/kg = 3876 R
1 R = 2.58 × 10–4 C/kg
1 mR = 258 pC/kg
Air kerma
Sum of initial energies of 
charged particles liber-
ated by ionizing radiation 
in air, per unit of mass
rad
Joule per kilogram 
(J/kg)
gray (Gy)
1 Gy = 100 rad
1 rad = 0.01 Gy
1 mrad = 10 μGy
Absorbed 
dose
Energy deposited per unit 
of mass in a medium, 
e.g., an organ/tissue
rad
Joule per kilogram 
(J/kg)
gray (Gy)
1 Gy = 100 rad
1 rad = 0.01 Gy
1 mrad = 10 μGy
Equivalent 
dose
Energy deposited per unit 
of mass in a medium, 
e.g., an organ/tissue, 
weighted to reflect type(s) 
of radiation
rem
Joule per kilogram 
(J/kg)
sievert (Sv)
1 Sv = 100 rem
1 rem = 0.01 Sv
1 mrem = 10 μSv
Effective dose Energy deposited per 
unit of mass in a refer-
ence individual, doubly 
weighted to reflect type(s) 
of radiation and organ(s) 
irradiated
rem
Joule per kilogram 
(J/kg)
sievert (Sv)
1 Sv = 100 rem
1 rem = 0.01 Sv
1 mrem = 10 μSv
Miscellaneous
APPENDIX
Laboratory Values of Clinical Importance
684
Acknowledgments
The contributions of Drs. Daniel J. Fink, Patrick M. Sluss, 
James L. Januzzi, and Kent B. Lewandrowski to this chapter in 
previous editions of Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine 
are gratefully acknowledged. We also express our gratitude to 
Drs. Amudha Palanisamy and Scott Fink for careful review of 
tables and helpful suggestions.
685
685
aQuestions and answers were taken from Wiener C et al (eds): Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine Self-Assessment and Board Review, 18th ed. New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 2012.
REVIEW AND  
SELF-ASSESSMENTa
DIRECTIONS: Choose the one best response to 
each question.
1.	A 41-year-old female presents to your clinic with a 
week of jaundice. She notes pruritus, icterus, and dark 
urine. She denies fever, abdominal pain, or weight loss. 
The examination is unremarkable except for yellow 
discoloration of the skin. Total bilirubin is 6.0 mg/dL, 
and direct bilirubin is 5.1 mg/dL. AST is 84 U/L, and 
ALT is 92 U/L. Alkaline phosphatase is 662 U/L. CT 
scan of the abdomen is unremarkable. Right upper 
quadrant ultrasound shows a normal gallbladder but 
does not visualize the common bile duct. What is the 
most appropriate next management step?
A. Antibiotics and observation
B. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography 
(ERCP)
C. Hepatitis serologies
D. HIDA scan
E. Serologies for antimitochondrial antibodies
2.	A 61-year-old male is admitted to your service for 
swelling of the abdomen. You detect ascites on clin-
ical examination and perform a paracentesis. The 
results show a white blood cell count of 300 leuko-
cytes/μL with 35% polymorphonuclear cells. The 
peritoneal albumin level is 1.2 g/dL, protein is 2.0 
g/dL, and triglycerides are 320 mg/dL. Peritoneal 
cultures are pending. Serum albumin is 2.6 g/dL. 
Which of the following is the most likely diagnosis?
A. Congestive heart failure
B. Peritoneal tuberculosis
C. Peritoneal carcinomatosis
D. Chylous ascites
E. Bacterial peritonitis
3.	An 80-year-old woman is evaluated for a complaint 
of involuntary weight loss. Her baseline weight at her 
clinic visit 6 months ago was 67 kg. She reports that 
her appetite began to decrease about 2 months ago 
Charles Wiener  n  Cynthia D. Brown  n  Anna R. Hemnes
QUESTIONS
when she noticed that food no longer had the same 
taste. Her daughter accompanies her to the visit and 
reports that her mother seems increasingly listless and 
withdrawn. Her daughter also notes that her mother 
seems more forgetful, and her home has become dis-
organized. The patient has a history of hypertension 
and peripheral vascular disease. She had a transient 
ischemic attack 6 years ago, but has never had a stroke. 
There have been no recent changes to any medica-
tions. Her weight in the clinic today is 60 kg. What 
is the appropriate approach for the evaluation of this 
patient’s weight loss?
A. Ask the patient to return to the clinic in 1 month for 
repeat weight evaluation.
B. Order thyroid function tests.
C. Perform a Mini-Mental State Examination.
D. Reassure the patient and her daughter that this 
degree of weight loss is not abnormal.
E. Both B and C are correct.
4.	The advantages of endoscopy over barium radio­
graphy in the evaluation of dysphagia include all of 
the following EXCEPT:
A. Ability to intervene as well as diagnose
B. Ability to obtain biopsy specimens
C. Increased sensitivity for the detection of abnormali-
ties identified by color, e.g., Barrett’s metaplasia
D. Increased sensitivity for the detection of mucosal lesions
E. No meaningful risk to procedure
5.	A 47-year-old man is evaluated in the emergency 
department for chest pain that developed at a restaurant 
after swallowing a piece of steak. He reports intermit-
tent episodes of meat getting stuck in his lower chest 
over the past 3 years, but none as severe as this event. 
He denies food regurgitation outside of these episodes 
or heartburn symptoms. He is able to swallow liquids 
without difficulty and has not had any weight loss. 
Which of the following is the most likely diagnosis?
	 3.	(Continued)
Review and Self-Assessment
686
	
5.	(Continued)
A. Achalasia
B. Adenocarcinoma of the esophagus
C. Esophageal diverticula
D. Plummer-Vinson syndrome
E. Schatzki’s ring
6.	Which of the following has a well-established asso-
ciation with gastroesophageal reflux?
A. Chronic sinusitis
B. Dental erosion
C. Pulmonary fibrosis
D. Recurrent aspiration pneumonia
E. Sleep apnea
7.	A 36-year-old female with AIDS and a CD4 count 
of 35/mm3 presents with odynophagia and pro-
gressive dysphagia. The patient reports daily fevers 
and a 20-lb weight loss. She has been treated with 
clotrimazole troches without relief. On physical 
examination the patient is cachectic with a body 
mass index (BMI) of 16 and a weight of 86 lb. She 
has a temperature of 38.2°C (100.8°F) and is noted 
to be orthostatic by blood pressure and pulse. Exam-
ination of the oropharynx reveals no evidence of 
thrush. The patient undergoes esophagogastroduo-
denoscopy (EGD), which reveals serpiginous ulcers 
in the distal esophagus without vesicles. No yellow 
plaques are noted. Multiple biopsies are taken that 
show intranuclear and intracytoplasmic inclusions 
in large endothelial cells and fibroblasts. What is the 
best treatment for this patient’s esophagitis?
A. Ganciclovir
B. Glucocorticoids
C. Fluconazole
D. Foscarnet
E. Thalidomide
8.	A 57-year-old man is evaluated with an esophago-
gastroduodenoscopy after an episode of hemateme-
sis. The patient reports a history of tobacco use and 
hypercholesterolemia, but is otherwise healthy. He 
has had lower back pain for the past month and has 
been intermittently using acetaminophen 1000 mg 
for relief. His endoscopy shows a 3-cm duodenal 
ulcer. Which of the following statements is correct 
regarding this finding?
A. The lesion should be biopsied as duodenal ulcers 
have an elevated risk of being due to carcinoma.
B. First-line therapy should be discontinuation of acet-
aminophen use.
	
8.	(Continued)
C. The patient is not at risk for any associated cancers.
D. Poor socioeconomic status is a risk factor for devel-
opment of this condition.
E. Antral gastritis is rarely found with this condition.
9.	A 58-year-old man is evaluated for abdominal pain 
by his primary care physician. He reports severe stress 
at his job for the last 3 months and has since noted 
that he has epigastric pain that is relieved by eating 
and drinking milk. He has not had food regurgita-
tion, dysphagia, or bloody emesis or bowel move-
ments. He denies any symptoms in his chest. Peptic 
ulcer disease is suspected. Which of the following 
statements regarding noninvasive testing for Helico-
bacter pylori is true?
A. There is no reliable noninvasive method to detect 
H. pylori.
B. Stool antigen testing is appropriate for both diagnosis 
of and proof of cure after therapy for H. pylori.
C. Plasma antibodies to H. pylori offer the greatest sensi-
tivity for diagnosis of infection.
D. Exposure to low-dose radiation is a limitation to the 
urea breath test.
E. False-negative testing using the urea breath test may 
occur with recent use of NSAIDs.
10.	A 44-year-old woman complains of 6 months of 
epigastric pain that is worst between meals. She also 
reports symptoms of heartburn. The pain is typically 
relieved by over-the-counter antacid medications. 
She comes to the clinic after noting her stools dark-
ening. She has no significant past medical history 
and takes no medications. Her physical examination 
is normal except for diffuse mid-epigastric pain. Her 
stools are heme positive. She undergoes EGD, which 
demonstrates a well-circumscribed 2-cm duodenal 
ulcer that is positive for H. pylori. Which of the fol-
lowing is recommended initial therapy given these 
findings?
A. Lansoprazole plus clarithromycin plus amoxicillin for 
14 days
B. Pantoprazole plus amoxicillin for 21 days
C. Pantoprazole plus clarithromycin for 14 days
D. Omeprazole plus bismuth plus tetracycline plus met-
ronidazole for 14 days
E. Omeprazole plus metronidazole plus clarithromycin 
for 7 days
11.	A 57-year-old man with peptic ulcer disease experi-
ences transient improvement with Helicobacter pylori 
eradication. However, 3 months later symptoms 
Review and Self-Assessment
687
recur despite acid-suppressing therapy. He does not 
take nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents. Stool 
analysis for H. pylori antigen is negative. Upper GI 
endoscopy reveals prominent gastric folds together 
with the persistent ulceration in the duodenal bulb 
previously detected and the beginning of a new 
ulceration 4 cm proximal to the initial ulcer. Fasting 
gastrin levels are elevated and basal acid secretion is 
15 meq/h. What is the best test to perform to make 
the diagnosis?
A. No additional testing is necessary.
B. Blood sampling for gastrin levels following a meal.
C. Blood sampling for gastrin levels following secretin 
administration.
D. Endoscopic ultrasonography of the pancreas.
E. Genetic testing for mutations in the MEN1 gene.
12.	A 23-year-old woman is evaluated by her primary 
care physician for diffuse, crampy abdominal pain. 
She reports that she has had abdominal pain for 
the last several years, but it is getting worse and is 
now associated with intermittent diarrhea without 
flatulence. This does not waken her at night. Stools 
do not float and are not hard to flush. She has not 
noted any worsening with specific foods, but she 
does have occasional rashes on her lower legs. She 
has lost about 5 kg over the last year. She is other-
wise healthy and takes no medications. Which of 
the following is the most appropriate recommenda-
tion at this point?
A. Increased dietary fiber intake
B. Measurement of antiendomysial antibody
C. Measurement of 24-hour fecal fat
D. Referral to gastroenterologist for endoscopy
E. Trial of lactose-free diet
13.	All of the following are direct complications of 
short bowel syndrome EXCEPT:
A. Cholesterol gallstones
B. Coronary artery disease
C. Gastric acid hypersecretion
D. Renal calcium oxalate calculi
E. Steatorrhea
14.	A 54-year-old man is evaluated by a gastroenterolo-
gist for diarrhea that has been present for approxi-
mately 1 month. He reports stools that float and are 
difficult to flush down the toilet; these can occur 
at any time of day or night, but seem worsened by 
fatty meals. In addition, he reports pain in many 
joints that lasts days to weeks and is not relieved by 
ibuprofen. His wife notes that the patient has had 
difficulty with memory for the last few months. He 
has lost 30 pounds and reports intermittent low-
grade fevers. He takes no medications and is oth-
erwise healthy. Endoscopy is recommended. Which 
of the following is the most likely finding on small-
bowel biopsy?
A. Dilated lymphatics
B. Flat villi with crypt hyperplasia
C. Mononuclear cell infiltrate in the lamina propria
D. Normal small-bowel biopsy
E. PAS-positive macrophages containing small bacilli
15.	A 54-year-old male presents with 1 month of diar-
rhea. He states that he has 8–10 loose bowel move-
ments a day. He has lost 4 kg during this time. Vital 
signs and physical examination are normal. Serum 
laboratory studies are normal. A 24-hour stool col-
lection reveals 500 g of stool with a measured stool 
osmolality of 200 mosmol/L and a calculated stool 
osmolality of 210 mosmol/L. Based on these findings, 
what is the most likely cause of this patient’s diarrhea?
A. Celiac sprue
B. Chronic pancreatitis
C. Lactase deficiency
D. Vasoactive intestinal peptide tumor
E. Whipple’s disease
16.	Cobalamin absorption may occur in all of the fol-
lowing diseases EXCEPT:
A. Bacterial overgrowth syndrome
B. Chronic pancreatitis
C. Crohn’s disease
D. Pernicious anemia
E. Ulcerative colitis
17.	Which of the following statements regarding the 
epidemiology of inflammatory bowel disease is 
correct?
A. Monozygotic twins are highly concordant for ulcer-
ative colitis.
B. Oral contraceptive use decreases the incidence of 
Crohn’s disease.
C. Persons of Asian descent have the highest rates of 
ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease.
D. Smoking may decrease the incidence of ulcerative 
colitis.
E. Typical age of onset for Crohn’s disease is 40–50 years 
old.
	11.	(Continued)
	14.	(Continued)
Review and Self-Assessment
688
18.	A 24-year-old woman is admitted to the hospital 
with a 1-year history of severe abdominal pain and 
chronic diarrhea, which has been bloody for the past 
2 months. She reports a 20-lb weight loss, frequent 
fevers, and night sweats. She denies vomiting. Her 
abdominal pain is crampy and primarily involves 
her right lower quadrant. She is otherwise healthy. 
Examination is concerning for an acute abdomen 
with rebound and guarding present. CT shows free 
air in the peritoneum. She is urgently taken to the 
operating room for surgical exploration, where she 
is found to have multiple strictures and a perfora-
tion of her bowel in the terminal ileum. The rectum 
was spared and a fissure from the duodenum to the 
jejunum is found. The perforated area is resected 
and adhesions lysed. Which of the following find-
ings on pathology of her resected area confirms her 
diagnosis?
A. Crypt abscesses
B. Flat villi
C. Noncaseating granuloma throughout the bowel wall
D. Special stain for Clostridium difficile toxin
E. Transmural acute and chronic inflammation
19.	A 45-year-old man with ulcerative colitis has been 
treated for the past 5 years with infliximab with 
excellent resolution of his bowel symptoms and 
endoscopic evidence of normal colonic mucosa. He 
is otherwise healthy. He is evaluated by a derma-
tologist for a lesion that initially was a pustule over 
his right lower extremity but has since progressed in 
size with ulceration. The ulcer is moderately pain-
ful. He does not recall any trauma to the area. On 
examination the ulcer measures 15 cm by 7 cm and 
central necrosis is present. The edges of the ulcer are 
violaceous. No other lesions are identified. Which 
of the following is the most likely diagnosis?
A. Erythema nodosum
B. Metastatic Crohn’s disease
C. Psoriasis
D. Pyoderma gangrenosum
E. Pyoderma vegetans
20.	Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) may be caused 
by exogenous factors. Gastrointestinal flora may 
promote an inflammatory response or may inhibit 
inflammation. Probiotics have been used to treat 
IBD. Which of the following organisms has been 
used in the treatment of IBD?
A. Campylobacter spp.
B. Clostridium difficile
C. Escherichia spp.
D. Lactobacillus spp.
E. Shigella spp.
21.	Your 33-year-old patient with Crohn’s disease 
(CD) has had a disappointing disease response to 
glucocorticoids and 5-ASA agents. He is interested 
in steroid-sparing agents. He has no liver or renal 
disease. You prescribe once-weekly methotrexate 
injections. In addition to monitoring hepatic func-
tion and complete blood count, what other com-
plication of methotrexate therapy do you advise the 
patient of?
A. Disseminated histoplasmosis
B. Lymphoma
C. Pancreatitis
D. Pneumonitis
E. Primary sclerosing cholangitis
22.	Which of the following patients requires no fur-
ther testing before making the diagnosis of irritable 
bowel syndrome and initiating treatment?
A. A 76-year-old woman with 6 months of intermittent 
crampy abdominal pain that is worse with stress and 
associated with bloating and diarrhea.
B. A 25-year-old woman with 6 months of abdomi-
nal pain, bloating, and diarrhea that has worsened 
steadily and now awakes her from sleep at night to 
move her bowels.
C. A 30-year-old man with 6 months of lower abdomi-
nal crampy pain relieved with bowel movements, 
usually loose. Symptoms are worse during the day-
time at work and better on the weekend. Weight loss 
is not present.
D. A 19-year-old female college student with 2 months 
of diarrhea and worsening abdominal pain with 
occasional blood in her stool.
E. A 27-year-old woman with 6 months of intermittent 
abdominal pain, bloating, and diarrhea without asso-
ciated weight loss. Crampy pain and diarrhea persist 
after a 48-hour fast.
23.	A 29-year-old woman comes to see you in the 
clinic because of abdominal discomfort. She feels 
abdominal discomfort on most days of the week, 
and the pain varies in location and intensity. She 
notes constipation as well as diarrhea, but diarrhea 
predominates. In comparison to 6 months ago, she 
has more bloating and flatulence than she has had 
before. She identifies eating and stress as aggra-
vating factors, and her pain is relieved by defeca-
tion. You suspect irritable bowel syndrome (IBS). 
	20.	(Continued)
Review and Self-Assessment
689
Laboratory data include white blood cell (WBC) 
count 8000/μL, hematocrit 32%, platelets 210,000/
μL, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of
44 mm/h. Stool studies show the presence of lacto-
ferrin but no blood. Which intervention is appro-
priate at this time?
A. Antidepressants
B. Ciprofloxacin
C. Colonoscopy
D. Reassurance and patient counseling
E. Stool bulking agents
24.	After a careful history and physical, and a cost-
effective workup, you have diagnosed a 24-year-old 
female patient with irritable bowel syndrome. What 
other condition would you reasonably expect to 
find in this patient?
A. Abnormal brain anatomy
B. Autoimmune disease
C. History of sexually transmitted diseases
D. Psychiatric diagnosis
E. Sensory hypersensitivity to peripheral stimuli
25.	A 78-year-old woman is admitted to the hospital 
with fever, loss of appetite, and left lower quadrant 
pain. She is not constipated, but has not moved her 
bowels recently. Laboratory examination is notable 
for an elevated WBC count. These symptoms began 
approximately 3 days ago and have steadily wors-
ened. Which of the following statements regarding 
the use of radiologic imaging to evaluate her condi-
tion is true?
A. Air-fluid levels are commonly seen on plain abdomi-
nal films.
B. Barium enema should not be performed because of 
the risk of perforation.
C. Lower gastrointestinal bleeding will likely be visual-
ized on CT angiography.
D. A thickened colonic wall is not required on CT for 
the diagnosis of her likely condition.
E. Ultrasound of the pelvis is the best modality to 
visualize the likely pathologic process.
26.	Which of the following patients is MOST appro-
priate for surgical management of their acute diver-
ticulitis?
A. A 45-year-old woman with rheumatoid arthritis 
treated with infliximab and prednisone.
B. A 63-year-old woman with diverticulitis in the 
descending colon and a distal stricture.
C. A 70-year-old woman with end-stage renal disease 
with colonic wall thickening of 8 mm on CT scan.
D. A 77-year-old man with two episodes of diverticuli-
tis in the past 2 years.
E. None of the above patients requires surgical 
management.
27.	A 67-year-old man is evaluated in the emergency 
department for blood in the toilet bowl after mov-
ing his bowels. Blood was also present on the toilet 
paper after wiping. He reports straining and recent 
constipation. He has a history of systemic hyper-
tension and hyperlipidemia. Vital signs are normal 
and he is not orthostatic. Anoscopy shows exter-
nal hemorrhoids. Hematocrit is normal and bleed-
ing does not recur during his 6-hour emergency 
department stay. Which of the following is the most 
appropriate management?
A. Ciprofloxacin and metronidazole
B. Cortisone suppositories, fiber supplementation
C. Hemorrhoidal banding
D. Operative hemorrhoidectomy
E. Upper endoscopy
28.	Which of the following statements regarding ano-
rectal abscess is true?
A. Anorectal abscess is more common in diabetic 
patients.
B. Anorectal abscess is more common in women.
C. Difficulty voiding is uncommon and should prompt 
further evaluation of anorectal abscess.
D. Examination in the operating room under anes-
thesia is required for adequate exploration in most 
cases.
E. The peak incidence is the seventh decade of life.
29.	An 88-year-old woman is brought to your clinic 
by her family because she has become increasingly 
socially withdrawn. The patient lives alone and has 
been reluctant to visit or be visited by her fam-
ily. Family members, including seven children, also 
note a foul odor in her apartment and on her per-
son. She has not had any weight loss. Alone in the 
examining room, she only complains of hemor-
rhoids. On mental status examination, she has signs 
of depression. Which of the following interventions 
is most appropriate at this time?
A. Head CT scan
B. Initiate treatment with an antidepressant medication
C. Physical examination including genitourinary and 
rectal examination
	23.	(Continued)
	26.	(Continued)
Review and Self-Assessment
690
D. Screening for occult malignancy
E. Serum thyroid-stimulating hormone
30.	A 37-year-old woman presents with abdominal 
pain, anorexia, and fever of 4 days’ duration. The 
abdominal pain is mostly in the left lower quadrant. 
Her past medical history is significant for irritable 
bowel syndrome, diverticulitis treated 6 months ago, 
and status post-appendectomy. Since her last bout 
of diverticulitis she has increased her fiber intake 
and avoids nuts and popcorn. Review of systems is 
positive for weight loss, daily chills and sweats, and 
“bubbles” in her urinary stream. Her temperature is 
39.6°C. A limited CT scan shows thickened colonic 
wall (5 mm) and inflammation with pericolic fat 
stranding. She is admitted with a presumptive diag-
nosis of diverticulitis. What is the most appropriate 
management for this patient?
A. A trial of rifaximin and a high-fiber diet
B. Bowel rest, ciprofloxacin, metronidazole, and ampicillin
C. Examination of the urine sediment
D. Measurement of 24-hour urine protein
E. Surgical removal of the affected colon and exploration
31.	An 85-year-old woman is brought to a local emer-
gency department by her family. She has been com-
plaining of abdominal pain off and on for several 
days, but this morning states that this is the worst 
pain of her life. She is able to describe a sharp, stab-
bing pain in her abdomen. Her family reports that 
she has not been eating and seems to have no appe-
tite. She has a past medical history of atrial fibril-
lation and hypercholesterolemia. She has had two 
episodes of vomiting and in the ER experiences 
diarrhea that is hemoccult positive. On examination 
she is afebrile, with a heart rate of 105 beats/min 
and blood pressure of 111/69 mmHg. Her abdomen 
is mildly distended and she has hypoactive bowel 
sounds. She does not exhibit rebound tenderness or 
guarding. She is admitted for further management. 
Several hours after admission she becomes unre-
sponsive. Blood pressure is difficult to obtain and at 
best approximation is 60/40 mmHg. She has a rigid 
abdomen. Surgery is called and the patient is taken 
for emergent laparotomy. She is found to have acute 
mesenteric ischemia. Which of the following is true 
regarding this diagnosis?
A. Mortality for this condition is greater than 50%.
B. Risk factors include low-fiber diet and obesity.
C. The “gold standard” for diagnosis is CT scan of the 
abdomen.
D. The lack of acute abdominal signs in this case is 
unusual for mesenteric ischemia.
E. The splanchnic circulation is poorly collateralized.
32.	All of the following are potential causes of appendix 
obstruction and appendicitis EXCEPT:
A. Ascaris infection
B. Carcinoid tumor
C. Cholelithiasis
D. Fecalith
E. Measles infection
33.	Which of the following organisms is most likely to 
be causative in acute appendicitis?
A. Clostridium species
B. Escherichia coli
C. Mycobacterium tuberculosis
D. Staphylococcus aureus
E. Yersinia enterocolitica
34.	A 32-year-old woman is evaluated in the emer-
gency department for abdominal pain. She reports 
a vague loss of appetite for the past day and has 
had progressively severe abdominal pain, initially 
at her umbilicus, but now localized to her right 
lower quadrant. The pain is crampy. She has not 
moved her bowels or vomited. She reports that she 
is otherwise healthy and has had no sick contact. 
Exam is notable for a temperature of 100.7°F, heart 
rate of 105 beats/min, and otherwise normal vital 
signs. Her abdomen is tender in the right lower 
quadrant and pelvic examination is normal. Urine 
pregnancy test is negative. Which of the following 
imaging modalities is most likely to confirm her 
diagnosis?
A. CT of the abdomen without contrast
B. Colonoscopy
C. Pelvic ultrasound
D. Plain film of the abdomen
E. Ultrasound of the abdomen
35.	A 38-year-old male is seen in the urgent care cen-
ter with several hours of severe abdominal pain. His 
symptoms began suddenly, but he reports several 
months of pain in the epigastrium after eating, with 
a resultant 10-lb weight loss. He takes no medi-
cations besides over-the-counter antacids and has 
no other medical problems or habits. On physical 
examination temperature is 38.0°C (100.4°F), pulse 
130 beats/min, respiratory rate 24 breaths/min, and 
blood pressure 110/50 mmHg. His abdomen has 
	29.	(Continued)
	31.	(Continued)
Review and Self-Assessment
691
absent bowel sounds and is rigid with involuntary 
guarding diffusely. A plain film of the abdomen is 
obtained and shows free air under the diaphragm. 
Which of the following is most likely to be found 
in the operating room?
A. Necrotic bowel
B. Necrotic pancreas
C. Perforated duodenal ulcer
D. Perforated gallbladder
E. Perforated gastric ulcer
36.	Which of the following is the source of the perito-
nitis of the patient in question 35?
A. Bile
B. Blood
C. Foreign body
D. Gastric contents
E. Pancreatic enzymes
37.	Enteric pathogens can produce diarrheal illness 
through a variety of mechanisms that lead to spe-
cific clinical characteristics. All of the following are 
characteristics of diarrhea caused by Vibrio cholerae 
EXCEPT:
A. Disease localized to the proximal small intestine
B. Fecal leukocytes
C. Fecal lactoferrin
D. Toxin production
E. Watery diarrhea
38.	A 46-year-old woman travels to a rural area of 
Guatemala. Three days after arrival, she develops 
watery diarrhea with severe abdominal cramping. 
She reports two unformed stools daily for the past 
2 days. She has noticed no blood in the stool and 
has not experienced a fever. What is the most likely 
cause of the patient’s illness?
A. Campylobacter jejuni
B. Enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli
C. Giardia lamblia
D. Norovirus
E. Shigella spp.
39.	For the case above, which of the following treat-
ments would you recommend?
A. Azithromycin 10 mg/kg on day 1 with 5 mg/kg on 
days 2 and 3 if the diarrhea persists
B. Ciprofloxacin 500 mg three times daily for 5 days
C. Ciprofloxacin 750 mg once
D. Loperamide 4 mg once followed by 2 mg after pas-
sage of each unformed stool
E. Oral rehydration therapy only
40.	Two hours after attending a company picnic, 
many individuals who attended the picnic develop 
an acute gastrointestinal illness. Food poisoning 
caused by Staphylococcus aureus is suspected. All of 
the following characteristics would be a common 
feature of food poisoning due to this organism 
EXCEPT:
A. Abdominal cramping
B. Diarrhea
C. Fever
D. Vomiting
41.	You are the on-call physician practicing in a subur-
ban community. You receive a call from a 28-year-
old woman with a past medical history significant for 
sarcoidosis who is currently taking no medications. 
She is complaining of an acute onset of crampy dif-
fuse abdominal pain and multiple episodes of emesis 
that are nonbloody. She has not had any lighthead-
edness with standing or loss of consciousness. When 
questioned further, the patient states that her last 
meal was 5 hours previously, when she joined her 
friends for lunch at a local Chinese restaurant. She 
ate from the buffet, which included multiple poul-
try dishes and fried rice. What should you do for 
this patient?
A. Ask the patient to go to the nearest emergency 
department for resuscitation with IV fluids.
B. Initiate antibiotic therapy with azithromycin.
C. Reassure the patient that her illness is self-limited 
and no further treatment is necessary if she can 
maintain adequate hydration.
D. Refer the patient for CT to assess for appendicitis.
E. Refer the patient for admission for IV vancomycin 
and ceftriaxone because of her immunocompromised 
state resulting from sarcoidosis.
42.	Which of the following is a common manifestation 
of Clostridium difficile infection?
A. Fever
B. Nonbloody diarrhea
C. Adynamic ileus
D. Recurrence after therapy
E. All of the above
43.	All of the following patients should be treated for 
Clostridium difficile infection EXCEPT:
	35.	(Continued)
	39.	(Continued)
Review and Self-Assessment
692
A. A 57-year-old nursing home resident with diar-
rhea for 2 weeks and pseudomembranes found on 
colonoscopy with no evidence of toxin A or B in 
the stool
B. A 63-year-old woman with fever, leukocytosis, ady-
namic ileus, and a positive PCR for C. difficile in the 
stool
C. A 68-year-old woman with recent course of anti-
biotics admitted to the medical intensive care unit 
after presentation to the emergency department 
with abdominal pain and diarrhea. She was found to 
have severe abdominal tenderness with absent bowel 
sounds, systemic hypotension, and colonic wall thick-
ening on CT of the abdomen.
D. A 75-year-old woman who received recent therapy 
with amoxicillin for an upper respiratory tract infec-
tion and now has two loose bowel movements per 
day for the past 3 days
44.	A 78-year-old woman with dementia has been liv-
ing in a nursing home for 5 years. She was been 
seen by her primary care provider for evaluation of 
diarrhea 4 weeks ago. At that time, a stool sample 
was positive by PCR for Clostridium difficile, and 
she was treated with oral metronidazole with some 
improvement in her symptoms. However, she has 
had five loose bowel movements per day starting 
4 days ago and now has abdominal tenderness. Stool 
PCR remains positive. Which of the following is 
the most appropriate therapy?
A. Fecal transplantation
B. IV immunoglobulin
C. Oral metronidazole
D. Oral nitazoxanide
E. Oral vancomycin
45.	Which of the following antibiotics has the weakest 
association with the development of Clostridium
difficile–associated disease?
A. Ceftriaxone
B. Ciprofloxacin
C. Clindamycin
D. Moxifloxacin
E. Piperacillin/tazobactam
46.	A 45-year-old man with a history of alcoholism 
and presumed cirrhosis is brought to the emer-
gency department by his friend complaining of 2 to 
3 days of increasing lethargy and confusion. He has 
not consumed alcohol in the past 2 years. He cur-
rently takes no medications and works at home as a 
video game designer. He has no risk factors for HIV. 
He was referred by his primary care physician for a 
liver transplant evaluation and is scheduled to begin 
his evaluation next month. His vital signs included 
blood pressure of 90/60 mmHg, heart rate of 105 
beats/min, temperature of 38.5°C, and respiratory 
rate of 10 breaths/min with O2 saturation of 97% 
on room air. He is somnolent but is able to answer 
questions accurately. His skin is notable for many 
spider telangiectasias and palmar erythema. He has 
a distended diffusely tender abdomen with a posi-
tive fluid wave. Paracentesis reveals slightly cloudy 
fluid with WBC 1000/μL and 40% neutrophils. His 
blood pressure increases to 100/65 mmHg, and his 
heart rate decreases to 95 beats/min after 1 L of 
intravenous fluids. Which of the following state-
ments regarding his condition and treatment is true?
A. Fever is present in more than 50% of cases.
B. Initial empiric therapy should include metronidazole 
or clindamycin for anaerobes.
C. The diagnosis of primary (spontaneous) bacterial 
peritonitis is not confirmed because the percent-
age of neutrophils in the peritoneal fluid is less than 
50%.
D. The mostly causative organism for his condition is 
Enterococcus.
E. The yield of peritoneal fluid cultures for diagnosis is 
greater than 90%.
47.	A 48-year-old woman with a history of end-stage 
renal disease caused by diabetic renal disease is 
admitted to the hospital with 1 day of abdominal 
pain and fever. She has been on continuous ambu-
latory peritoneal dialysis (CAPD) for the past 
6 months. She reports that for the past day she has 
had poor return of dialysate and is feeling bloated. 
She has had complications from her diabetes, includ-
ing retinopathy and peripheral neuropathy. She is 
uncomfortable but not toxic. Her vital signs include 
a temperature of 38.8°C, blood pressure of 130/65 
mmHg, heart rate of 105 beats/min, and respiratory 
rate of 15 breaths/min with room air O2 satura-
tion of 98%. Her abdomen is slightly distended and 
diffusely tender with rebound tenderness. A sample 
of dialysate reveals WBC 400/μL with 80% neu-
trophils. Empiric intraperitoneal antibiotic therapy 
should include:
A. Cefoxitin
B. Fluconazole
C. Metronidazole
D. Vancomycin
E. Voriconazole
	43.	(Continued)
	46.	(Continued)
Review and Self-Assessment
693
48.	A 77-year-old man presents to the hospital with 1 
week of fever, chills, nausea, and right upper quadrant 
pain. His temperature is 39°C, and he appears toxic. 
His blood pressure is 110/70 mmHg, heart rate is 110 
beats/min, and respiratory rate is 22 breaths/min with 
room air O2 saturation 92%. He has diminished breath 
sounds at the right base and diffuse tenderness in the 
right upper quadrant. He has a history of cholelithia-
sis but has declined elective cholecystectomy. His CT 
scan of the abdomen is shown in Figure 48.  Which 
of the following statements regarding his condition or 
therapy is true?
 
Figure 48
A. Concomitant bacteremia is rare (<10%).
B. He should receive empiric antibiotics targeting Can-
dida species.
C. He should receive empiric antibiotics targeting 
anaerobic organisms.
D. He should undergo percutaneous drainage.
E. His serum alkaline phosphatase is most likely normal.
49.	A 41-year-old man with hepatitis C–associated ascites 
presents with acute abdominal pain. Physical examina-
tion is notable for temperature of 38.3°C, heart rate of 
115 beats/min, blood pressure of 88/48 mmHg, respi-
ratory rate of 16 breaths/min, and oxygen saturation of 
99% on room air. The patient is in moderate discom-
fort and is lying still. He is alert and oriented. His lungs 
are clear. Cardiac examination is unremarkable. His 
abdomen is diffusely tender with distant bowel sounds, 
mild guarding, and no rebound tenderness. Laboratory 
studies reveal a leukocyte count of 11,630/μL with 
94% neutrophils, hematocrit of 29%, and platelet count 
of 24,000/μL. Paracentesis reveals 658 PMNs/μL,
total protein of 1.2 g/dL, and glucose of 24 mg/dL 
and Gram stain showing gram-negative rods, gram-
positive cocci in chains, gram-positive rods, and 
yeast forms. All of the following are indicated 
EXCEPT:
A. Abdominal radiograph
B. Broad-spectrum antibiotics
C. Drotrecogin alfa
D. Intravenous fluid
E. Surgical consultation
50.	Helicobacter pylori colonization increases the odds 
ratio of developing all of the following conditions 
EXCEPT:
A. Duodenal ulcer disease
B. Esophageal adenocarcinoma
C. Gastric adenocarcinoma
D. Gastric mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) 
lymphoma
E. Peptic ulcer disease
51.	One month after receiving a 14-day course of omepra-
zole, clarithromycin, and amoxicillin for Helicobacter 
pylori–associated gastric ulcer disease, a 44-year-old 
woman still has mild dyspepsia and pain after meals. 
What is the appropriate next step in management?
A. Empirical long-term proton pump inhibitor therapy
B. Endoscopy with biopsy to rule out gastric adeno-
carcinoma
C. H. pylori serology testing
D. Second-line therapy for H. pylori with omeprazole, 
bismuth subsalicylate, tetracycline, and metronidazole
E. Urea breath test
52.	In the developed world, seroprevalence of Helico-
bacter pylori infection is currently
A. Decreasing
B. Increasing
C. Staying the same
D. Unknown
53.	A 42-year-old man with heme-positive stools and a 
history of epigastric pain is found to have a duode-
nal ulcer that is biopsy-proven positive for H. pylori. 
All of the following are effective eradication regi-
mens EXCEPT:
A. Amoxicillin and levofloxacin for 10 days
B. Omeprazole, clarithromycin, and metronidazole for 
14 days
C. Omeprazole, clarithromycin, and amoxicillin for 
14 days
D. Omeprazole, bismuth, tetracycline, and metronida-
zole for 14 days
E. Omeprazole and amoxicillin for 5 days followed by 
omeprazole, clarithromycin, and tinidazole for 5 days
	49.	(Continued)
Review and Self-Assessment
694
54.	Five healthy college roommates develop a rapid 
(<8 hours) onset of abdominal pain, cramping, fever 
to 38.5°C, vomiting, and copious nonbloody diarrhea 
while camping. They immediately return for hydra-
tion and diagnosis. A stool culture grows Salmonella 
enteritidis. All of the statements regarding their clini-
cal syndrome are true EXCEPT:
A. Antibiotic therapy is not indicated.
B. Bacteremia occurs in fewer than 10% of cases.
C. The most likely source was undercooked eggs.
D. There is no vaccine available for this illness.
E. They have enteric (typhoid) fever.
55.	Two days after returning from a trip to Thailand, a 
36-year-old woman develops severe crampy abdom-
inal pain, fever to 40°C, nausea, and malaise. The 
next day, she begins having bloody mucopurulent 
diarrhea with worsening abdominal pain and con-
tinued fever. She reports she was in Bangkok during 
monsoonal flooding and ate fresh food from stalls. A 
stool examination shows many neutrophils, and cul-
ture grows Shigella flexneri. Which of the following 
statements regarding her clinical syndrome is true?
A. An effective vaccine for travelers is available.
B. Antibiotic therapy prolongs the carrier state and 
should not be administered unless she develops 
bacteremia.
C. Antimotility agents are effective in reducing the risk 
of dehydration.
D. Ciprofloxacin is recommended therapy.
E. Her disease can be distinguished from illness caused 
by Campylobacter jejuni on clinical grounds by the 
presence of fever.
56.	A previously healthy 32-year-old graduate student 
at the University of Wisconsin describes 1 to 2 days 
of fever, myalgia, and headache followed by abdom-
inal pain and diarrhea. He has experienced up to 
10 bowel movements over the past day. He has noted 
mucus and blood in the stool. The patient notes 
that 3 days ago, he was at a church barbecue, where 
several people contracted a diarrheal illness. He has 
not traveled in more than 6 months and has no 
history of GI illness. Physical examination is unre-
markable except for a temperature of 38.8°C and 
diffuse abdominal tenderness. Laboratory findings 
are notable only for a slightly elevated leukocyte 
count and an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation 
rate. Wright’s stain of a fecal sample reveals the pres-
ence of neutrophils. Colonoscopy reveals inflamed 
mucosa. Biopsy of an affected area discloses mucosal 
infiltration with neutrophils, monocytes, and eosin-
ophils; epithelial damage, including loss of mucus; 
glandular degeneration; and crypt abscesses. Which 
of the following microbial pathogens is most likely 
to be responsible for his illness?
A. Campylobacter
B. Escherichia coli
C. Norwalk agent
D. Rotavirus
E. Staphylococcus aureus
57.	In the patient described in question 56, which of 
the following is recommended therapy?
A. Azithromycin
B. Ceftriaxone
C. Lomotil only for symptoms
D. Metronidazole
E. Tinidazole
58.	While working for a relief mission in Haiti, you are 
asked to see a 19-year-old patient with profuse watery 
diarrhea as shown in Figure 58. The patient is mildly 
hypotensive and tachycardic and is afebrile. There 
is no abdominal tenderness. All of the statements 
regarding this patient’s illness are true EXCEPT:
Figure 58
	56.	(Continued)
Review and Self-Assessment
695
  Antibiotic therapy shortens the duration of disease and 
hastens clearance of the organism from stool.
A. Morbidity or death is mediated by bacteremia and 
multiorgan failure.
B. Point of care antigen testing is available.
C. The diarrhea is toxin mediated.
D. Vaccines with moderate efficacy are available outside 
the United States.
59.	All of the following statements regarding Norwalk 
virus gastroenteritis are true EXCEPT:
A. Fever is common.
B. Incubation period is typically 5 to 7 days.
C. Infection is common worldwide.
D. It is a major cause of nonbacterial diarrhea outbreaks 
in the United States.
E. Transmission is typically fecal–oral.
60.	All of the following statements regarding rotavirus 
gastroenteritis are true EXCEPT:
A. Fever occurs in more than 25% of cases.
B. Inflammatory diarrhea distinguishes rotaviral illness 
from Norwalk agent gastroenteritis.
C. It is a major cause of diarrheal death among children 
in the developing world.
D. Nausea is common.
E. Vaccination is recommended for all children in the 
United States.
61.	A 45-year-old migrant worker originally from Mexico 
is evaluated for right upper quadrant pain, fever, and 
hepatic tenderness. He reports no diarrhea or bloody 
stool. He is found to have a large hepatic abscess on 
CT scan of the abdomen. Of note, he has been in the 
United States for approximately 10 years and was well 
until approximately 10 days ago. Which of the follow-
ing tests can be used to confirm the diagnosis?
A. Examination of stool for trophozoites
B. Liver biopsy
C. PCR of stool for Campylobacter spp.
D. Response to empiric trial of iodoquinol
E. Serologic test for antibody to E. histolytica
62.	Which of the following intestinal protozoal infec-
tions can be diagnosed with stool ova and parasite 
examination?
A. Cryptosporidium spp.
B. Cyclospora spp.
C. Giardia spp.
	58.	(Continued)
D. Isospora spp.
E. Microsporidia spp.
F. All of the above
63.	A 17-year-old woman presents to the clinic com-
plaining of vaginal itchiness and malodorous dis-
charge. She is sexually active with multiple partners, 
and she is interested in getting tested for sexually 
transmitted diseases. A wet-mount microscopic 
examination is performed, and trichomonal para-
sites are identified. Which of the following state-
ments regarding trichomoniasis is true?
A. A majority of women are asymptomatic.
B. No treatment is necessary because the disease is self-
limited.
C. The patient’s sexual partner need not be treated.
D. Trichomoniasis can only be spread sexually.
E. Trichomoniasis is 100% sensitive to metronidazole
64.	A 19-year-old college student presents to the emer-
gency department with crampy abdominal pain and 
watery diarrhea that has worsened over 3 days. He 
recently returned from a volunteer trip to Mexico. 
He has no past medical history and felt well through-
out the trip. Stool examination shows small cysts 
containing four nuclei, and stool antigen immunoas-
say is positive for Giardia spp. Which of the following 
is a recommend treatment regimen for this patient?
A. Albendazole
B. Clindamycin
C. Giardiasis is self-limited and requires no antibiotic 
therapy
D. Paromomycin
E. Tinidazole
65.	A 28-year-old woman is brought to the hospital 
because of abdominal pain, weight loss, and dehy-
dration. She has been diagnosed with HIV/AIDS 
for the past 2 years with a history of oral candi-
diasis and pneumocystis pneumonia. She reports 
voluminous watery diarrhea over the past 2 weeks. 
Because of medical nonadherence, she has not 
taken any antiretroviral therapy. Routine stool ova 
and parasite examination is normal, but stool anti-
gen testing reveals Cryptosporidium spp. Which of 
the following is the recommended therapy?
A. Metronidazole
B. Nitazoxanide
C. No therapy recommended because the diarrhea is 
self-limited.
	62.	(Continued)
Review and Self-Assessment
696
D. No effective specific therapy is available.
E. Tinidazole
66.	While attending the University of Georgia, a group 
of friends go on a 5-day canoeing and camping trip 
in rural southern Georgia. A few weeks later, one of 
the campers develops a serpiginous, raised, pruritic, 
erythematous eruption on the buttocks. Strongyloi-
des larvae are found in his stool. Three of his com-
panions, who are asymptomatic, are also found to 
have Strongyloides larvae in their stool. Which of the 
following is indicated in the asymptomatic carriers?
A. Fluconazole
B. Ivermectin
C. Mebendazole
D. Mefloquine
E. Treatment only for symptomatic illness
67.	All of the following are clinical manifestations of 
Ascaris lumbricoides infection EXCEPT:
A. Asymptomatic carriage
B. Fever, headache, photophobia, nuchal rigidity, and 
eosinophilia
C. Nonproductive cough and pleurisy with 
eosinophilia
D. Right upper quadrant pain and fever
E. Small bowel obstruction
68.	A 21-year-old college student in Mississippi comes 
to student health to ask advice about treatment for 
Ascaris infection. He is an education major and 
works 1 day a week in an elementary school, where 
a number of the students were recently diagnosed 
with ascariasis over the past 3 months. He feels 
well and reports being asymptomatic. A stool O&P 
reveals characteristic Ascaris eggs. Which of the fol-
lowing should you recommend?
A. Albendazole
B. Diethylcarbamazine (DEC)
C. Fluconazole
D. Metronidazole
E. Vancomycin
69.	A 38-year-old woman presents to the emergency 
department with severe abdominal pain. She has 
no past medical or surgical history. She recalls no 
recent history of abdominal discomfort, diarrhea, 
melena, bright red blood per rectum, nausea, or 
vomiting before this acute episode. She ate cevi-
che (lime-marinated raw fish) at a Peruvian restau-
rant 3 hours before presentation. On examination, 
	65.	(Continued)
she is in terrible distress and has dry heaves. Her 
temperature is 37.6°C, heart rate is 128 beats/min, 
and blood pressure is 174/92 mmHg. Examination 
is notable for an extremely tender abdomen with 
guarding and rebound tenderness. Bowel sounds are 
present and hyperactive. Rectal examination find-
ings are normal, and Guaiac test result is negative. 
The pelvic examination is unremarkable. The white 
blood cell count is 6738/μL and hematocrit is 42%. 
A complete metabolic panel and lipase and amylase 
levels are all within normal limits. CT of the abdo-
men shows no abnormality. What is the next step in 
her management?
A. CT angiogram of the abdomen
B. Pelvic ultrasonography
C. Proton pump inhibitor therapy and observation
D. Right upper quadrant ultrasonography
E. Upper endoscopy
70.	Which of the following is the most common symp-
tom or sign of liver disease?
A. Fatigue
B. Itching
C. Jaundice
D. Nausea
E. Right upper quadrant pain
71.	In women, what is the average amount of reported 
daily alcohol intake that is associated with the 
development of chronic liver disease?
A. 1 drink
B. 2 drinks
C. 3 drinks
D. 6 drinks
E. 12 drinks
72.	Elevations in all of the following laboratory studies 
would be indicative of liver disease EXCEPT:
A. 5′-Nucleotidase
B. Aspartate aminotransferase
C. Conjugated bilirubin
D. Unconjugated bilirubin
E. Urine bilirubin
73.	A 26-year-old male resident is noticed by his attend-
ing physician to have yellow eyes after his 24-hour 
call period. When asked, the resident states he has 
no medical history, but on occasion he has thought 
he might have mild jaundice when he is stressed 
or has more than 4–5 alcoholic drinks. He never 
	69.	(Continued)
Review and Self-Assessment
697
sought medical treatment because he was uncertain, 
and his eyes would return fully to normal within 
2 days. He denies nausea, abdominal pain, dark urine, 
light-colored stools, pruritus, or weight loss. On 
examination he has a body mass index of 20.1 kg/
m2, and his vital signs are normal. Scleral icterus is 
present. There are no stigmata of chronic liver dis-
ease. The patient’s abdomen is soft and nontender. 
The liver span is 8 cm to percussion. The liver edge 
is smooth and palpable only with deep inspiration. 
The spleen is not palpable. Laboratory examinations 
are normal except for a total bilirubin of 3.0 mg/dL. 
Direct bilirubin is 0.2 mg/dL. Aspartate amino-
transferase (AST), alanine aminotransferase (ALT), 
and alkaline phosphatase are normal. Hematocrit, 
lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), and haptoglobin are 
normal. Which of the following is the most likely 
diagnosis?
A. Autoimmune hemolytic anemia
B. Crigler-Najjar syndrome type 1
C. Choledocholithiasis
D. Dubin-Johnson syndrome
E. Gilbert’s syndrome
74.	What is the next step in the evaluation and manage-
ment of the patient in question 73?
A. Genotype studies
B. Peripheral blood smear
C. Prednisone
D. Reassurance
E. Right upper quadrant ultrasound
75.	A 34-year-old man presents to the physician com-
plaining of yellow eyes. For the past week, he has 
felt ill with decreased oral intake, low-grade fevers 
(~100°F), fatigue, nausea, and occasional vomiting. 
With the onset of jaundice, he has noticed pain in 
his right upper quadrant. He currently uses mari-
juana and ecstasy, and has a prior history of injec-
tion drug use with cocaine. He has no other past 
medical history, but he was unable to donate blood 
4 years previously for reasons that he cannot recall. 
His social history is remarkable for working as a 
veterinary assistant. On sexual history, he reports 
five male sexual partners over the past 6 months. 
He does not consistently use condoms. On physical 
examination, he appears ill and has obvious jaun-
dice with scleral icterus. His liver is 15 cm to per-
cussion and is palpable 6 cm below the right costal 
margin. The edge is smooth and tender to palpation. 
The spleen is not enlarged. There are no stigmata 
	73.	(Continued)
of chronic liver disease. His AST is 1232 U/L, ALT 
is 1560 U/L, alkaline phosphatase is 394 U/L, total 
bilirubin is 13.4 mg/dL, and direct bilirubin is 12.2 
mg/dL. His INR is 2.3, and aPTT is 52 seconds. 
Hepatitis serologies are sent and reveal the following:
Hepatitis A IgM negative
Hepatitis A IgG negative
Hepatitis B core IgM positive
Hepatitis B core IgG negative
Hepatitis B surface antigen positive
Hepatitis B surface antibody negative
Hepatitis B e antigen positive
Hepatitis B e antibody negative
Hepatitis C antibody positive
What is the cause of the patient’s current clinical 
presentation?
A. Acute hepatitis A infection
B. Acute hepatitis B infection
C. Acute hepatitis C infection
D. Chronic hepatitis B infection
E. Drug-induced hepatitis
76.	In the scenario described in question 75, what 
would be the best approach to prevent development 
of chronic hepatitis?
A. Administration of anti-hepatitis A virus IgG.
B. Administration of lamivudine.
C. Administration of pegylated interferon α plus
ribavirin.
D. Administration of prednisone beginning at a dose of 
1 mg/kg daily.
E. Do nothing and observe, as 99% of individuals with 
this disease recover.
77.	Which of the following viral causes of acute hepa-
titis is most likely to cause fulminant hepatitis in a 
pregnant woman?
A. Hepatitis A
B. Hepatitis B
C. Hepatitis C
D. Hepatitis D
E. Hepatitis E
78.	A 16-year-old woman had visited your clinic 
1 month ago with jaundice, vomiting, malaise, and 
anorexia. Two other family members were ill with 
similar symptoms. Based on viral serologies, includ-
ing a positive anti-hepatitis A virus (HAV) IgM, a 
diagnosis of hepatitis A was made. The patient was 
	75.	(Continued)
Review and Self-Assessment
698
treated conservatively, and 1 week after first pre-
senting, she appeared to have made a full recovery. 
She returns to your clinic today complaining of the 
same symptoms she had 1 month ago. She is jaun-
diced, and an initial panel of laboratory tests returns 
elevated transaminases. Which of the following 
offers the best explanation of what has occurred in 
this patient?
A. Coinfection with hepatitis C
B. Inappropriate treatment of initial infection
C. Incorrect initial diagnosis; this patient likely has 
hepatitis B
D. Reinfection with hepatitis A
E. Relapse of hepatitis A
79.	A 26-year-old woman presents to your clinic and 
is interested in getting pregnant. She seeks your 
advice regarding vaccines she should obtain, and in 
particular asks about the hepatitis B vaccine. She 
works as a receptionist for a local business, denies 
alcohol or illicit drug use, and is in a monogamous 
relationship. Which of the following is true regard-
ing hepatitis B vaccination?
A. Hepatitis B vaccine consists of two IM doses 
1 month apart.
B. Only patients with defined risk factors need to be 
vaccinated.
C. Pregnancy is not a contraindication to the hepatitis 
B vaccine.
D. This patient’s hepatitis serologies should be checked 
before vaccination.
E. Vaccination should not be administered to children 
under 2 years old.
80.	An 18-year-old man presents to a rural clinic with 
nausea, vomiting, anorexia, abdominal discomfort, 
myalgias, and jaundice. He describes occasional 
alcohol use and is sexually active. He describes 
using heroin and cocaine “a few times in the past.” 
He works as a short-order cook in a local restaurant. 
He has lost 15.5 kg since his last visit to the clinic 
and appears emaciated and ill. On examination he 
is noted to have icteric sclerae and a palpable, ten-
der liver below the right costal margin. In regard to 
acute hepatitis, which of the following is true?
A. A distinction between viral etiologies cannot be 
made using clinical criteria alone.
B. Based on age and risk factors, he is likely to have 
hepatitis B infection.
C. He does not have hepatitis E virus, as this infects 
only pregnant women.
	78.	(Continued)
D. This patient cannot have hepatitis C because his 
presentation is too acute.
E. This patient does not have hepatitis A because his 
presentation is too fulminant.
81.	A 36-year-old male presents with fatigue and tea-
colored urine for 5 days. Physical examination 
reveals jaundice and tender hepatomegaly, but is 
otherwise unremarkable. Laboratories are remark-
able for an aspartate aminotransferase (AST) of 2400 
U/L and an alanine aminotransferase (ALT) of 2640 
U/L. Alkaline phosphatase is 210 U/L. Total biliru-
bin is 8.6 mg/dL. Which of the following diagnoses 
is least likely to cause this clinical picture and these 
laboratory abnormalities?
A. Acute hepatitis A infection
B. Acute hepatitis B infection
C. Acute hepatitis C infection
D. Acetaminophen ingestion
E. Budd-Chiari syndrome
82.	Which of the following drugs has a direct toxic 
effect on hepatocytes?
A. Acetaminophen
B. Chlorpromazine
C. Halothane
D. Isoniazid
E. Rosuvastatin
83.	A 32-year-old woman is admitted to the intensive 
care unit following an overdose of acetaminophen 
with coingestion of alcohol. She was known to be 
alert and interactive about 4 hours before her pre-
sentation when she had a fight with her boyfriend 
who then left the home. When he returned 6 hours 
later, he found an empty bottle of acetaminophen 
500 mg capsules as well as an empty vodka bottle. 
The exact number of pills in the bottle is unknown 
but the full bottle held as much as 50 capsules. The 
patient was unresponsive and had vomited, so her 
boyfriend called 911. Upon arrival to the emer-
gency department, the patient is stuporous. Her vital 
signs are as follows: pulse 109 beats/min, respiratory 
rate 20 breaths/min, blood pressure 96/52 mmHg, 
and oxygen saturation 95% on room air. Her exam-
ination shows mild nonspecific abdominal pain 
with palpation. The liver is not enlarged. Her initial 
laboratory values show a normal CBC, and nor-
mal electrolytes and kidney function. The AST is 
68 U/L, ALT is 46 U/L, alkaline phosphatase is 110 
U/L, and total bilirubin is 1.2 mg/dL. Glucose and 
	80.	(Continued)
Review and Self-Assessment
699
coagulation studies are normal. The serum alcohol 
level is 210 g/dL. The acetaminophen level is 350 
μg/mL. What is the most appropriate next step in 
the treatment of this patient?
A. Administration of activated charcoal or cholestyramine.
B. Administration of N-acetylcysteine 140 mg/kg 
followed by 70 mg/kg every 4 hours for a total of 
15–20 doses.
C. Continued monitoring of liver function, glucose, and 
coagulation studies every 4 hours with administra-
tion of N-acetylcysteine if these begin to change.
D. Do nothing as normal liver function tests and 
coagulation studies are indicative of only a minor 
ingestion.
E. Initiate hemodialysis for toxin clearance.
84.	A 38-year-old woman is evaluated for elevated trans-
aminase levels that were identified during routine 
laboratory testing for life insurance. She is originally 
from Thailand and immigrated to the United States 
10 years previously. She has been married to an Amer-
ican for the past 12 years, having met him while he 
was living abroad for business. She previously worked 
in Thailand as a deputy tourism minister for the gov-
ernment, but is not currently employed. She has no 
significant past medical history. She had one uncom-
plicated pregnancy at the age of 22. When queried 
about risk factors for liver disease, she denies alcohol 
intake or drug abuse. She has never had a blood trans-
fusion. She recalls an episode of jaundice that she did 
not seek evaluation for about 15 years ago. It resolved 
spontaneously. She currently feels well, and her hus-
band wished to have her added to his life insurance 
policy. There are no stigmata of chronic liver disease. 
Her laboratory studies reveal an AST of 346 U/L, 
ALT of 412 U/L, alkaline phosphatase of 98 U/L, 
and total bilirubin of 1.5 mg/dL. Further workup 
includes the following viral studies: hepatitis A IgG 
+, hepatitis B surface antigen +, hepatitis B e antigen 
+, anti-HBV core IgG +, and hepatitis C IgG nega-
tive. The HBV DNA level is 4.8 × 104 IU/mL. What 
treatment do you recommend for this patient?
A. Entecavir.
B. Pegylated interferon.
C. Pegylated interferon plus entecavir.
D. No treatment is necessary.
E. Either A or C.
85.	A 46-year-old man is known to have chronic hepa-
titis C virus (HCV) infection. He is a former IV 
drug user for more than 20 years who has been 
abstinent from drug use for 1 year. He is asking 
whether he should receive treatment for his HCV 
infection. He has a prior history of hepatitis B virus 
(HBV) and has positive antibody to HBV surface 
antigen. He was treated for tricuspid valve endo-
carditis 3 years previously. He has no other medical 
history. He does not know when he acquired HCV. 
His laboratory studies show a positive HCV IgG 
antibody with a viral load of greater than 1 million 
copies. The virus is genotype 1. His AST is 62 U/L, 
and his ALT is 54 U/L. He undergoes liver biopsy, 
which demonstrates a moderate degree of bridging 
fibrosis. What do you tell him regarding his like-
lihood of progression and possibilities regarding 
treatment?
A. As he is infected with genotype 1, the likelihood of 
response to pegylated interferon and ribavirin is less 
than 40%.
B. Following 12 weeks of treatment, the expected viral 
load should be undetectable.
C. Given his normal liver enzymes on laboratory test-
ing, he is unlikely to develop progressive liver injury.
D. If the patient elects to undergo treatment, the best 
regimen for individuals with genotype 1 disease is 
pegylated interferon and ribavirin for 24 weeks.
E. The presence of bridging fibrosis on liver biopsy is 
the most predictive factor of the development of cir-
rhosis over the next 10–20 years.
86.	A 34-year-old woman is evaluated for fatigue, mal-
aise, arthralgias, and a 10-lb weight loss over the past 
6–8 weeks. She has no past medical history. Since 
feeling poorly, she has taken approximately one or 
two tablets of acetaminophen 500 mg daily. On 
physical examination, her temperature is 100.2°F, 
respiratory rate is 18 breaths/min, blood pressure is 
100/48 mmHg, heart rate is 92 beats/min, and oxy-
gen saturation is 96% on room air. She has scleral 
icterus. Her liver edge is palpable 3 cm below the 
right costal margin. It is smooth and tender. The 
spleen is not enlarged. She has mild synovitis in 
the small joints of her hands. Her AST is 542 U/L, 
ALT is 657 U/L, alkaline phosphatase is 102 U/L, 
total bilirubin is 5.3 mg/dL, and direct bilirubin is 
4.8 mg/dL. Which of the following tests would be 
LEAST likely to be positive in this diagnosis?
A. Antinuclear antibodies in a homogeneous pattern
B. Anti-liver/kidney microsomal antibodies
C. Antimitochondrial antibodies
D. Hypergammaglobulinemia
E. Rheumatoid factor
	83.	(Continued)
	85.	(Continued)
Review and Self-Assessment
700
87.	In chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection, the 
presence of hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg) signifies 
which of the following?
A. Development of liver fibrosis leading to cirrhosis.
B. Dominant viral population is less virulent and less 
transmissible.
C. Increased likelihood of an acute flare in the next 1–2 
weeks.
D. Ongoing viral replication.
E. Resolving infection.
88.	A 32-year-old woman is admitted to the hospi-
tal with fever, abdominal pain, and jaundice. She 
drinks approximately 6 beers daily and has recently 
increased her alcohol intake to more than 12 beers 
daily. She has no other substance abuse history and 
has no history of alcoholic liver disease or pancre-
atitis. She is not taking any medications. On physi-
cal examination, she appears ill and disheveled with 
a fruity odor to her breath. Her vital signs are as 
follows: heart rate 122 beats/min, blood pressure 
95/56 mmHg, respiratory rate 22 breaths/min, 
temperature 101.2°F, and oxygen saturation 98% on 
room air. She has scleral icterus, and spider angi-
omata are present on the trunk. The liver edge is 
palpable 10 cm below the right costal margin. It is 
smooth and tender to palpation. The spleen is not 
palpable. No ascites or lower extremity edema is 
present. Laboratory studies demonstrate an AST of 
431 U/L, ALT of 198 U/L, bilirubin of 8.6 mg/dL, 
alkaline phosphatase of 201 U/L, amylase of 88 U/L, 
and lipase of 50 U/L. Total protein is 6.2 g/dL, 
and albumin is 2.8 g/dL. The prothrombin time is 
28.9 seconds. What is the best approach to treatment 
of this patient?
A. Administer IV fluids, thiamine, and folate, and 
observe for improvement in laboratory tests and 
clinical condition.
B. Administer IV fluids, thiamine, folate, and imipenem 
while awaiting blood culture results.
C. Administer prednisone 40 mg daily for 4 weeks 
before beginning a taper.
D. Consult surgery for management of acute cholecystitis.
E. Perform an abdominal CT with IV contrast to assess 
for necrotizing pancreatitis.
89.	A 48-year-old woman presents complaining of 
fatigue and itching. She has been tired for the past 
6 months and has recently developed diffuse itching. 
It is worse in the evening hours, but it is intermit-
tent. She does not note it to be worse following hot 
baths or showers. Her past medical history is signifi-
cant only for hypothyroidism for which she takes 
levothyroxine 125 μg daily. On physical examina-
tion, she has mild jaundice and scleral icterus. The 
liver is enlarged to 15 cm on palpation and is pal-
pable 5 cm below the right costal margin. Xantho-
mas are seen on both elbows. Hyperpigmentation is 
noticeable on the trunk and arms where the patient 
has excoriations. Laboratory studies demonstrate 
the following: WBC 8900/μL, hemoglobin 13.3 
g/dL, hematocrit 41.6%, and platelets 160,000/μL. 
The creatinine is 1.2 mg/dL. The AST is 52 U/L, 
ALT is 62 U/L, alkaline phosphatase is 216 U/L, 
total bilirubin is 3.2 mg/dL, and direct bilirubin is 
2.9 mg/dL. The total protein is 8.2 g/dL, and albu-
min is 3.9 U/L. The thyroid-stimulating hormone 
is 4.5 U/mL. Antimitochondrial antibodies are pos-
itive. P-ANCA and C-ANCA are negative. What 
is the most likely cause of the patient’s symptoms?
A. Lymphoma
B. Polycythemia vera
C. Primary biliary cirrhosis
D. Primary sclerosis cholangitis
E. Uncontrolled hypothyroidism
90.	A 63-year-old man presents to the emergency 
department complaining of hematemesis. The vom-
iting began abruptly and was not preceded by any 
abdominal pain or other symptoms. He describes the 
vomiting as about 500 mL of bright red blood. He 
has not had melena or bright red blood per rectum. 
He has known alcoholic cirrhosis and continues to 
drink at least 12 beers daily. He does not seek regu-
lar medical care, and he has not previously had an 
endoscopy to screen for varices. When he is initially 
evaluated in the emergency department, he is noted 
to be tachycardic with a heart rate of 125 beats/
min and a blood pressure of 76/40. After 1 L of IV 
saline, his blood pressure increases to 92/56. He has 
an additional 300 mL of hematemesis upon arriving 
in the emergency department. The initial hemato-
crit is 32%. All of the following should be a part of 
the initial management of this patient EXCEPT:
A. Administration of octreotide 100 μg/h by
continuous IV infusion
B. Administration of propranolol 10 mg four times 
daily
C. Emergent GI consult for upper endoscopy
D. Ongoing volume resuscitation with saline and packed 
red blood cells as needed to maintain adequate blood 
pressure
E. Placement of large-bore IV access in the antecubital 
fossae or large central vein
	89.	(Continued)
Review and Self-Assessment
701
91.	A 42-year-old man with cirrhosis related to 
hepatitis C and alcohol abuse has ascites requir-
ing frequent large-volume paracentesis. All of the 
following therapies would be indicated for this 
patient EXCEPT:
A. Fluid restriction to less than 2 L daily
B. Furosemide 40 mg daily
C. Sodium restriction to less than 2 g daily
D. Spironolactone 100 mg daily
E. Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt if 
medical therapy fails
92.	Which of the following statements about cardiac 
cirrhosis is TRUE?
A. AST and ALT levels may mimic the very high levels 
seen in acute viral hepatitis.
B. Budd-Chiari syndrome cannot be distinguished clini-
cally from cardiac cirrhosis.
C. Echocardiography is the gold standard for diag-
nosing constrictive pericarditis as a cause of 
cirrhosis.
D. Prolonged passive congestion from right-sided heart 
failure results first in congestion and necrosis of por-
tal triads, resulting in subsequent fibrosis.
E. Venoocclusive disease can be confused with cardiac 
cirrhosis and is a major cause of morbidity and mor-
tality in patients undergoing liver transplantation.
93.	You are asked to consult on a 62-year-old white 
female with pruritus for 4 months. She has noted 
progressive fatigue and a 5-lb weight loss. She has 
intermittent nausea but no vomiting and denies 
changes in her bowel habits. There is no history of 
prior alcohol use, blood transfusions, or illicit drug 
use. The patient is widowed and had two heterosex-
ual partners in her lifetime. Her past medical history 
is significant only for hypothyroidism, for which she 
takes levothyroxine. Her family history is unremark-
able. On examination she is mildly icteric. She has 
spider angiomata on her torso. You palpate a nodu-
lar liver edge 2 cm below the right costal margin. 
The remainder of the examination is unremarkable. 
A right upper quadrant ultrasound confirms your 
suspicion of cirrhosis. You order a complete blood 
count and a comprehensive metabolic panel. What 
is the most appropriate next test?
A. 24-hour urine copper
B. Antimitochondrial antibodies (AMA)
C. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography 
(ERCP)
D. Hepatitis B serologies
E. Serum ferritin
94.	A 58-year-old man is evaluated for a new diagno-
sis of cirrhosis. The patient has a medical history of 
diabetes mellitus, hypertriglyceridemia, and hyper-
tension. He takes pioglitazone, rosuvastatin, lisino-
pril, and atenolol. He is a lifetime nonsmoker and 
has never used IV drugs. He drinks about one glass 
of wine weekly. For about 4–8 years in his 20s, he 
admits to binge drinking as much as 12–18 beers 
on the weekends, but has not drunk more than 
two glasses of wine weekly for many years. He has 
never had a blood transfusion and has been in a 
monogamous sexual relationship for 30 years. He 
has no family history of liver disease. He works as a 
machinist in a factory making airplane engines. He 
denies chemical exposures. His physical examina-
tion is notable for a body mass index of 45.9 kg/
m2. He has stigmata of chronic liver disease includ-
ing spider angiomata and caput medusa. Moderate 
ascites is present. Workup has shown no evidence 
of viral hepatitis, hemochromatosis, Wilson’s disease, 
autoimmune hepatitis, or α1 antitrypsin deficiency. 
He undergoes liver biopsy, which shows fibrosis in 
a perivenular and perisinusoidal distribution. Which 
of the following statements is TRUE regarding the 
cause of the patient’s cirrhosis?
A. As opposed to individuals with metabolic syndrome 
alone, these individuals do not show significant insu-
lin resistance.
B. The aspartate aminotransferase is commonly elevated 
to more than twice the alanine aminotransferase 
level.
C. The lack of steatohepatitis on liver biopsy rules out 
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease as a cause of the 
patient’s cirrhosis.
D. The prevalence of the milder form of this disorder 
is between 10 and 20% in the United States and 
Europe, with as much as 10–15% of affected indi-
viduals developing cirrhosis in some series.
E. Treatment with ursodeoxycholic acid and HMG-
CoA reductase inhibitors has been demonstrated to 
improve outcomes in this disorder.
95.	A 44-year-old woman is evaluated for complaints 
of abdominal pain. She describes the pain as a post-
prandial burning pain. It is worse with spicy or fatty 
foods and is relieved with antacids. She is diagnosed 
with a gastric ulcer and is treated appropriately for 
Helicobacter pylori. During the course of her evalua-
tion for her abdominal pain, the patient had a right 
upper quadrant ultrasound that demonstrated the 
presence of gallstones. Following treatment of 
H. pylori, her symptoms have resolved. She is request-
ing your opinion regarding whether treatment is 
Review and Self-Assessment
702
required for the finding of gallstone disease. Upon 
review of the ultrasound report, there were numer-
ous stones in the gallbladder, including in the neck 
of the gallbladder. The largest stone measures 
2.8 cm. What is your advice to the patient regard-
ing the risk of complications and the need for 
definitive treatment?
A. Given the size and number of stones, prophylactic 
cholecystectomy is recommended.
B. No treatment is necessary unless the patient develops 
symptoms of biliary colic frequently and severely 
enough to interfere with the patient’s life.
C. The only reason to proceed with cholecystectomy 
is the development of gallstone pancreatitis or 
cholangitis.
D. The risk of developing acute cholecystitis is about 
5–10% per year.
E. Ursodeoxycholic acid should be given at a dose of 
10–15 mg/kg daily for a minimum of 6 months to 
dissolve the stones.
96.	A 62-year-old man has been hospitalized in intensive 
care for the past 3 weeks following an automobile 
accident resulting in multiple long-bone fractures 
and acute respiratory distress syndrome. He has been 
slowly improving, but remains on mechanical venti-
lation. He is now febrile and hypotensive, requiring 
vasopressors. He is being treated empirically with 
cefepime and vancomycin. Multiple blood cultures 
are negative. He has no new infiltrates or increas-
ing secretions on chest radiograph. His laboratory 
studies demonstrated a rise in his liver function tests, 
bilirubin, and alkaline phosphatase. Amylase and 
lipase are normal. A right upper quadrant ultrasound 
shows sludge in the gallbladder, but no stones. The 
bile duct is not dilated. What is the next best step in 
the evaluation and treatment of this patient?
A. Discontinue cefepime.
B. Initiate treatment with clindamycin.
C. Initiate treatment with metronidazole.
D. Perform hepatobiliary scintigraphy.
E. Refer for exploratory laparotomy.
97.	All of the following are associated with an increased 
risk for cholelithiasis EXCEPT:
A. Chronic hemolytic anemia
B. Female sex
C. High-protein diet
D. Obesity
E. Pregnancy
98.	Which of the following statements regarding liver 
transplantation is TRUE?
A. Individuals with cholangiocarcinoma should be 
referred early for consideration of liver 
transplantation.
B. Living donor transplantation is only performed in 
children.
C. Reinfection with hepatitis B typically occurs in 35% 
or more of patients with liver transplantation.
D. The 5-year survival rate for orthotopic liver 
transplantation is about 50%.
E. The most common indication for liver transplanta-
tion is chronic hepatitis B infection.
99.	A 55-year-old male with cirrhosis is seen in the 
clinic for follow-up of a recent hospitalization for 
spontaneous bacterial peritonitis. He is doing well 
and finishing his course of antibiotics. He is taking 
propranolol and lactulose. Besides complications 
of end-stage liver disease, he has well-controlled 
diabetes mellitus and had a basal cell carcinoma 
resected 5 years ago. The cirrhosis is thought to be 
due to alcohol abuse, and his last drink of alcohol 
was 2 weeks ago. He and his wife ask if he is a liver 
transplant candidate. He can be counseled in which 
of the following ways?
A. Because he had a skin cancer he is not a transplant 
candidate.
B. Because he has diabetes mellitus he is not a transplant 
candidate.
C. He is appropriate for liver transplantation and should 
be referred immediately.
D. He is not a transplant candidate as he has a history of 
alcohol dependence.
E. He is not a transplant candidate now, but may be 
after a sustained period of proven abstinence from 
alcohol.
100.	A 27-year-old woman is admitted to the hospital 
with acute-onset severe right upper quadrant pain 
that radiates to the back. The pain is constant and 
not relieved with eating or bowel movements. Her 
labs show a marked elevation in amylase and lipase, 
and acute pancreatitis is diagnosed. Which of the 
following is the best first test to demonstrate the 
etiology of her pancreatitis?
A. Right upper quadrant ultrasound
B. Serum alcohol level
C. Serum triglyceride level
D. Technetium HIDA scan
E. Urine drug screen
	95.	(Continued)
Review and Self-Assessment
703
101.	A 58-year-old man with severe alcoholism is admit-
ted to the hospital with acute pancreatitis. His 
symptoms have been present for 3 days and he has 
continued to drink heavily. He now has persistent 
vomiting and feels dizzy upon standing. On exami-
nation he has severe epigastric and right upper 
quadrant tenderness and decreased bowel sounds, 
and appears uncomfortable. A faint blue discolor-
ation is present around the umbilicus. What is the 
significance of this finding?
A. A CT of the abdomen is likely to show severe necro-
tizing pancreatitis.
B. Abdominal plain film is likely to show pancreatic 
calcification.
C. Concomitant appendicitis should be ruled out.
D. He likely has a pancreatico-aortic fistula.
E. Pancreatic pseudocyst is likely present.
102.	A 36-year-old man is admitted to the hospital with 
acute pancreatitis. In order to determine the severity 
of disease and risk of mortality, the BISAP (Bedside 
Index of Severity in Acute Pancreatitis) is calculated. 
All of the following variables are used to calculate 
this score EXCEPT:
A. Age greater than 60 years
B. BUN greater than 35
C. Impaired mental status
D. Pleural effusion
E. White blood cell count greater than 15,000 
leukocytes/μL
103.	A 54-year-old man is admitted to the intensive care 
unit with severe pancreatitis. His BMI is 30 or above 
and he has a prior history of diabetes mellitus. A CT 
of the abdomen is obtained and shows severe nec-
rotizing pancreatitis. He is presently afebrile. Which 
of the following medications has been shown to be 
effective in the treatment of acute necrotizing pan-
creatitis?
A. Calcitonin
B. Cimetidine
C. Glucagon
D. Imipenem
E. None of the above
104.	Which of the following statements is true regarding 
enteral feeding in acute pancreatitis?
A. A patient with persistent evidence of pancreatic 
necrosis on CT 2 weeks after acute presentation 
should be maintained on bowel rest.
B. All patients with elevations of amylase and lipase and 
CT evidence of pancreatitis should be fasted until 
amylase and lipase normalize.
C. Enteral feeding with a nasojejunal tube has been 
demonstrated to have fewer infectious complications 
than total parenteral nutrition in the management of 
patients with acute pancreatitis.
D. Patients requiring surgical removal of infected 
pancreatic pseudocysts should be treated with total 
parental nutrition.
E. Total parenteral nutrition has been shown to maintain 
integrity of the intestinal tract in acute pancreatitis.
105.	A 47-year-old woman presents to the emergency 
department with severe mid-abdominal pain radiat-
ing to her back. The pain began acutely and is sharp. 
She denies cramping or flatulence. She has had two 
episodes of emesis of bilious material since the pain 
began, but this has not lessened the pain. She cur-
rently rates the pain as a 10 out of 10 and feels the 
pain is worse in the supine position. For the past 
few months, she has had intermittent episodes of 
right upper and mid-epigastric pain that occurs after 
eating but subsides over a few hours. This is asso-
ciated with a feeling of excess gas. She denies any 
history of alcohol abuse. She has no medical history 
of hypertension or hyperlipidemia. On physical 
examination, she is writhing in distress and slightly 
diaphoretic. Vital signs are as follows: heart rate 127 
beats/min, blood pressure 92/50 mmHg, respira-
tory rate 20 breaths/min, temperature 37.9°C, and 
88% oxygen saturation on room air. Her body mass 
index is 29 kg/m2. The cardiovascular examination 
reveals a regular tachycardia. The chest examination 
shows dullness to percussion at bilateral bases with 
a few scattered crackles. On abdominal examina-
tion, bowel sounds are hypoactive. There is no rash 
or bruising evident on inspection of the abdomen. 
There is voluntary guarding on palpation. The pain 
with palpation is greatest in the periumbilical and 
epigastric areas without rebound tenderness. There 
is no evidence of jaundice, and the liver span is 
about 10 cm to percussion. Amylase level is 750 
IU/L, and lipase level is 1129 IU/L. Other labora-
tory values include aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 
168 U/L, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 196 U/L, 
total bilirubin 2.3 mg/dL, alkaline phosphatase level 
268 U/L, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) 300 U/L, 
and creatinine 1.9 mg/dL. The hematocrit is 43%, 
and white blood cell (WBC) count is 11,500/μL 
with 89% neutrophils. An arterial blood gas shows 
a pH of 7.32, PCO2 of 32 mmHg, and a PO2 
of 56 mmHg. An ultrasound confirms a dilated 
	104.	(Continued)
Review and Self-Assessment
704
common bile duct with evidence of pancreatitis 
manifested as an edematous and enlarged pancreas. 
A CT scan shows no evidence of necrosis. After 3 L 
of normal saline, her blood pressure comes up to 
110/60 mmHg with a heart rate of 105 beats/min. 
Which of the following statements best describes 
the pathophysiology of this disease?
A. Intrapancreatic activation of digestive enzymes with 
autodigestion and acinar cell injury
B. Chemoattraction of neutrophils with subsequent 
infiltration and inflammation
C. Distant organ involvement and systemic inflamma-
tory response syndrome related to release of activated 
pancreatic enzymes and cytokines
D. All of the above
106.	A 25-year-old female with cystic fibrosis is diag-
nosed with chronic pancreatitis. She is at risk for all 
of the following complications EXCEPT:
A. Vitamin B12 deficiency
B. Vitamin A deficiency
C. Pancreatic carcinoma
D. Niacin deficiency
E. Steatorrhea
107.	A 64-year-old man seeks evaluation from his pri-
mary care physician because of chronic diarrhea. He 
reports that he has two or three large loose bowel 
movements daily. He describes them as markedly foul 
smelling, and they often leave an oily ring in the toilet. 
He also notes that the bowel movements often fol-
low heavy meals, but if he fasts or eats low-fat foods, 
the stools are more formed. Over the past 6 months, 
he has lost about 18 kg. In this setting, he reports 
intermittent episodes of abdominal pain that can be 
quite severe. He describes the pain as sharp and in a 
mid-epigastric location. He has not sought evaluation 
of the pain previously, but when it occurs he will 
limit his oral intake and treat the pain with non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. He notes the 
pain has not lasted for more than 48 hours and 
is not associated with meals. His past medical his-
tory is remarkable for peripheral vascular disease and 
tobacco use. He currently smokes one pack of ciga-
rettes daily. In addition, he drinks 2–6 beers daily. He 
has stopped all alcohol intake for up to a week at a 
time in the past without withdrawal symptoms. His 
current medications are aspirin 81 mg daily and alb-
uterol metered dose inhaler (MDI) on an as-needed 
basis. On physical examination, the patient is thin but 
appears well. His body mass index is 18.2 kg/m2. Vital 
signs are normal. Cardiac and pulmonary examina-
tions are normal. The abdominal examination shows 
mild epigastric tenderness without rebound or 
guarding. The liver span is 12 cm to percussion and 
palpable 2 cm below the right costal margin. There 
is no splenomegaly or ascites present. There are 
decreased pulses in the lower extremities bilaterally. 
An abdominal radiograph demonstrates calcifications 
in the epigastric area, and CT scan confirms that 
these calcifications are located within the body of 
the pancreas. No pancreatic ductal dilatation is noted. 
Amylase level is 32 U/L, and lipase level is 22 U/L. 
What is the next most appropriate step in diagnosing 
and managing this patient’s primary complaint?
A. Advise the patient to stop all alcohol use and pre-
scribe pancreatic enzymes.
B. Advise the patient to stop all alcohol use and pre-
scribe narcotic analgesia and pancreatic enzymes.
C. Perform angiography to assess for ischemic bowel 
disease.
D. Prescribe prokinetic agents to improve gastric 
emptying.
E. Refer the patient for endoscopic retrograde cholan-
giopancreatography (ERCP) for sphincterotomy.
ANSWERS
1.	The answer is B.
(Chaps. 8 and 45) The clinical presentation is consis-
tent with a cholestatic picture. Painless jaundice always 
requires an extensive workup, as many of the underlying 
pathologies are ominous and early detection and inter-
vention often offers the only hope for a good outcome. 
The gallbladder showed no evidence of stones and the 
patient shows no evidence of clinical cholecystitis, and 
so a hepatobiliary iminodiacetic acid (HIDA) scan is 
not indicated. Similarly, antibiotics are not necessary at 
this point. The cholestatic picture without significant 
­elevation of the transaminases on the liver function tests 
makes acute hepatitis unlikely. Antimitochondrial anti-
bodies are elevated in cases of primary biliary cirrhosis 
(PBC), which may present in a similar fashion. However, 
PBC is far more common in women than in men, and 
the average age of onset is the fifth or sixth decade. The 
lack of an obvious lesion on CT scan does not rule out 
a source of the cholestasis in the biliary tree. Malignant 
causes such as cholangiocarcinoma and tumor of 
the ampulla of Vater, and nonmalignant causes such 
	105.	(Continued)
	107.	(Continued)
Review and Self-Assessment
705
as sclerosing cholangitis and Caroli’s disease may be 
detected only by direct visualization with endoscopic 
retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP). ERCP is 
useful both diagnostically and therapeutically, as stenting 
procedures may be done to alleviate the obstruction.
2.	The answer is A.
(Chaps. 9 and 36) Diagnostic paracentesis is part of the 
routine evaluation in a patient with ascites. Fluid should 
be examined for its gross appearance, protein content, 
cell count and differential, and albumin. Cytologic and 
culture studies should be performed when one suspects 
infection or malignancy. The serum-ascites albumin gra-
dient (SAG) offers the best correlation with portal pres-
sure. A high gradient (>1.1 g/dL) is characteristic of 
uncomplicated cirrhotic ascites and differentiates ascites 
caused by portal hypertension from ascites not caused by 
portal hypertension in more than 95% of cases. Condi-
tions that cause a low gradient include more “exudative” 
processes such as infection, malignancy, and inflamma-
tory processes. Similarly, congestive heart failure and 
nephrotic syndrome cause high gradients. In this patient 
the SAG is 1.5 g/dL, indicating a high gradient. The 
low number of leukocytes and polymorphonuclear cells 
makes bacterial or tubercular infection unlikely. Chylous 
ascites often is characterized by an opaque milky fluid 
with a triglyceride level greater than 1000 mg/dL in 
addition to a low SAG.
3.	The answer is E.
(Chap. 10) Involuntary weight loss (IWL) is a frequent 
finding in older individuals, affecting more than 25% of 
frail individuals older than 65 years. Clinically impor-
tant weight loss is defined as a loss of more than 5% of 
body weight or more than 5 kg over the course of 6–12 
months. In older individuals, weight loss is associated 
with hip fracture, pressure ulcers, decreased functional 
status, and death. There are many causes of IWL, with 
the most common categories being malignancy, chronic 
inflammatory or infectious disease, metabolic disorders, 
and psychiatric disorders. In older individuals, it is also 
important to consider neurologic disorders, including 
stroke leading to dysphagia, progressive vision loss, and 
dementia. IWL can be one of the earliest manifesta-
tions of Alzheimer’s disease. An under-recognized cause 
of IWL is lack of access to food or inability to pay for 
food. When evaluating an individual for IWL, a com-
plete physical examination, including a dental examina-
tion, should be performed to assess for obvious physi-
cal causes that would lead to weight loss. Medications 
may also lead to changes in appetite or weight loss. 
Patients should undergo age-appropriate cancer screen-
ing. In older individuals, a Mini-Mental State Examination, 
Mini-Nutritional Assessment, and assessment of perfor-
mance of activities of daily living may be helpful. It may 
also be useful to observe the patient’s eating. Depression 
in the elderly may also present with loss of appetite and 
should be assessed. Laboratory studies could include a 
complete blood count, comprehensive metabolic panel, 
thyroid function tests, and erythrocyte sedimentation 
rate and C-reactive protein. HIV testing is indicated if 
risk factors are identified.
4.	The answer is E.
(Chap. 13) Endoscopy, also known as esophagogastro-
duodenoscopy (EGD), is the best test for the evaluation 
of the proximal gastrointestinal tract. Because of high-
quality images, disorders of color such as Barrett’s meta-
plasia, and mucosal irregularities are easily demonstrated. 
The sensitivity of endoscopy is superior to that of bar-
ium radiography for mucosal lesions. Because the endo-
scope has an instrumentation channel, biopsy specimens 
are easily obtained and dilation of strictures can also be 
performed. The only advantage that barium radiography 
confers is the absence of the requirement for sedation, 
which, in some populations at risk for conscious seda-
tion, is an important consideration.
5.	The answer is E.
(Chap. 13) Intermittent solid food dysphagia is a classic 
symptom in Schatzki’s ring in which a distal esophageal 
ring occurs at the squamocolumnar mucosal junction. 
The origin of these rings is unknown, and smaller rings 
with a lumen of greater than 13 mm are common in 
the general population (up to 15%). When the lumen is 
less than 13 mm, dysphagia may occur. Schatzki’s rings 
typically occur in persons older than 40 years and often 
cause “steakhouse syndrome” from meat getting stuck at 
the ring. The rings are easily treated with dilation. Plum-
mer-Vinson syndrome also includes esophageal rings, 
but typically the rings occur in the proximal esophagus, 
are associated with iron-deficiency anemia, and occur in 
middle-aged women. Achalasia involves both solid and 
liquid dysphagia often with regurgitation. Adenocarci-
noma often includes solid and liquid dysphagia at later 
stages. Most esophageal diverticulae are asymptomatic.
6.	The answer is B.
(Chap. 13) Aside from the discomfort and local com-
plications of gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), a 
number of other non-GI–related sites may have a com-
plication related to it. Syndromes with a well-established 
association with GERD include chronic cough, laryngi-
tis, asthma, and dental erosions. Other diseases have impli-
cated GERD as potentially contributory, but the role of 
GERD is less well established. These include pharyngitis, 
pulmonary fibrosis, chronic sinusitis, cardiac arrhythmias, 
sleep apnea, and recurrent aspiration pneumonia.
7.	The answer is A.
(Chap. 13) This patient has symptoms of esophagitis. 
In patients with HIV, various infections can cause this 
Review and Self-Assessment
706
disease, including herpes simplex virus (HSV), cytomeg-
alovirus (CMV), varicella-zoster virus (VZV), Candida, 
and HIV itself. The lack of thrush does not rule out 
Candida as a cause of esophagitis, and EGD is necessary 
for diagnosis. CMV classically causes serpiginous ulcers 
in the distal esophagus that may coalesce to form giant 
ulcers. Brushings alone are insufficient for diagnosis, and 
biopsies must be performed. Biopsies reveal intranuclear 
and intracytoplasmic inclusions with enlarged nuclei in 
large fibroblasts and endothelial cells. Given her notable 
swallowing symptoms, IV ganciclovir is the treatment 
of choice. Valganciclovir is an effective oral preparation. 
Foscarnet is useful in treating ganciclovir-resistant CMV. 
Herpes simplex virus manifests as vesicles and punched-
out lesions in the esophagus, with the characteris-
tic finding on biopsy of ballooning degeneration with 
ground-glass changes in the nuclei. It can be treated with 
acyclovir or foscarnet in resistant cases. Candida esopha-
gitis has the appearance of yellow nodular plaques with 
surrounding erythema. Treatment usually requires flu-
conazole therapy. Finally, HIV alone can cause esoph-
agitis that can be quite resistant to therapy. On EGD 
these ulcers appear deep and linear. Treatment with tha-
lidomide or oral glucocorticoids is employed, and highly 
active antiretroviral therapy should be considered.
8.	The answer is D.
(Chap. 13) The patient has a duodenal ulcer, which is 
almost universally due to H. pylori infection, although 
in a minority of cases NSAID use may either facilitate 
development or be the only identified cause. The patient 
was taking acetaminophen and not a traditional NSAID, 
making H. pylori–associated peptic ulcer disease the most 
likely cause of the findings. H. pylori infection is closely 
correlated with advancing age, low socioeconomic status, 
and low education levels. After initial infection, antral gas-
tritis is very common, and in a portion of cases, ­duodenal 
or gastric ulcers form. Associated with these conditions is 
the development of gastric cancer or MALT lymphoma. 
Duodenal ulcers are rarely cancerous, although this is a 
not an uncommon finding in gastric cancers. After dis-
covery of the ulcer, first-line therapy is eradication of 
H. pylori in addition to acid suppression.
9.	The answer is D.
(Chap. 14) Noninvasive testing for H. pylori infection is 
recommended in patients with suggestive symptoms and 
no other indication for endoscopy, e.g., GI bleeding, 
atypical symptoms. Several tests have good sensitivity and 
specificity, including plasma serology for H. pylori, 14C- 
or 13C-urea breath test, and the fecal H. pylori antigen 
test. Sensitivity and specificity are greater than 80% and 
greater than 90%, respectively, for serology, while the 
urea breath test and fecal antigen testing are greater than 
90% for both. Serology is not useful for early follow-
up after therapy completion, as antibody titers will take 
­several weeks to months to fall. The urea breath test, 
which relies on the presence of urease secreted by H. 
pylori to digest the swallowed radioactive urea and liber-
ate 14C or 13C as part of ammonia, is simple and rapid. It 
is useful for early follow-up, as it requires living bacteria 
to secrete urease and produce a positive test. The limita-
tions to the test include the requirement for ingestion of 
radioactive materials, albeit low dose, and false-negative 
results with recent use of PPI, antibiotics, or bismuth 
compounds. Stool antigen testing is cheap and conve-
nient, but is not established for proof of eradication.
10.	The answer is A.
(Chap. 14) H. pylori should be eradicated in patients 
with documented peptic ulcer disease no matter the 
number of episodes, severity, presence of confound-
ing factors (e.g., NSAID ingestion), or symptomatic 
status. Documented eradication of H. pylori is associated 
with substantially lower recurrence rates and symptom 
improvement. Treating patients with GERD who require 
long-term acid reduction therapy and the role of H. pylori 
eradication to prevent gastric cancer are controversial. 
Fourteen-day regimens are most effective. Shorter dura-
tion of therapy with current agents available has high 
recurrence rates. Dual-therapy regimens are not recom-
mended because of eradication rates of less than 80%. 
A number of combinations are available (Table 14-4). 
Triple-therapy regimens (one antacid plus two antibi-
otics) for 14 days have an eradication rate of 85–90%. 
Antibiotic resistance is the most common cause of failure 
to eradicate in compliant patients. Unfortunately, there 
is no currently available test for H. pylori sensitivity to 
direct therapy. Quadruple therapy should be reserved for 
patients with failure to eradicate after an effective initial 
course.
11.	The answer is C.
(Chap. 14) Fasting gastrin levels can be elevated in a 
variety of conditions including atrophic gastritis with 
or without pernicious anemia, G-cell hyperplasia, and 
acid suppressive therapy (gastrin levels increase as a con-
sequence of loss of negative feedback). The diagnostic 
concern in a patient with persistent ulcers following 
optimal therapy is Zollinger-Ellison syndrome (ZES). 
The result is not sufficient to make a diagnosis because 
gastrin levels may be elevated in a variety of conditions. 
Elevated basal acid secretion also is consistent with ZES, 
but up to 12% of patients with peptic ulcer disease may 
have basal acid secretion as high as 15 meq/h. Thus, 
additional testing is necessary. Gastrin levels may go up 
with a meal (>200%), but this test does not distinguish 
G-cell hyperfunction from ZES. The best test in this set-
ting is the secretin stimulation test. An increase in gastrin 
levels greater than 200 pg within 15 minutes of admin-
istering 2 μg/kg of secretin by IV bolus has a sensitivity 
and specificity of greater than 90% for ZES. Endoscopic 
Review and Self-Assessment
707
ultrasonography is useful in locating the gastrin-secreting 
tumor once the positive secretin test is obtained. 
Genetic testing for mutations in the gene that encodes 
the menin protein can detect the fraction of patients 
with gastrinomas that are a manifestation of multiple 
endocrine neoplasia type I (Wermer’s syndrome). 
Gastrinoma is the second most common tumor in this 
syndrome following parathyroid adenoma, but its peak 
incidence is generally in the third decade.
12.	The answer is B.
(Chap. 15) The patient presents with nonspecific gas-
trointestinal symptoms, but the presence of weight loss 
suggests malabsorption syndrome. Patients with lactose 
intolerance are usually able to relate symptoms to con-
sumption of milk-based products and also report a strong 
history of crampy pain and flatulence. Therefore, a lac-
tose-free diet is unlikely to be helpful. The patient does 
not have nocturnal diarrhea, which is commonly a feature 
of steatorrhea along with floating stools. In the absence 
of symptoms suggesting fat malabsorption, the first test 
should not be fecal fat measurement. As the patient has 
weight loss, irritable bowel syndrome is less likely, and an 
increase dietary fiber is unlikely to be useful. Finally, 
her symptoms may be consistent with celiac disease. The 
widespread availability of antibodies to gliadin, endo-
mysial, and tTG can be easily measured in peripheral 
blood. Antiendomysial antibody has a 90–95% sensitivity 
and equal specificity, making it a reasonable first test in 
symptomatic individuals. The presence of the antibody 
is not diagnostic, however, and duodenal biopsy is rec-
ommended. Duodenal biopsy will show villous atrophy, 
absence or reduced height of villi, cuboidal appearance 
of surface epithelial cells, and increased lymphocytes and 
plasma cells in the lamina propria. These changes regress 
with complete removal of gluten from the diet.
13.	The answer is B.
(Chap. 15) Short bowel syndrome is a descriptive term 
referring to the many clinical complications that may 
occur after resection of varying lengths of the small bowel. 
Rarely, these complications may be due to congenital 
abnormalities of the small bowel. Most commonly in 
adults, short bowel syndrome occurs in mesenteric vas-
cular disease, primary mucosal or submucosal disease 
(Crohn’s disease), and operations without preexisting 
small bowel disease such as trauma. Multiple factors con-
tribute to diarrhea and steatorrhea including gastric acid 
hypersecretion, increased bile acids in the colon due to 
absent or decreased reabsorption in the small bowel, and 
lactose intolerance due to increased gastric acid secre-
tion. Nonintestinal symptoms may include renal calcium 
oxalate calculi due to an increase in oxalate absorption by 
the large intestine with subsequent hyperoxaluria. This 
may be due to increased fatty acids in the colon that bind 
calcium, and thus calcium in the gut is not free to bind 
oxalate and free oxalate is absorbed in the large intestine. 
Increased bile acid pool size results in the generation of 
cholesterol gallstones from supersaturating in gallbladder 
bile. Gastric hypersecretion of acid is well described and 
thought to be due to loss of inhibition of gastric acid 
secretion because of absent short bowel to secrete inhibi-
tory hormones. Coronary artery disease is not described 
as a complication of short bowel syndrome.
14.	The answer is E.
(Chap. 15) The patient presents with symptoms sug-
gestive of Whipple’s disease with a chronic multisystem 
disease often including diarrhea/steatorrhea, migratory 
arthralgias, weight loss, and CNS or cardiac problems. 
Generally the presentation is of insidious onset, and demen-
tia is a late finding and poor prognostic sign. The disease 
primarily occurs in middle-aged white males. The diag-
nosis requires small bowel biopsy and demonstration of 
PAS-positive macrophages within the small bowel. Small 
bacilli are often present and suggest the diagnosis of 
Whipple’s disease. Similar macrophages may be found in 
other affected organs, e.g., the CNS. Dilated lymphatics 
are present in patients with intestinal lymphangiectasia. 
Mononuclear cell infiltrate in the lamina propria is 
often demonstrated in patients with tropical sprue, and 
flat villi with crypt hyperplasia are the hallmark of 
celiac disease.
15.	The answer is D.
(Chap. 15) This patient has a stool osmolality gap (mea-
sured stool osmolality - calculated stool osmolality) of 
less than 50 mosmol/L, suggesting a secretory rather than 
an osmotic cause for diarrhea. Secretory causes of diar-
rhea include toxin-mediated diarrhea (cholera, entero-
toxigenic Escherichia coli) and intestinal peptide–mediated 
diarrhea in which the major pathophysiology is a luminal 
or circulating secretagogue. The distinction between 
secretory diarrhea and osmotic diarrhea aids in forming 
a differential diagnosis. Secretory diarrhea will not 
decrease substantially during a fast and has a low 
osmolality gap. Osmotic diarrhea will generally decrease 
during a fast and has a high (>50 mosmol/L) osmolality 
gap. Celiac sprue, chronic pancreatitis, lactase deficiency, 
and Whipple’s disease all cause an osmotic diarrhea.
16.	The answer is E.
(Chaps. 15 and 16) Cobalamin malabsorption may occur 
due to disease at multiple anatomic sites extending from 
the stomach to the ileum. In the past, the Schilling test 
was utilized to assess cobalamin absorption, but this test 
is not currently commercially available. Cobalamin is 
primarily present in meat, but dietary deficiency is rare 
except in strict vegans. Dietary cobalamin is bound in the 
stomach to R-binder protein that is synthesized in sali-
vary glands and stomach. The cobalamin–R binder com-
plex requires an acid medium. Therefore, achlorhydria 
Review and Self-Assessment
708
of any cause may result in the inability for splitting of 
cobalamin from food and binding to R-binder pro-
tein. Cobalamin absorption has an absolute require-
ment for intrinsic factor, which allows uptake by specific 
receptors in the ileum. Intrinsic factor is produced and 
released by gastric parietal cells. Thus pernicious anemia, 
the autoimmune atrophy of parietal cells, is a cause of 
cobalamin malabsorption. Pancreatic protease enzymes 
lyse the cobalamin–R binder protein complex to release 
cobalamin in the proximal intestine where it is bound to 
intrinsic factor for ileal absorption. Thus a deficiency 
of pancreatic enzymes, such as in chronic pancreatitis, 
can lead to cobalamin malabsorption. Finally, cobalamin-
intrinsic factor is absorbed via an intact epithelium in the 
ileum. Inflammation (Crohn’s disease) or absence (surgical 
removal) of ileum will cause cobalamin malabsorption. 
The large intestine is not involved in cobalamin absorp-
tion; thus ulcerative colitis confined to the large intestine 
will not cause malabsorption.
17.	The answer is D.
(Chap. 17) The incidence of inflammatory bowel disease 
is highly influenced by ethnicity, location, and environ-
mental factors. Both conditions have their highest inci-
dence in the United Kingdom and North America, and 
the peak incidence has a bimodal distribution of age of 
presentation: 15–30 years and 60–80 years. The incidence 
of both ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease is high-
est among persons of the Ashkenazi Jewish population. 
Prevalence decreases progressively in non-Jewish white, 
African-American, Hispanic, and Asian populations. 
Cigarette smoking is associated with a decreased inci-
dence of ulcerative colitis, but may cause Crohn’s disease. 
Oral contraceptive use is associated with a slightly higher 
incidence of Crohn’s disease, but not ulcerative colitis. 
Monozygotic twins are highly concordant for Crohn’s 
disease, but not ulcerative colitis.
18.	The answer is C.
(Chap. 17) Chronic bloody diarrhea associated with 
weight loss and systemic symptoms in a young person 
is highly suggestive of inflammatory bowel disease. Her 
surgical findings suggest discontinuous lesions, which is 
typical of Crohn’s disease. Ulcerative colitis, in contrast, 
typically affects the rectum and proceeds caudally from 
there without normal mucosa until the area of inflam-
mation terminates. The presence of strictures and fissures 
further supports the diagnosis of Crohn’s disease, as these 
are not features of ulcerative colitis. Microscopically, both 
ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease may have crypt 
abscess and, although Crohn’s disease is more often trans-
mural, full thickness disease may be present in ulcerative 
colitis. The hallmark of Crohn’s disease is granulomas that 
may be present throughout the bowel wall and involve 
the lymph nodes, mesentery, peritoneum, liver, and 
pancreas. Although pathognomonic for Crohn’s disease, 
granulomas are only found in about half of surgical 
resections. Flat villi are not always present in either dis-
ease and are more commonly found in isolation with 
celiac disease.
19.	The answer is D.
(Chap. 17) There are a number of dermatologic manifesta-
tions of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), and each type 
of IBD has a particular predilection for different dermato-
logic conditions. This patient has pyoderma gangrenosum. 
Pyoderma gangrenosum can occur in up to 12% of patients 
with ulcerative colitis and is characterized by a lesion that 
begins as a pustule and progresses concentrically to sur-
rounding normal skin. The lesions ulcerate with violaceous, 
heaped margins and surrounding erythema. They are typi-
cally found on the lower extremities. Often the lesions are 
difficult to treat and respond poorly to colectomy; similarly, 
pyoderma gangrenosum is not prevented by colectomy. 
Treatment commonly includes IV antibiotics, glucocorti-
coids, dapsone, infliximab, and other immunomodulatory 
agents. Erythema nodosum is more common in Crohn’s 
disease, and attacks correlate with bowel symptoms. The 
lesions are typically multiple red hot, tender nodules mea-
suring 1–5 cm and are found on the lower legs and arms. 
Psoriasis is more common in ulcerative colitis. Finally, 
pyoderma vegetans is a rare disorder in intertriginous areas 
reported to be a manifestation of inflammatory bowel dis-
ease in the skin.
20.	The answer is D.
(Chap. 17, Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2007 Oct 17; 
[4]) Despite being described as a clinical entity for over 
a century, the etiology of IBD remains cryptic. Current 
theory is related to an interplay between inflammatory 
stimuli in genetically predisposed individuals. Recent 
studies have identified a group of genes or polymor-
phisms that confer risk of IBD. Multiple microbio-
logic agents, including some that reside as “normal” 
flora, may initiate IBD by triggering an inflammatory 
response. Anaerobic organisms (e.g., Bacteroides and 
Clostridia spp.) may be responsible for the induction 
of inflammation. Other organisms, for unclear rea-
sons, may have the opposite effect. These “probiotic” 
organisms include Lactobacillus spp., Bifidobacterium spp., 
Taenia suis, and Saccharomyces boulardii. Shigella, Esch-
erichia, and Campylobacter spp. are known to promote 
inflammation. Studies of probiotic therapy in adults 
and children with IBD have shown potential benefit 
for reducing disease activity.
21.	The answer is D.
(Chap. 17) Methotrexate, azathioprine, cyclosporine,
tacrolimus, and anti-tumor necrosis factor (TNF) antibody 
are reasonable options for patients with CD, depending 
on the extent of macroscopic disease. Pneumonitis is a 
rare but serious complication of methotrexate therapy. 
Review and Self-Assessment
709
Primary sclerosing cholangitis is an extraintestinal mani-
festation of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Pancre-
atitis is an uncommon complication of azathioprine, and 
IBD patients treated with azathioprine are at a fourfold 
increased risk of developing a lymphoma. Anti-TNF 
antibody therapy is associated with an increased risk of 
tuberculosis, disseminated histoplasmosis, and a number 
of other infections.
22.	The answer is C.
(Chap. 18) Irritable bowel syndrome is characterized 
by the following: recurrence of lower abdominal pain 
with altered bowel habits over a period of time with-
out progressive deterioration, onset of symptoms dur-
ing periods of stress or emotional upset, absence of other 
systemic symptoms such as fever and weight loss, and 
small-volume stool without evidence of blood. Warning 
signs that the symptoms may be due to something other 
than irritable bowel syndrome include presentation for 
the first time in old age, progressive course from the time 
of onset, persistent diarrhea after a 48-hour fast, and pres-
ence of nocturnal diarrhea or steatorrheal stools. Each 
patient, except for patient C, has “warning” symptoms 
that should prompt further evaluation.
23.	The answer is C.
(Chap. 18) Although this patient has signs and symptoms 
consistent with IBS, the differential diagnosis is large. 
Few tests are required for patients who have typical IBS 
symptoms and no alarm features. In this patient, alarm 
features include anemia, an elevated ESR, and evidence 
of WBCs in the stool. Alarm features warrant further 
investigation to rule out other gastrointestinal disorders 
such as colonic pathology including diverticular disease 
or inflammatory bowel disease. In this case, colonoscopy 
to evaluate for luminal lesions and mucosal character-
istics would be the logical first step. At this point, with 
the warning signs, empiric therapy for IBS is premature. 
Reassurance, stool bulking agents, and antidepressants are 
all therapies to consider if a patient does indeed have IBS.
24.	The answer is D.
(Chap. 18) Up to 80% of patients with irritable bowel 
syndrome (IBS) also have abnormal psychiatric features; 
however, no single psychiatric diagnosis predominates. 
The mechanism is not well understood but may involve 
altered pain thresholds. Although these patients are 
hypersensitive to colonic stimuli, this does not carry 
over to the peripheral nervous system. Functional brain 
imaging shows disparate activation in, for example, 
the mid-cingulate cortex, but brain anatomy does not 
discriminate IBS patients from those without IBS. An 
association between a history of sexual abuse and IBS 
has been reported. There is no reported association with 
sexually transmitted diseases. Patients with IBS do not 
have an increased risk of autoimmunity.
25.	The answer is B.
(Chap. 19) The patient presents with classic signs of 
diverticulitis with fever, abdominal pain that is usually 
left lower quadrant, anorexia or obstipation, and leuko-
cytosis. This most commonly occurs in older individuals. 
Patients may present with acute abdomen due to per-
foration, though this occurs in less than 25% of cases. 
Plain radiographs of the abdomen are seldom helpful, 
but may rarely show the presence of an air–fluid level in 
the left lower quadrant indicating a giant diverticulum 
with impending perforation. CT with oral contrast is the 
diagnostic modality of choice with the following find-
ings: sigmoid diverticula, thickened colonic wall greater 
than 4 mm, and inflammation within the pericolic space 
with or without the collection of contrast material or 
fluid. Abscesses, if present, will also be demonstrated on 
CT. Barium enema and colonoscopy should be avoided 
in acute diverticulitis because the insufflation of air or 
contrast material may lead to perforation. Although 
diverticular disease may result in hematochezia, these are 
generally not temporally linked to diverticulitis.
26.	The answer is B.
(Chap. 19) Medical management is appropriate for many 
patients with uncomplicated diverticular disease. Uncom-
plicated disease has fever, abdominal pain, leukocytosis, and 
anorexia/obstipation, while complicated disease includes 
that with abscess formation, perforation, strictures, or fis-
tulae. Uncomplicated disease accounts for at least 75% of 
cases. Medical therapy generally involves bowel rest and 
antibiotics, usually trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole or 
ciprofloxacin and metronidazole targeting aerobic gram-
negative rods and anaerobic bacteria. Patients with more 
than two attacks of diverticulitis were previously thought 
to require surgical therapy, but newer data suggest that 
these patients do not have an increased risk of perfora-
tion and can continue medical management. Patients with 
immunosuppressive therapy, chronic renal failure, or colla-
gen vascular disease have a fivefold higher risk of perfora-
tion during recurrent attacks. Surgical therapy is indicated 
for surgical low-risk patients with complicated disease.
27.	The answer is B.
(Chap. 19) Hemorrhoids can be internal or external; 
however, they are normally internal and may prolapse to 
the external position. Hemorrhoids are staged in the fol-
lowing manner: stage I, enlargement with bleeding; stage 
II, protrusion with spontaneous reduction; stage III, pro-
trusion requiring manual reduction; stage IV, irreducible 
protrusion. Stage I, which this patient has, is treated with 
fiber supplementation, cortisone suppositories, and/or 
sclerotherapy. Stage II is treated with fiber and cortisone 
suppositories. Stage III patients are offered the prior 
three therapies and banding or operative hemorrhoidec-
tomy. Stage IV patients benefit from fiber and cortisone 
therapy as well as operative hemorrhoidectomy. While 
Review and Self-Assessment
710
substantial upper GI bleeding may result in hematoche-
zia, the absence of suggestive signs/symptoms and the 
consistent findings of hemorrhoids do not indicate the 
need for upper endoscopy.
28.	The answer is A.
(Chap. 19) An anorectal abscess is an abnormal fluid-
containing cavity in the anorectal region. Anorectal 
abscess results from an infection involving the glands sur-
rounding the anorectal canal. The disease is more com-
mon in males with a peak incidence in the third to fifth 
decades. Patients with diabetes, inflammatory bowel dis-
ease, or who are immunocompromised are at increased 
risk for this condition. Perianal pain with defecation and 
fever are common presenting symptoms.
29.	The answer is C.
(Chap. 19) This patient has symptoms (social isolation), 
signs (foul odor), and risk factors (multiparity) for proci-
dentia (rectal prolapse) and fecal incontinence. Prociden-
tia is far more common in women than men and is often 
associated with pelvic floor disorders. It is not uncom-
mon for these patients to become socially withdrawn 
and suffer from depression because of the associated fecal 
incontinence. The foul odor is a result of poor perianal 
hygiene due to the prolapsed rectum. Although depres-
sion in the elderly is an important medical problem, it is 
too premature in the evaluation of this patient to initiate 
medical therapy for depression. Occult malignancy and 
thyroid abnormalities may cause fecal incontinence and 
depression, but a physical examination would be diagnos-
tic and avoid costly tests. Often patients are concerned 
that they have a rectal mass or carcinoma. Examination 
after an enema often makes the prolapse apparent. Medi-
cal therapy is limited to stool bulking agents or fiber. 
Surgical correction is the mainstay of therapy.
30.	The answer is E.
(Chap. 19) Surgical therapy is indicated in all low-risk 
surgical patients with complicated diverticular disease. 
Patients with at least two episodes of diverticulitis requir-
ing hospitalization, with disease that does not respond to 
medical therapy, or who develop intraabdominal com-
plications are considered to have complicated disease. 
Complicating this patient’s relapse of diverticulitis is 
probably an enterovesicular fistula causing pneumaturia. 
Studies indicate that younger patients (<50 years) may 
experience a more aggressive form of the disease than 
older patients, and therefore waiting for more than two 
attacks before considering surgery is not recommended. 
Rifaximin is a poorly absorbed broad-spectrum anti-
biotic that, when combined with a fiber-rich diet, is 
associated with less frequent symptoms in patients with 
uncomplicated diverticular disease. Pneumaturia repre-
sents a potential surgical urgency and should not be con-
fused with proteinuria.
31.	The answer is A.
(Chap. 20) Mesenteric ischemia is a relatively uncom-
mon and highly morbid illness. Acute mesenteric isch-
emia is usually due to arterial embolus (usually from 
the heart) or from thrombosis in a diseased vascular bed. 
Major risk factors include age, atrial fibrillation, valvular 
disease, recent arterial catheterization, and recent myo-
cardial infarction. Ischemia occurs when the intestines 
are inadequately perfused by the splanchnic circulation. 
This blood supply has extensive collateralization and can 
receive up to 30% of the cardiac output, making poor 
perfusion an uncommon event. Patients with acute mes-
enteric ischemia will frequently present with pain out of 
proportion to their initial physical examination. As isch-
emia persists, peritoneal signs and cardiovascular collapse 
will follow. Mortality is greater than 50%. While radio-
graphic imaging can suggest ischemia, the gold standard 
for diagnosis is laparotomy.
32.	The answer is C.
(Chap. 22) Obstruction of the appendiceal lumen is 
believed to typically result in appendicitis. Although 
obstruction is most commonly caused by fecalith, which 
results from accumulation and inspissation of fecal matter 
around vegetable fibers, other causes have been described. 
These other potential causes include enlarged lymphoid 
follicles associated with viral infection (e.g., measles), 
inspissated barium, worms (e.g., pinworms, Ascaris and 
Taenia), and tumors such as carcinoma or carcinoid. Cho-
lelithiasis is a common cause of acute pancreatitis.
33.	The answer is E.
(Chap. 22) Infection with Yersinia organisms may poten-
tially cause acute appendicitis after obstruction occurs. 
High complement fixation antibody titers have been 
found in up to 30% of proven cases of acute appendicitis. 
Chronic appendicitis is quite rare, but may occur due to 
tuberculosis, amebiasis, and actinomycosis.
34.	The answer is A.
(Chap. 22) The patient presents with classic findings for 
acute appendicitis with anorexia, progressing to vague 
periumbilical pain, followed by localization to the right 
lower quadrant. Low-grade fever and leukocytosis are 
frequently present. Although acute appendicitis is 
primarily a clinical diagnosis, imaging modalities are 
frequently employed as the symptoms are not always 
classic. Plain radiographs are rarely helpful except when 
an opaque fecalith is found in the right lower quadrant 
(<5% of cases). Ultrasound may demonstrate an enlarged 
appendix with a thick wall, but is most useful to rule 
out ovarian pathology, tuboovarian abscess, or ectopic 
pregnancy. Recently both nonenhanced and contrasted 
CT have been shown be superior to ultrasound or plain 
radiograph in the diagnosis of acute appendicitis, with a 
positive predictive value of 95–97% and overall accuracy 
Review and Self-Assessment
711
of 90–97%. Findings often include a thickened appendix 
with periappendiceal stranding and often the presence 
of a fecalith. Free air is uncommon, even in the case of 
a perforated appendix. Nonvisualization of the appendix 
on CT is associated with surgical findings of a normal 
appendix 98% of the time. Colonoscopy has no role in 
the diagnosis of acute appendicitis.
	 35 and 36. The answers are C and D, respectively.
(Chap. 22) The patient presents with several months of 
epigastric abdominal pain that is worse after eating. His 
symptoms are highly suggestive of peptic ulcer disease, 
with the worsening pain after eating suggesting a duode-
nal ulcer. The current presentation with acute abdomen 
and free air under the diaphragm diagnoses perforated 
viscus. Perforated gallbladder is less likely in light of the 
duration of symptoms and the absence of the significant 
systemic symptoms that often accompany this condition. 
As the patient is relatively young with no risk factors for 
mesenteric ischemia, necrotic bowel from an infarction 
is highly unlikely. Pancreatitis can have a similar presenta-
tion, but a pancreas cannot perforate and liberate free air. 
Peritonitis is most commonly associated with bacterial 
infection, but it can be caused by the abnormal presence 
of physiologic fluids, for example, gastric contents, bile, 
pancreatic enzymes, blood, or urine, or by foreign bodies. 
In this case peritonitis most likely is due to the presence 
of gastric juice in the peritoneal cavity after perforation 
of a duodenal ulcer has allowed these juices to leave the 
gut lumen.
37.	The answer is B.
(Chap. 23) Acute infectious diarrhea remains a leading 
cause of death worldwide, especially among children 
younger than 5 years of age. The major categories of 
acute diarrheal illness include noninflammatory, inflam-
matory, and penetrating diarrhea. Vibrio cholerae causes 
diarrhea through production of an enterotoxin, which is 
characteristic of noninflammatory diarrhea. After inges-
tion of a large volume (105–106) of organisms, V. chol-
erae attaches to the brush border of the small intestinal 
enterocytes and produces cholera toxin. The primary 
clinical characteristic of diarrheal illness caused by toxin 
production is profuse watery diarrhea that is not bloody. 
Fecal leukocytes are typically not present in noninflam-
matory diarrhea. However, a mild increase in fecal lacto-
ferrin can be seen because this test is more sensitive for 
the presence of mild inflammation. Other pathogens that 
are common causes of noninflammatory diarrhea are 
enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli, Bacillus cereus, Staphylococ-
cus aureus, and viral diarrhea, among others.
  The site of inflammation in inflammatory diarrhea is 
typically the colon or distal small bowel. In inflammatory 
diarrhea, there is invasion of leukocytes into the wall 
of the intestines. The prototypical pathogen of inflam-
matory diarrhea is Shigella dysenteriae. Bloody stools are 
common, and the stool contains large quantities of fecal 
leukocytes and fecal lactoferrin. Other pathogens that 
cause inflammatory diarrhea are most Salmonella species, 
Campylobacter jejuni, enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli, 
and Clostridium difficile.
  Penetrating diarrhea is caused by either Salmonella 
typhi or Yersinia enterocolitica. The site of inflammation in 
penetrating diarrhea is the distal small bowel. In pen-
etrating diarrhea, these organisms penetrate the intestinal 
wall and multiply within Peyer’s patches and intestinal 
lymph nodes before disseminating into the bloodstream. 
Clinically, penetrating diarrhea presents as enteric fever 
with fever, relative bradycardia, abdominal pain, leukope-
nia, and splenomegaly.
	 38 and 39. The answers are B and D, respectively.
(Chap. 23) Traveler’s diarrhea is common among indi-
viduals traveling to Asia, Africa, and Central and South 
America, affecting 25 to 50% of travelers to these 
areas. Most traveler’s diarrhea begins within 3 to 5 days 
after arrival and is self-limited, lasting 1 to 5 days. Most 
individuals acquire traveler’s diarrhea after consuming 
contaminated food or water. Although some organisms 
have a geographic association, enterotoxigenic and 
enteroaggregative Escherichia coli are found worldwide 
and are the most common causes of traveler’s diarrhea. 
In Asia, Campylobacter jejuni is also common. This pre-
sentation would be uncommon for Shigella spp. because 
it most frequently causes bloody diarrhea. Norovirus is 
associated with a more profuse diarrhea. It has been the 
causative organism in large outbreaks on cruise ships. 
Giardia lamblia is a parasite that is responsible for 5% or 
less of traveler’s diarrhea. The approach to treatment of 
traveler’s diarrhea should be tailored to the severity of 
the patient’s symptoms. In general, most cases are self-
limited. As long as an individual is able to maintain 
adequate fluid intake, no specific therapy may be required 
if there are no more than one or two unformed stools 
daily without distressing abdominal symptoms, bloody 
stools, or fever. In this scenario, the patient is not having 
a large number of stools, but in the presence of distress-
ing abdominal symptoms, use of bismuth subsalicylate or 
loperamide is recommended. If loperamide is used, an 
initial dose of 4 mg is given followed by 2 mg after pas-
sage of each unformed stool. Antibacterial therapy is only 
recommended if there is evidence of inflammatory diar-
rhea (bloody stools or fever) or there are more than two 
unformed stools daily. The antibacterial agent of choice is 
usually a fluoroquinolone. Ciprofloxacin given as a single 
dose of 750 mg or 500 mg three times daily for 3 days 
is typically effective. In Thailand, Campylobacter jejuni is a 
common agent and has a high degree of fluoroquinolone 
resistance. For travelers to Thailand who require antibiot-
ics, azithromycin is recommended with an initial dose of 
10 mg/kg on the first day followed by 5 mg/kg on days 
2 and 3 if diarrhea persists.
Review and Self-Assessment
712
40.	The answer is C.
(Chap. 23) Acute bacterial food poisoning occurring 1 
to 6 hours after ingestion of contaminated food is most 
commonly caused by infection with Staphylococcus aureus 
or Bacillus cereus. S. aureus is associated with ingestion of 
ham, poultry, potato or egg salad, mayonnaise, or cream 
pastries that have been allowed to remain at room tem-
perature after cooking. B. cereus is classically associated 
with contaminated fried rice. The symptoms of bacte-
rial food poisoning begin abruptly with nausea, vomit-
ing, abdominal cramping, and diarrhea. However, fever is 
not a common finding and should cause one to consider 
other etiologies of vomiting and diarrhea.
41.	The answer is C.
(Chap. 23) The patient most likely has food poisoning 
caused by contamination of the fried rice with Bacillus 
cereus. This toxin-mediated disease occurs when heat-
resistant spores germinate after boiling. Frying before 
serving may not destroy the preformed toxin. The emetic 
form of illness occurs within 6 hours of eating and is self-
limited. No therapy is necessary unless the patient devel-
ops severe dehydration. This patient currently has no 
symptoms consistent with volume depletion; therefore, 
she does not need intravenous fluids at present. Sarcoid-
osis does not predispose patients to infectious diseases.
42.	The answer is E.
(Chap. 24) Although frequent nonbloody diarrheal illness 
is commonly associated with Clostridium difficile infec-
tion, other presentations are well described, including 
fever in 28% of cases, abdominal pain, and leukocytosis. 
Adynamic ileus is often seen with C. difficile infection, 
and leukocytosis in this condition should be a clue that 
C. difficile is at play. Recurrent infection after therapy has 
been described in 15 to 30% of cases.
43.	The answer is D.
(Chap. 24) Clostridium difficile infection is diagnosed by 
the following means: diarrhea of three or more stools 
per day for 2 or more days with no other cause plus (1) 
demonstration of toxin A or B in the stool, (2) poly-
merase chain reaction for toxin-producing C. difficile of 
the stool, or (3) demonstration of pseudomembranes on 
colonoscopy. Although many tests are available, none has 
adequate sensitivity to definitively rule out C. difficile 
infection. Thus, empiric therapy is appropriate in a patient 
(such as patient C) with a high likelihood of C. difficile 
infection.
44.	The answer is C.
(Chap. 24) The patient has evidence of recurrent Clos-
tridium difficile infection, which occurs in up to 30% of 
treated patients. Because there is no evidence that she has 
severe infection and this is her first recurrence, the rec-
ommended therapy is to retreat with oral metronidazole. 
Vancomycin is reserved for patients with severe infection 
either initially or with recurrence. Fecal transplantation, 
intravenous immunoglobulin, and oral nitazoxanide are 
all potential therapies for patients with multiple recur-
rences.
45.	The answer is E.
(Chap. 24) Clindamycin, ampicillin, and cephalosporins 
(including ceftriaxone) were the first antibiotics associ-
ated with Clostridium difficile–associated disease and still 
are. More recently, broad-spectrum fluoroquinolones, 
including moxifloxacin and ciprofloxacin, have been 
associated with outbreaks of C. difficile, including out-
breaks in some locations of a more virulent strain that 
has caused severe disease among elderly outpatients. For 
unclear reasons, β-lactams other than the later genera-
tion cephalosporins appear to carry a lesser risk of disease. 
Penicillin–β-lactamase combination antibiotics appear to 
have lower risk of C. difficile–associated disease than the 
other agents mentioned. Cases have even been reported 
associated with metronidazole and vancomycin admin-
istration. Nevertheless, all patients initiating antibiotics 
should be warned to seek care if they develop diarrhea 
that is severe or persists for more than 1 day because 
all antibiotics carry some risk for C. difficile–associated 
disease.
46.	The answer is A.
(Chap. 25) Primary (spontaneous) bacterial peritoni-
tis (PBP) occurs when the peritoneal cavity becomes 
infected without an apparent source of contamination. 
PBP occurs most often in patients with cirrhosis, usu-
ally with preexisting ascites. The bacterial likely invade 
the peritoneal fluid because of poor hepatic filtration 
in cirrhosis. Although fever is present in up to 80% of 
cases, abdominal pain, acute onset, and peritoneal signs 
are often absent. Patients may present with nonspecific 
findings such as malaise or worsening encephalopathy. 
A neutrophil count in peritoneal fluid of greater than 
250/μL is diagnostic; there is no % neutrophil differential 
threshold. Diagnosis is often difficult because peritoneal 
culture findings are often negative. Blood cultures may 
reveal the causative organism. The most common organ-
isms are enteric gram-negative bacilli, but gram-positive 
cocci are often found. Anaerobes are not common 
(in contrast to secondary bacterial peritonitis), and empiric 
antibiotics targeting them are not necessary if PBP is 
suspected. Third-generation cephalosporins or piperacil-
lin–tazobactam are reasonable initial empiric therapy. 
Diagnosis requires exclusion of a primary intraabdomi-
nal source of peritonitis.
47.	The answer is D.
(Chap. 25) This patient has continuous ambulatory peri-
toneal dialysis (CAPD)–associated peritonitis. Unlike 
primary or secondary bacterial peritonitis, this infection 
Review and Self-Assessment
713
is usually caused by skin organisms, most commonly 
Staphylococcus spp. The organisms migrate into the peri-
toneal fluid via the device. There may not be a tunnel or 
exit-site infection. Peritonitis is the most common rea-
son for discontinuing CAPD. Y-connectors and diligent 
technique decrease the risk of CAPD. In contrast to PBP 
and similar to spontaneous bacterial peritonitis (SBP), 
the onset of symptoms is usually acute with diffuse pain 
and peritoneal signs. The dialysate will be cloudy with 
greater than 100 WBC/μL and greater than 50% neutro-
phils. Dialysate should be placed in blood culture media 
and often is often positive with one organism. Finding 
more than one organism in culture should prompt an 
evaluation for SBP. Empirical intraperitoneal coverage 
for CAPD peritonitis should be directed against staph-
ylococcal species based on local epidemiology. If the 
patient is severely ill, intravenous antibiotics should be 
added. If the patient does not respond within 4 days, 
catheter removal should be considered.
48.	The answer is D.
(Chap. 25) The computed tomography scan shows a large 
complex liver abscess in the right lobe. Liver abscesses 
may arise from hematogenous spread, biliary disease (most 
common currently), pylephlebitis, or contiguous infec-
tion in the peritoneal cavity. Fever is the only common 
physical finding in liver abscess. Up to 50% of patients 
may not have symptoms or signs to direct attention to 
the liver. Nonspecific symptoms are common, and liver 
abscess is an important cause of fever of unexplained ori-
gin in elderly patients. The only reliably abnormal serum 
studies are elevated alkaline phosphatase or WBC in 70% 
of patients. Liver abscess may be suggested by an elevated 
hemidiaphragm on chest radiograph. The most common 
causative organisms in presumed biliary disease are gram-
negative bacilli. Anaerobes are not common unless pel-
vic or other enteric sources are suspected. Fungal liver 
abscesses occur after fungemia in immunocompromised 
patients receiving chemotherapy, often presenting symp-
tomatically with neutrophil reconstitution. Drainage, 
usually percutaneous, is the mainstay of therapy and is 
useful initially diagnostically (Figure 25-3).
49.	The answer is C.
(Chap. 25) It is important to distinguish between pri-
mary (spontaneous) and secondary peritonitis. Primary 
peritonitis is a result of long-standing ascites, usually as a 
result of cirrhosis. The pathogenesis is poorly understood 
but may involve bacteremic spread or translocation across 
the gut wall of usually only a single species of pathogenic 
bacteria. Secondary peritonitis is caused by rupture of a 
hollow viscous or irritation of the peritoneum caused by 
a contiguous abscess or pyogenic infection. It typically 
presents with peritoneal signs and in most cases repre-
sents a surgical emergency. Secondary peritonitis in a 
patient with cirrhosis is difficult to distinguish on clinical 
grounds from primary (spontaneous) peritonitis. It is 
often overlooked because classic peritoneal signs are almost 
always lacking, and it is uniformly fatal in the absence of 
surgery. Suspicion for this diagnosis should occur when 
ascites shows a protein greater than 1 g/dL, lactate dehy-
drogenase (LDH) greater than serum LDH, glucose level 
below 50 mg/dL, or a polymicrobial Gram stain. When 
this diagnosis is suspected, abdominal radiography is 
indicated to rule out free air, and prompt surgical con-
sultation is warranted. Unlike with primary (spontane-
ous) bacterial peritonitis, in cases of secondary perito-
nitis, antibiotics should include anaerobic coverage and 
often antifungal agents. This patient requires intravenous 
fluid because he has hypotension and tachycardia caused 
by sepsis. Drotrecogin alfa has been shown to reduce 
mortality in patients with sepsis, but it is not indicated 
in patients with thrombocytopenia, cirrhosis, and ascites.
50.	The answer is B.
(Chap. 26) Helicobacter pylori is thought to colonize about 
50% (30% in developed countries and >80% in devel-
oping countries) of the world’s population. The organ-
ism induces a direct tissue response in the stomach, with 
evidence of mononuclear and polymorphonuclear 
infiltrates in all of those with colonization regardless of 
whether or not symptoms are present. Gastric ulceration 
and adenocarcinoma of the stomach arise in association 
with this gastritis. MALT is specific to H. pylori infec-
tion and because of prolonged B-cell activation in the 
stomach. Although H. pylori does not directly infect the 
intestine, it does diminish somatostatin production, 
indirectly contributing to the development of duode-
nal ulcers. Gastroesophageal reflux disease is not caused 
by H. pylori colonization. Recent studies have demon-
strated that colonization by some strains of H. pylori may 
be protective for the development of adenocarcinoma of 
the esophagus and premalignant lesions such as Barrett’s 
esophagus (odds ratio, 0.2–0.6).
51.	The answer is E.
(Chap. 26) It is impossible to know whether the patient’s 
continued dyspepsia is attributable to persistent Helico-
bacter pylori as a result of treatment failure or to some 
other cause. A quick noninvasive test to look for the 
presence of H. pylori is a urea breath test. This test can 
be done as an outpatient and gives a rapid, accurate 
response. Patients should not have received any proton 
pump inhibitors or antimicrobials in the meantime. Stool 
antigen test is another good option if urea breath testing 
is not available. If the urea breath test is positive more 
than 1 month after completion of first-line therapy, 
second-line therapy with a proton pump inhibitor, 
bismuth subsalicylate, tetracycline, and metronidazole 
may be indicated. If the urea breath test result is nega-
tive, the remaining symptoms are unlikely attributable to 
persistent H. pylori infection. Serology is useful only for 
Review and Self-Assessment
714
diagnosing infection initially, but it can remain positive and 
therefore misleading in those who have cleared H. pylori. 
Endoscopy is a consideration to rule out ulcer or upper 
gastrointestinal malignancy but is generally preferred after 
two failed attempts to eradicate H. pylori. Figure 26-2 out-
lines the algorithm for management of H. pylori infection.
52.	The answer is A.
(Chap. 26) Helicobacter pylori is a disease of overcrowd-
ing. Transmission has therefore decreased in the United 
States as the standard of living has increased. It is predi-
cated that the percentage of duodenal ulcers caused by 
factors other than H. pylori (e.g., use of nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs) will increase over the upcoming 
decades. Controversial but increasing evidence suggests 
that H. pylori colonization may provide some protection 
from recent emerging gastrointestinal disorders, such as 
gastroesophageal reflux disease (and its complication, 
esophageal carcinoma). Therefore, the health implica-
tions of H. pylori eradication may not be simple.
53.	The answer is A.
(Chap. 26) In vitro, Helicobacter pylori is susceptible to a 
wide variety of antibiotics. However, monotherapy is no 
longer recommended because of inadequate antibiotic 
delivery to the colonization niche and the development 
of resistance. All current regimens include a proton pump 
inhibitor (omeprazole or equivalent), H2 blocker (raniti-
dine or equivalent), and/or bismuth. Regimens includ-
ing quinolones may not be advisable because of common 
resistance and the risk of developing Clostridium difficile 
colitis. Current regimens have an eradication rate of 75 to 
80%. (See Table 26-2.)
54.	The answer is E.
(Chap. 27) Salmonella enteritidis is one of the causes of 
nontyphoidal salmonellosis (NTS) along with Salmonella 
typhimurium and other strains. Enteric (typhoid) fever 
is caused by Salmonella typhi or Salmonella paratyphi. 
Recent cases of gastroenteritis caused by NTS have been 
associated with undercooked or raw eggs. In contrast to 
S. typhi and S. paratyphi, which only have human res-
ervoirs, the NTS can colonize livestock accounting for 
outbreaks related to contaminated water (fresh produce, 
undercooked ground meat, dairy products). The gastro-
enteritis caused by NTS is indistinguishable clinically for 
other enteric pathogens. The diarrhea is nonbloody and 
may be copious. The disease is typically self-limited in 
healthy hosts, and antibiotic therapy is not recommended 
because it does not change the course of disease and pro-
motes resistance. Therapy may be necessary for neonates 
or debilitated elderly patients who are more likely to 
develop bacteremia. Bacteremia occurs in fewer than 10% 
of cases. Metastatic infections of bone, joint, and endo-
vascular devices may occur. There is no vaccine for NTS. 
Oral and parenteral vaccines for S. typhi are available.
55.	The answer is D.
(Chap. 28) Shigellosis remains a cause of dysentery in the 
developing world and sporadic cases caused by fecal–oral 
contamination occur in the developing and developed 
world. The human intestinal tract is the most prevalent res-
ervoir for the bacteria. Clinical illness from Shigella infec-
tion can be caused by a very small inoculum. Shigellosis 
typically evolves through four phases: incubation, watery 
diarrhea, dysentery, and the postinfectious phase. The 
incubation period is usually 1 to 4 days, and the dysentery 
follows within hours to days. The dysentery syndrome 
is indistinguishable from other invasive enteropathogens 
(including Campylobacter spp.), and inflammatory bowel 
disease is also in the differential diagnosis. Because the 
organism is enteroinvasive, antibiotic therapy is indicated. 
Ciprofloxacin is generally recommended unless there is 
no or proven resistance. Ceftriaxone, azithromycin, piv-
mecillinam, and some recent quinolones are also effective. 
Shigella infection typically does not cause life-threatening 
dehydration. Antimotility agents are not recommended 
because they are thought to prolong the systemic symp-
toms and may increase the risk of toxic megacolon and 
hemolytic uremic syndrome. There is currently no com-
mercially available vaccine for Shigella infection.
56.	The answer is A.
(Chap. 29) Campylobacter spp. are motile, curved gram-
negative rods. The principal diarrheal pathogen is Cam-
pylobacter jejuni. This organism is found in the gastroin-
testinal tract of many animals used for food production 
and is usually transmitted to humans in raw or under-
cooked food products or through direct contact with 
infected animals. More than half of cases are caused by 
insufficiently cooked contaminated poultry. Campylo-
bacter infection a common cause of diarrheal disease in 
the United States. The illness usually occurs within 2 to 
4 days after exposure to the organism in food or water. 
Biopsy of an affected patient’s jejunum, ileum, or colon 
reveals findings indistinguishable from those of Crohn’s 
disease and ulcerative colitis. Although the diarrheal 
illness is usually self-limited, it may be associated with 
constitutional symptoms, lasts more than 1 week, and 
recurs in 5 to 10% of untreated patients. Complications 
include pancreatitis, cystitis, arthritis, meningitis, and 
Guillain-Barré syndrome. The symptoms of Campylo-
bacter enteritis are similar to those resulting from infec-
tion with Salmonella typhi, Shigella spp., and Yersinia spp.; 
all of these agents cause fever and the presence of fecal 
leukocytes. The diagnosis is made by isolating Campylo-
bacter organisms from the stool, which requires selective 
media. Escherichia coli (enterotoxigenic), Norwalk agent, 
and rotavirus are generally not associated with the find-
ing of fecal leukocytes. About 5 to 10% of untreated 
patients with Campylobacter enteritis develop recurrences 
that may be clinically and pathologically confused with 
inflammatory bowel disease.
Review and Self-Assessment
715
57.	The answer is A.
(Chap. 29) As is true with all acute diarrheal diseases, 
adequate volume resuscitation is central to treatment. 
Many patients with mild Campylobacter enteritis will resolve 
spontaneously, and not all patients clearly benefit from 
therapy. In the presence of high or persistent fever, 
bloody diarrhea, severe diarrhea, worsening symptoms, 
or symptoms persisting for more than 1 week, antibiotics 
are recommended. A 5- to 7-day course of erythromy-
cin, azithromycin (and other macrolides), or ciprofloxa-
cin is effective. Drug resistance to fluoroquinolones and 
tetracycline is increasing. Antimotility agents are not rec-
ommended because they have been associated with the 
development of serious complications, including toxic 
megacolon and hemolytic uremic syndrome. Tinidazole 
and metronidazole are used to treat a variety of nonbacte-
rial diarrhea syndromes, including giardiasis and amoebiasis. 
Metronidazole is also used for Clostridium difficile–associated 
colitis.
58.	The answer is B.
(Chap. 30) Cholera remains a worldwide problem with 
sporadic cases usually related to contact with fecally con-
taminated water or seafood. Humans are the only known 
reservoir of Vibrio cholera. Most cases are reported in Africa 
or Asia. After a century, cholera returned to Haiti after 
recent natural disasters and breakdown of public health 
measures. The watery diarrhea of cholera is mediated by 
a specific cholera toxin that binds to small intestine epi-
thelium to cause profuse fluid secretion. The diarrhea of 
cholera is painless, nonbloody, and watery with mucus 
and few inflammatory cells. The term “rice-water” diar-
rhea refers to the appearance of water after soaking rice. 
Morbidity and mortality from cholera are from profound 
volume depletion. Rehydration is essential to therapy. 
Major improvements in care came from the develop-
ment of oral rehydration solutions that take advantage 
of glucose–sodium co-transport in the small intestine. 
These solutions allowed effective rehydration in resource 
limited settings where intravenous rehydration was not 
practical. Diagnosis is by culture or point-of-care antigen 
detection dipstick assay. Antibiotics are not necessary for 
cure, but they diminish the duration and volume of fluid 
loss and hasten the clearance of the organism from stool. 
A single dose of doxycycline is effective in adults in areas 
where there is not resistance. Ciprofloxacin or azithro-
mycin may be alternatives.
59.	The answer is B.
(Chap. 31) The Norwalk virus is the prototype calici-
virus that causes human disease. The calicivirus family, 
many of which cause gastroenteritis and diarrhea, par-
ticularly in children, includes norovirus and sapovirus. 
Most adults worldwide have antibodies to these viruses. 
However, they are a major cause of morbidity through-
out the world and a frequent cause of nonbacterial 
diarrhea outbreaks in the United States. They spread via 
fecal–oral spread and have a low inoculum necessary for 
disease. In temperate regions, they tend to occur in cold 
weather months. The incubation period is less than 3 
days, typically 24 hours. The onset of disease is rapid. 
Fever, myalgias, and headache are common. The diar-
rhea is nonbloody without fecal leukocytes. The disease 
is self-limited, and therapy is supportive.
60.	The answer is B.
(Chap. 31) Nearly all children worldwide are infected 
with rotavirus by age 5 years. In the developing world, 
it remains a major cause of diarrheal death caused by 
volume depletion. Repeated infections occur with each 
subsequent episode of lesser severity. Therefore, severe 
disease is uncommon in adolescents and adults who may 
develop disease, particularly after contact with ill children. 
The disease typically has an abrupt onset with vomiting 
usually preceding diarrhea. Fever occurs in approximately 
one-third of cases. Stools usually do not contain blood, 
mucus, or inflammatory material. The disease is usu-
ally self-limited in 3 to 7 days. Because rotavirus is a 
major cause of childhood hospitalization and morbid-
ity in the United States, vaccination is recommended 
for all U.S. children. Vaccination has less efficacy in the 
developing world because of a higher frequency of mal-
nutrition, co-infection, and comorbidities, but is rec-
ommended by the World Health Organization for all 
children worldwide.
61.	The answer is E.
(Chap. 32) Entamoeba histolytica is a common pathogen 
in areas of the world with poor sanitation and crowding. 
Transmission is oral–fecal, and the primary manifestation 
is colitis, often heme positive. Liver abscess is a common 
complication, occurring after the organism crosses the 
colonic border and travels through the portal circulation, 
subsequently lodging in the liver. At the time of pre-
sentation with liver abscess, the primary gastrointestinal 
infection has usually cleared, and organisms cannot be 
identified in the stool. Suggestive imaging with a positive 
serologic test result for E. histolytica is diagnostic. When 
a patient has a diagnostic imaging procedure, a positive 
amebic serology result is highly sensitive (>94%) and 
highly specific (>95%) for diagnosis of amebic liver 
abscess. Treatment for amebic liver abscess is generally 
with metronidazole. Luminal infection can be treated 
with paromomycin or iodoquinol. Campylobacter is a 
major cause of foodborne infectious diarrhea. Although 
usually self-limited, it may cause serious enteritis and 
inflammatory diarrhea but not liver abscess.
62.	The answer is C.
(Chap. 33) Of the listed protozoa, only Giardia infection 
can be diagnosed with stool ova and parasite examina-
tion. Stool antigen immunoassay can be used to diagnose 
Review and Self-Assessment
716
Giardia and Cryptosporidium spp. Fecal acid-fast testing 
may be used to diagnose Cryptosporidium, Isospora, and 
Cyclospora spp. Microsporidia require special fecal stains 
or tissue biopsy for diagnosis.
63.	The answer is D.
(Chap. 33) Trichomoniasis is transmitted via sexual con-
tact with an infected partner. Many men are asymptom-
atic but may have symptoms of urethritis, epididymitis, 
or prostatitis. Most women have symptoms of infec-
tion that include vaginal itching, dyspareunia, and mal-
odorous discharge. These symptoms do not distinguish 
Trichomonas infection from other forms of vaginitis, 
such as bacterial vaginosis. Trichomoniasis is not a self-
limited infection and should be treated for symptomatic 
and public health reasons. Wet-mount examination for 
motile trichomonads has a sensitivity of 50 to 60% in 
routine examination. Direct immunofluorescent anti-
body staining of secretions is more sensitive and can also 
be performed immediately. Culture is not widely avail-
able and takes 3 to 7 days. Treatment should consist 
of metronidazole either as a single 2-g dose or 500-mg 
doses twice daily for 7 days; all sexual partners should 
be treated. Trichomoniasis resistant to metronidazole has 
been reported and is managed with increased doses of 
metronidazole or with tinidazole.
64.	The answer is E.
(Chap. 33) Giardiasis is diagnosed by detection of parasite 
antigens in the feces or by visualizing cysts or trophozo-
ites in feces or small intestine. There is no reliable serum 
test for this disease. Because a wide variety of pathogens 
are responsible for diarrheal illness, some degree of diag-
nostic testing beyond the history and physical examina-
tion is required for definitive diagnosis. Colonoscopy does 
not have a role in diagnosing Giardia infection. Giardiasis 
can persist in symptomatic patients and should be treated. 
Severe symptoms such as malabsorption, weight loss, 
growth retardation, and dehydration may occur in pro-
longed cases. Additionally, extraintestinal manifestations 
such as urticarial, anterior uveitis, and arthritis have been 
associated with potential giardiasis. A single oral 2-g dose 
of tinidazole is reportedly more effective than a 5-day 
course of metronidazole with cure rates above 90% for 
both. Paromomycin, an oral poorly absorbed amino-
glycoside, can be used for symptomatic patients during 
pregnancy, but its efficacy for eradicating infection is not 
known. Clindamycin and albendazole do not have a role 
in treatment of giardiasis. Refractory disease with persis-
tent infection can be treated with a longer duration of 
metronidazole.
65.	The answer is D.
(Chap. 33) Cryptosporidium typically causes a self-limited 
diarrheal illness in immunocompetent patients but may 
cause severe debilitating disease in patients with severe 
immunodeficiency, such as advanced HIV infection. 
Outbreaks in immunocompetent hosts are caused by 
ingestion of oocysts. Infectious oocysts are excreted in 
human feces, causing human-to-human transmission. 
Waterborne transmission of oocysts accounts for disease 
in travelers and common-source outbreaks. Oocysts resist 
killing by routine chlorination of drinking and recre-
ational water sources. Infection may be asymptomatic in 
immunocompetent and immunosuppressed hosts. Diar-
rhea is typically watery and nonbloody and may be asso-
ciated with abdominal pain, nausea, fever, and anorexia. 
In immunocompetent hosts, symptoms usually subside 
in 1 to 2 weeks without therapy. In advanced AIDS 
with CD4 counts below 100/μL, severe symptoms may 
develop, leading to significant electrolyte and volume 
loss. Nitazoxanide is approved for treatment of Crypto-
sporidium but to date has not been shown to be effective 
in HIV-infected patients. The best available therapy for 
these patients is antiretroviral therapy to reduce immune 
suppression. Tinidazole and metronidazole are used to 
treat giardiasis and trichomoniasis, not cryptosporidiosis.
66.	The answer is B.
(Chap. 34) Strongyloides is the only helminth that can 
replicate in the human host, allowing autoinfection. 
Humans acquire Strongyloides when larvae in fecally con-
taminated soil penetrate the skin or mucous membranes. 
The larvae migrate to the lungs via the bloodstream; 
break through the alveolar spaces; ascend the respiratory 
airways; and are swallowed to reach the small intestine, 
where they mature into adult worms. Adult worms may 
penetrate the mucosa of the small intestine. Strongyloi-
des is endemic in Southeast Asia, sub-Saharan Africa, 
Brazil, and the Southern United States. Many patients 
with Strongyloides are asymptomatic or have mild gas-
trointestinal symptoms or the characteristic cutaneous 
eruption, larval currens, as described in this case. Small 
bowel obstruction may occur with early heavy infection. 
Eosinophilia is common with all clinical manifestations. 
In patients with impaired immunity, particularly gluco-
corticoid therapy, hyperinfection or dissemination may 
occur. This may lead to colitis, enteritis, meningitis, 
peritonitis, and acute renal failure. Bacteremia or gram-
negative sepsis may develop because of bacterial trans-
location through disrupted enteric mucosa. Because of 
the risk of hyperinfection, all patients with Strongyloides 
infection, even asymptomatic carriers, should be treated 
with ivermectin, which is more effective than alben-
dazole. ­Fluconazole is used to treat candidal infections. 
Mebendazole is used to treat trichuriasis, enterobiasis 
(pinworm), ascariasis, and hookworm. Mefloquine is 
used for malaria prophylaxis.
67.	The answer is B.
(Chap. 34) Ascaris lumbricoides is the longest nematode 
(15–40 cm) parasite of humans. It resides in tropical 
Review and Self-Assessment
717
and subtropical regions. In the United States, it is found 
mostly in the rural Southeast. Transmission is through 
fecally contaminated soil. Most commonly, the worm 
burden is low, and it causes no symptoms. Clinical dis-
ease is related to larval migration to the lungs or to adult 
worms in the gastrointestinal tract. The most common 
complications occur because of a high gastrointestinal 
adult worm burden, leading to small bowel obstruc-
tion (most often in children with a narrow-caliber small 
bowel lumen) or migration leading to obstructive com-
plications such as cholangitis, pancreatitis, or appendicitis. 
Rarely, adult worms can migrate to the esophagus and be 
orally expelled. During the lung phase of larval migra-
tion (9–12 days after egg ingestion), patients may develop 
a nonproductive cough, fever, eosinophilia, and pleuritic 
chest pain. Eosinophilic pneumonia syndrome (Löffler’s 
syndrome) is characterized by symptoms and lung infil-
trates. Meningitis is not a known complication of asca-
riasis but can occur with disseminated strongyloidiasis in 
an immunocompromised host.
68.	The answer is A.
(Chap. 34) Ascariasis should always be treated, even in 
asymptomatic cases, to prevent serious intestinal com-
plications. Albendazole, mebendazole, and ivermectin 
are effective. These agents should not be administered to 
pregnant women. Pyrantel is safe in pregnancy. Metro-
nidazole is used for anaerobic bacterial and Trichomonas 
infections. Fluconazole is mostly used to treat Candida 
infections. Diethylcarbamazine (DEC) is first-line ther-
apy for active lymphatic filariasis. Vancomycin has no 
effect on nematodes.
69.	The answer is E.
(Chap. 34) This patient’s most likely diagnosis is anisa-
kiasis. This is a nematode infection in which humans are 
an accidental host. It occurs hours to days after ingest-
ing eggs that previously settled into the muscles of fish. 
The main risk factor for infection is eating raw fish. Pre-
sentation mimics an acute abdomen. History is critical 
because upper endoscopy is both diagnostic and curative. 
The implicated nematodes burrow into the mucosa of 
the stomach, causing intense pain, and must be manu-
ally removed by endoscope or, on rare occasion, surgery. 
There is no medical agent known to cure anisakiasis.
70.	The answer is A.
(Chap. 35) The most common and most characteristic 
symptom of liver disease is fatigue. Unfortunately, it is 
also very nonspecific with little specific diagnostic util-
ity. The fatigue in liver disease seems to improve in the 
morning and worsen throughout the day, but it can be 
intermittent. Jaundice is the hallmark of liver disease and 
is much more specific. Jaundice, however, is typically a 
sign of more advanced disease. Itching is also typically a 
symptom of more advanced disease and is more common 
in cholestatic causes of liver disease. Nausea often occurs 
in severe disease and can be accompanied by vomiting. 
Right upper quadrant pain is a less common symptom 
and indicates stretching of the liver capsule.
71.	The answer is B.
(Chap. 35) Women are more susceptible to the effects 
of alcohol on the liver. On average, drinking about two 
drinks daily can lead to chronic liver disease in women, 
whereas in men it is about three drinks daily. In indi-
viduals with alcoholic cirrhosis, the average daily alcohol 
intake is usually much higher, however, and heavy drink-
ing for more than 10 years is typical before the onset of 
liver disease.
72.	The answer is D.
(Chap. 36) It is important to understand the patterns 
of laboratory abnormalities that indicate liver disease 
is present. One way to consider laboratory evaluation 
of liver disease is to consider three general categories 
of tests: tests based on excretory function of the liver, 
tests of biosynthetic activity of the liver, and coagula-
tion factors. The most common tests of liver function 
fall under the category of tests based on the detoxifica-
tion and excretory function of the liver. These include 
serum bilirubin, urine bilirubin, ammonia, and enzyme 
levels. Bilirubin can exist as a conjugated and an uncon-
jugated form. The unconjugated form is often referred 
to as the indirect fraction. Elevations in the unconju-
gated form of bilirubin are not related to liver disease, 
but are most commonly seen in hemolysis and a number 
of benign genetic conditions such as Gilbert’s syndrome. 
In contrast, conjugated hyperbilirubinemia almost always 
indicates disease of the liver or biliary tract. Conjugated 
bilirubin is water soluble and is excreted in the urine, but 
unconjugated bilirubin is not. Rather, it binds to albu-
min in the blood. Therefore, bilirubinuria implies liver 
disease as well. Among the serum enzymes, it is useful 
to consider those that are associated with hepatocellu-
lar injury or those that reflect cholestasis. Alanine and 
aspartate aminotransferases are the primary enzymes that 
indicate hepatocyte injury. Alkaline phosphatase is the 
most common enzyme elevated in cholestasis, but bone 
disease also causes increased alkaline phosphatase. In some 
cases, one needs additional information to determine if 
the alkaline phosphatase is liver or bone in origin. Other 
tests that would be elevated in cholestatic liver disease are 
5′-nucleotidase and γ-glutamyl transferase. The primary 
test of synthetic function is measurement of serum albu-
min. Coagulation factors can be directly measured, but 
impaired production of coagulation factors in liver disease 
is primarily inferred from elevations in prothrombin time.
	 73 and 74. The answers are E and D, respectively.
(Chap. 37) This patient is presenting with an asymptomatic 
and mild elevation in unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia 
Review and Self-Assessment
718
that has occurred during a time of increased stress, 
fatigue, and likely decreased caloric intake. This presen-
tation is characteristic of Gilbert’s syndrome (option E), 
an inherited disorder of bilirubin conjugation. In Gil-
bert’s syndrome, there is a mutation of the UGT1A1 
gene that encodes bilirubin UDP-glucuronosyltransfer-
ase that leads to a reduction in activity on the enzyme to 
10–35% of normal. This enzyme is of critical importance 
in the conjugation of bilirubin. Most of the time, there 
is no apparent jaundice, as the reduced ability to conju-
gate bilirubin is not reduced to a degree that leads to an 
elevation of bilirubin. However, during times of stress, 
fatigue, alcohol use, decreased caloric intake, or intercur-
rent illness, the enzyme can become overwhelmed, lead-
ing to a mild hyperbilirubinemia. Typical bilirubin levels 
are less than 4.0 mg/dL unless the individual is ill or fast-
ing. Diagnosis usually occurs during young adulthood, 
and episodes are self-limited and benign. If a liver biopsy 
were to be performed, hepatic histology would be nor-
mal. No treatment is necessary as there are no long-term 
consequences of Gilbert’s syndrome, and patient reas-
surance is recommended. Other inherited disorders of 
bilirubin conjugation are Crigler-Najjar syndrome types 
I and II. Crigler-Najjar syndrome type I is a congenital 
disease characterized by more dramatic elevations in bili-
rubin as high as 20–45 mg/dL that is first diagnosed in 
the neonatal period and is present throughout life. This 
rare disorder was once fatal in early childhood due to the 
development of kernicterus. However, with photother-
apy, individuals are now able to survive into adulthood, 
although neurologic deficits are common. Crigler-Najjar 
syndrome type II is similar to type I, but the elevations in 
bilirubin are less. Kernicterus is rare. This is due to the 
fact that there is some residual function of the bilirubin 
UDP-glucuronosyltransferase enzyme (<10%), which is 
totally absent in type I disease. Hemolysis is another fre-
quent cause of elevated unconjugated bilirubin. Hemoly-
sis can be caused by many factors including medications, 
autoimmune disorders, and inherited disorders, among 
others. However, the normal hematocrit, LDH, and 
haptoglobin eliminate hemolysis as a possibility. Dubin-
Johnson syndrome is another congenital hyperbiliru-
binemia. However, it is a predominantly conjugated 
hyperbilirubinemia caused by a defect in biliary excre-
tion from hepatocytes. Obstructive choledocholithiasis is 
characterized by right upper quadrant pain that is often 
exacerbated by fatty meals. The absence of symptoms or 
elevation in other liver function tests, especially alkaline 
phosphatase, also makes this diagnosis unlikely.
75.	The answer is B.
(Chap. 38) This patient presents with acute hepatitis, which 
has numerous etiologies. These include viruses, toxins/
drugs, autoimmune diseases, metabolic disease, alcohol, isch-
emia, pregnancy, and other infectious etiologies including 
rickettsial diseases and leptospirosis. In this clinical ­scenario, 
the patient has risk factors for hepatitis A, B, and C infec-
tion, including having had sex with men and a prior his-
tory of injection drug use. All acute viral hepatitis presents 
with a similar clinical pattern, although incubation periods 
vary after exposure. The most common initial symptoms 
are fatigue, anorexia, nausea, vomiting, myalgias, and head-
ache. These symptoms precede the onset of jaundice by 
about 1–2 weeks. Once jaundice develops, the prodromal 
symptoms regress. On physical examination, there is usually 
obvious icterus with an enlarged and tender liver. Spleno-
megaly can occur. AST and ALT are elevated with peak 
levels that are quite variable between 400–4000 U/L, and 
alkaline phosphatase levels are increased to a much lesser 
degree. Hyperbilirubinemia (levels from 5 to 20 mg/dL) 
occurs with primarily increased levels of conjugated bili-
rubin. Thus, it is important to recognize the patterns of 
antibody production in the viral hepatitides. Hepatitis A 
is an RNA virus that presents with acute hepatitis and is 
transmitted by the fecal-oral route. In the acute state, the 
IgM would be elevated, which is not seen in this sce-
nario. Hepatitis B virus is a DNA virus with three com-
mon antigens that are tested serologically to determine the 
time course of the illness. These antigens are the surface 
antigen, the core antigen, and the e antigen, which is a 
nucleocapsid protein produced from the same gene as the 
core antigen but is immunologically distinct. Several dis-
tinct patterns can be observed. In acute hepatitis B, the 
core IgM, surface antigen, and e antigens are all positive, 
which is what is seen in this case. At this point, the patient is 
highly infectious with viral shedding in body fluids, includ-
ing saliva. In a late acute infection, core IgG may be posi-
tive at the same time as surface- and e-antigen positivity. In 
chronic hepatitis B, this same pattern of serologies is seen. 
If a patient has a prior infection without development of 
chronic hepatitis, the core IgG and surface antibody is posi-
tive. However, when immunity is obtained via vaccination, 
only the surface antibody (SAb) is positive; the e antigen 
and surface antigen will be negative since the patient was 
never infected. The variety of antigen-antibody positivities 
that can result are outlined in Table 38-5. Acute hepati-
tis C often is detectable with contemporary immunoassays 
early in the disease when the aminotransferases are positive. 
Thus, a positive HCV antibody could indicate acute hepa-
titis C in this individual. However, given his clinical history 
of prior injection drug use and inability to donate blood, 
this likely indicates chronic hepatitis C infection. In some 
instances, ecstasy has been reported to cause drug-induced 
hepatitis, but given the viral serologies in this patient, this 
would be unlikely.
76.	The answer is E.
(Chap. 38) No treatment is recommended for acute 
hepatitis B in most individuals because 99% of infected 
individual recover without assistance. Therefore, it 
would not be expected that an individual would derive 
any particular benefit from treatment. In severe acute 
Review and Self-Assessment
719
­hepatitis B, nucleoside analogues, including lamivudine, 
have been used successfully, although there are no clin-
ical trial data to support such an approach. For acute 
hepatitis C, however, there is a growing body of litera-
ture to support the use of interferon α therapy to pre-
vent the development of chronic hepatitis C. In a study 
of 44 patients, 98% had a sustained virologic response 
after 3 months, and therapy was continued for a total of 
24 weeks. Many experts are now recommending that 
pegylated interferon α plus ribavirin be used as an alter-
native treatment for acute hepatitis C, although clinical 
trial data to support this approach is also lacking. Hepa-
titis A is an acute and self-limited illness that does not 
progress to chronic liver disease. Thus, no treatment is 
required. Anti–hepatitis A virus immunoglobulin can be 
given prophylactically following a known exposure to 
prevent the development of disease, but it is not help-
ful in established disease. There is no role for oral or IV 
corticosteroids in the treatment of acute viral hepatitis 
of any etiology. It has demonstrated no clinical benefit 
and may increase the risk of developing chronic disease.
77.	The answer is E.
(Chap. 38) In most instances, patients with any form of 
acute viral hepatitis do not succumb to fulminant liver 
failure. However, pregnant women are highly suscep-
tible to fulminant hepatic failure in the setting of acute 
hepatitis E infection. This RNA virus is an enteric virus 
that is endemic in India, Asia, Africa, the Middle East, 
and Central America, and is spread via contaminated 
water supplies. Person-to-person spread is rare. Gener-
ally, the clinical course of hepatitis E infection is mild, 
and the rate of fulminant hepatitis is only 1–2%. How-
ever, in pregnant women, this is as high as 10–20%. For 
hepatitis A and C, the rate of fulminant hepatic failure 
is about 0.1% or less. It is slightly higher for hepatitis 
B at around 0.1–1%. Hepatitis D occurs as a coinfec-
tion with hepatitis B virus. When the two viruses are 
acquired simultaneously, the rate of fulminant hepatitis 
is about 5% or less. When hepatitis D is acquired in 
the setting of chronic hepatitis B infection, this number 
rises to 20%.
78.	The answer is E.
(Chap. 38) Hepatitis A is an acute, self-limited virus that 
is acquired almost exclusively via the fecal-oral route. It 
is classically a disease of poor hygiene and overcrowding. 
Outbreaks have been traced to contaminated water, milk, 
frozen raspberries and strawberries, green onions, and 
shellfish. Infection occurs mostly in children and young 
adults. It almost invariably resolves spontaneously and 
results in lifelong immunity. Fulminant disease occurs in 
0.1% or less of cases, and there is no chronic form (in 
contrast to hepatitis B and C). Diagnosis is made by dem-
onstrating a positive IgM antibody to HAV, as described 
in the case for this question. An IgG antibody to HAV 
indicates immunity that has been obtained by previous 
infection or vaccination. A small proportion of patients 
will experience relapsing hepatitis weeks to months after 
a full recovery from HAV infection. This too is self-lim-
ited. There is no approved antiviral therapy for hepati-
tis A disease. An inactivated vaccine has decreased the 
incidence of the disease, and it is recommended for all 
U.S. children, high-risk adults, and travelers to endemic 
areas. Passive immunization with immune globulin is also 
available, and it is effective in preventing clinical disease 
before exposure or during the early incubation period.
79.	The answer is C.
(Chap. 38) The current hepatitis B vaccine is a recom-
binant vaccine consisting of yeast-derived hepatitis B 
surface antigen particles. A strategy of vaccinating only 
high-risk individuals in the United States has been 
shown to be ineffective, and universal vaccination against 
hepatitis B is now recommended. Pregnancy is not a con-
traindication to vaccination. Vaccination should ideally 
be performed in infancy. Routine evaluation of hepatitis 
serologies is not cost-effective and is not recommended. 
The vaccine is given in three divided IM doses at 0, 1, 
and 6 months.
80.	The answer is A.
(Chap. 38) A clear distinction between viral etiologies 
of acute hepatitis cannot be made on clinical or epide-
miologic features alone. This patient is at risk for many 
forms of hepatitis due to his lifestyle. Given his occupa-
tion in food services, from a public health perspective it 
is important to make an accurate diagnosis. Serologies 
must be obtained to make a diagnosis. While hepatitis C 
virus typically does not present as an acute hepatitis, this 
is not absolute. Hepatitis E virus infects men and women 
equally and resembles hepatitis A virus in clinical presen-
tation. This patient should be questioned regarding IV 
drug use, and in addition to hepatitis serologies, an HIV 
test should be performed.
81.	The answer is C.
(Chaps. 36 and 38) Causes of extreme elevations in 
serum transaminases generally fall into a few major cat-
egories, including viral infections, toxic ingestions, and 
vascular/hemodynamic causes. Both acute hepatitis A 
and hepatitis B infections may be characterized by high 
transaminases. Fulminant hepatic failure may occur, par-
ticularly in situations in which acute hepatitis A occurs 
on top of chronic hepatitis C infection, or if hepatitis B 
and hepatitis D are cotransmitted. Most cases of acute 
hepatitis A or B infection in adults are self-limited. Hep-
atitis C is an RNA virus that does not typically cause 
acute hepatitis. However, it is associated with a high 
probability of chronic infection. Therefore, progression 
to cirrhosis and hepatoma is increased in patients with 
chronic hepatitis C infection. Extreme transaminitis is 
Review and Self-Assessment
720
highly unlikely with acute hepatitis C infection. Acet-
aminophen remains one of the major causes of fulminant 
hepatic failure and is managed by prompt administration 
of N-acetylcysteine. Budd-Chiari syndrome is character-
ized by posthepatic thrombus formation. It often pres-
ents with jaundice, painful hepatomegaly, ascites, and 
elevated transaminases.
82.	The answer is A.
(Chap. 39) The liver is the primary site for the metabo-
lism of many drugs and as such is susceptible to injury 
related to drugs and toxins. Indeed, the most common 
cause of acute hepatic failure is drug-induced liver injury. 
In general, it is useful to think of chemical hepatotox-
icity within two broad categories: direct toxic effects 
and idiosyncratic reactions. Drugs or toxins that cause a 
direct toxic effect on the liver are either poisons them-
selves or are metabolized to toxic substances. With agents 
that cause a direct toxic effect on hepatocytes, there is a 
predictable, dose-related pattern of injury, and the time 
to effect is relatively short. The most common drug or 
toxin causing direct hepatocyte toxicity is acetamino-
phen. In therapeutic doses, acetaminophen does not cause 
liver injury. However, in higher doses, one of the metabo­
lites of acetaminophen, N-acetyl-p-benzoquinone-imine 
(NAPQI), can overwhelm the glutathione stores of the 
liver that are necessary to convert NAPQI to a non-
toxic metabolite and lead to hepatocyte necrosis. Other 
medications or toxins that cause direct hepatocyte injury 
are carbon tetrachloride, trichloroethylene, tetracycline, 
and the Amanita phalloides mushroom. More commonly 
known as the deathcap mushroom, ingestion of a single 
mushroom can contain enough hepatotoxin to be lethal. 
Idiosyncratic reactions are infrequent and unpredictable. 
There is no dose dependency, and the timing of hepatic 
injury has little association with the duration of drug 
treatment. Many drugs produce idiosyncratic reactions, 
and often it is difficult to known when an idiosyncratic 
reaction will lead to more serious liver failure. Often, mild 
increases in transaminase levels will occur, but over time 
adaptation leads to a return of liver enzymes to normal 
levels.­ In other instances, idiosyncratic reactions can lead 
to fulminant hepatic failure. Although rare, serious hepatic 
reactions can lead to medications being removed from 
the market. It is now recognized that many idiosyncratic 
reactions are related to metabolites leading to liver injury. 
However, it is likely that individual genetic variations in 
liver metabolism are the primary cause, and these are not 
predictable effects of the drug given our current state of 
knowledge. Common medications that can lead to idiosyn-
cratic drug reactions include halothane, isothane, isoniazid, 
HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors, and chlorpromazine.
83.	The answer is B.
(Chap. 39) Acetaminophen overdose is the most common 
cause of acute liver failure and drug-induced liver failure 
that leads to transplantation. Acetaminophen is metab-
olized in the liver through two pathways. The primary 
pathway is a phase II reaction that produces nontoxic 
sulfate and glucuronide metabolites. The minor pathway 
occurs through a phase I reaction leading to the produc-
tion of N-acetyl-p-benzoquinone-imine (NAPQI). This 
metabolite is directly toxic to liver cells and can lead to 
hepatocyte necrosis. With therapeutic use of acetamino-
phen, glutathione in the liver rapidly converts NAPQI 
to a nontoxic metabolite that is excreted in the urine. 
However, glutathione stores can become depleted in the 
setting of a large acute ingestion, chronic alcoholism, or 
the chronic ingestion of increased acetaminophen. In 
addition, because alcohol upregulates the first enzyme 
in the metabolic pathway, NAPQI accumulates more 
quickly in alcoholics. Given the known hepatotoxicity 
of acetaminophen, the U.S. Food and Drug Adminis-
tration has recommended a maximum daily dose of no 
more than 3.25 g, with lower doses in individuals who 
use alcohol chronically. Acute ingestions of 10–15 g of 
acetaminophen is sufficient to cause clinical evidence 
of liver injury, and doses higher than 25 g can lead to 
fatal hepatic necrosis. The course of illness with acute 
acetaminophen ingestion follows a predictable pattern. 
Nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, and shock occur 
within 4–12 hours after ingestion. Liver enzymes and 
synthetic function are normal during this time. Within 
24–48 hours, these symptoms subside and are followed 
by evidence of hepatic injury. Maximal levels of amino-
transferases can reach more than 10,000 U/L and may 
not occur until 4–6 days after ingestion. These patients 
must be followed carefully for fulminant hepatic fail-
ure with serious complications including encephalopa-
thy, cerebral edema, marked coagulopathy, renal failure, 
metabolic acidosis, electrolyte abnormalities, and refrac-
tory shock. Levels of acetaminophen are predictive of the 
development of hepatotoxicity. The first level should be 
measured no sooner than 4 hours after a known inges-
tion. Levels should be plotted on a nomogram that relates 
acetaminophen levels to the time after ingestion. If at 
4 hours the acetaminophen level is greater than 300 μg/
mL, significant hepatotoxicity is likely. In the setting of 
overdose, it may be difficult to know the exact quantity 
and timing of the ingestion. For the patient presenting in 
the clinical scenario in this question, her acetaminophen 
level of greater than 300 μg/mL is quite concerning for a 
large ingestion, and treatment should be initiated imme-
diately. The primary treatment for acetaminophen over-
dose is N-acetylcysteine. N-acetylcysteine acts to replete 
glutathione levels in the liver and also provides a reser-
voir of sulfhydryl groups to bind to the toxic metabolites. 
The typical dose of N-acetylcysteine is 140 mg/kg given 
as a loading dose, followed by 70 mg/kg every 4 hours 
for a total of 15–20 doses. This drug can also be given 
by continuous infusion. Activated charcoal or cholestyr-
amine should only be given if the patient presents within 
Review and Self-Assessment
721
30 minutes after ingestion. Hemodialysis will not accel-
erate clearance of acetaminophen and will not protect 
the liver. Most patients with fulminant hepatic failure 
develop acute renal failure, often requiring hemodialysis. 
If a patient survives an acetaminophen overdose, there is 
usually no chronic liver injury.
84.	The answer is E.
(Chap. 40) The patient in this scenario has evidence of 
chronic active hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection. The 
presence of hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg) is indicative 
of ongoing viral replication, and individuals with HBeAg 
positivity typically have high levels of HBV DNA on test-
ing. The spectrum of clinical infection in chronic hepa-
titis B is quite variable, and often individuals are asymp 
tomatic with elevated liver enzymes identified on test-
ing for other reasons. Thus, the decision to treat chronic 
HBV infection should not be based on clinical features. 
Most experts recommend treatment of HBeAg-positive 
chronic HBV infection with HBV DNA levels above 2 
× 104 IU/mL if the ALT is elevated greater than twice 
the upper limit of normal. At present, many treatment 
options are available for the treatment of HBV infection 
and fall broadly into two categories: nucleoside analogues 
and interferons. While lamivudine and interferon were 
the first drugs used for the treatment of chronic HBV 
infection, these drugs have largely been supplanted by 
entecavir, tenofovir, and pegylated interferon as first-line 
therapy. When choosing among these agents, treatment 
can be tailored to specific patient preferences. Pegylated 
interferon achieves more rapid clearance of HBeAg and 
does not contribute to viral mutations. However, it is 
associated with systemic side effects that many find intol-
erable and requires weekly SC injections. In contrast, the 
oral agents often require a longer duration of therapy, 
are very well tolerated, and yield a more profound sup-
pression of HBV DNA. However, mutations can occur 
with the use of these medications. Combination therapy 
does not appear to be more effective than single-drug 
therapy. The patient’s husband should also be screened 
for hepatitis B given the continued viremia.
85.	The answer is E.
(Chap. 40) Much information has been gained in recent 
decades about the progression and treatment of chronic 
hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection. Chronic hepatitis 
develops in about 85% of all individuals affected with 
HCV, and 20–25% of these individuals will progress to 
cirrhosis over about 20 years. Among those infected with 
HCV, about one-third of individuals will have normal 
or near-normal levels of aminotransferases, although liver 
biopsy demonstrates active hepatitis in as much as one-
half of patients. Moreover, about 25% of individuals with 
normal aminotransferase levels at one point in time will 
develop elevations in these enzymes later, which can lead 
to progressive liver disease. Thus, normal aminotransferase 
levels at a single point in time do not definitively rule out 
the possibility that cirrhosis can develop. Progression to 
end-stage liver disease in individuals with chronic HCV 
hepatitis is more likely in older individuals and in those 
with a longer duration of infection, advanced histologic 
stage and grade, genotype 1 infection, more complex 
quasi-species diversity, concomitant other liver disease, 
HIV infection, and obesity. Among these factors, the best 
prognostic indicator for the development of progres-
sive liver disease is liver histology. Specifically, patients 
who have moderate to severe inflammation or necro-
sis including septal or bridging fibrosis have the great-
est risk of developing cirrhosis over the course of 10–20 
years. Indications for therapy in those with HCV include 
detectable levels of HCV RNA, portal or bridging fibro-
sis on liver biopsy, or moderate to severe hepatitis on liver 
biopsy. Contraindications to treatment are age greater 
than 60 years, mild hepatitis on liver biopsy, and severe 
renal insufficiency. Standard therapy for HCV infection 
is pegylated interferon plus ribavirin. While genotypes 
1 and 4 are less responsive to therapy than genotypes 2 
and 3, the current research demonstrates a response rate 
of at least 40% for genotypes 1 and 4. Interestingly, even 
in individuals who fail to show a virologic or biochemi-
cal response, 75% will have histologic improvement on 
liver biopsy. The treatment course for genotypes 1 and 
4 is a minimum of 48 weeks, whereas genotypes 2 and 
3 can be treated for as little as 24 weeks. Once treat-
ment has been started, a repeat HCV viral load should be 
assessed at 12 weeks. At this point, a 2-log drop in viral 
load is expected. Failure to achieve this level of response 
suggests that a sustained virologic response is unlikely to 
occur. With a drop of this magnitude, however, the likeli-
hood of a sustained virologic response is about 66% at 
the end of therapy, and if the viral load is undetectable at 
12 weeks, the chances of a sustained virologic response 
is more than 80%.
86.	The answer is C.
(Chap. 40) Three types of autoimmune hepatitis have 
been identified based on clinical and laboratory charac-
teristics. Type I autoimmune hepatitis is a disorder typi-
cally seen in young women. The clinical characteristics 
can be variable from those of chronic hepatitis to fulmi-
nant hepatic failure, and many of the features are difficult 
to distinguish from other causes of chronic hepatitis. In 
some individuals, extrahepatic manifestations including 
fatigue, malaise, weight loss, anorexia, and arthralgias 
can be quite prominent. Liver enzymes are elevated but 
may not correlate with the clinical severity of disease. In 
more severe cases, elevations in serum bilirubin between 
3 and 10 mg/dL can be seen. Hypoalbuminemia occurs 
in advanced disease, and hypergammaglobulinemia (>2.5 
g/dL) is very common. The circulating antibody profile 
in autoimmune hepatitis depends to some extent on the 
type of hepatitis. Antinuclear antibodies are positive in a 
Review and Self-Assessment
722
homogeneous staining pattern almost invariably in the 
disease, and rheumatoid factor is also common. Peri-
nuclear antineutrophilic cytoplasmic antibody may be 
positive, but in an atypical fashion. Anti–smooth muscle 
antibodies and anti–liver/kidney microsomal antibodies 
are frequently seen, but these are nonspecific as other 
causes of chronic hepatitis can lead to positivity of these 
enzymes. Because of the lack of a specific autoimmune 
profile, the diagnostic criteria for autoimmune hepatitis 
incorporate a variety of clinical and laboratory features. 
Specific features that argue against this diagnosis include 
prominent alkaline phosphatase elevation, presence of 
mitochondrial antibodies, markers of viral hepatitis, his-
tory of hepatotoxic drugs or excess alcohol intake, and 
histologic evidence of bile duct injury or atypical biopsy 
features including excess hepatic iron, fatty infiltration, 
and viral inclusions. Antimitochondrial antibodies are 
typically seen in primary biliary cirrhosis.
87.	The answer is D.
(Chap. 40) In the course of acute hepatitis B, HBeAg 
positivity is common and usually transient. Persistence of 
HBeAg in the serum for 3 months or longer indicates an 
increased likelihood of development of chronic hepatitis 
B. In chronic hepatitis B, the presence of HBeAg in the 
serum indicates ongoing viral replication and increased 
infectivity. It is also a surrogate for inflammatory liver 
injury but not fibrosis. The development of antibody to 
HBeAg (anti-HBe) is indicative of the nonreplicative 
phase of HBV infection. During this phase, intact virions 
do not circulate and infectivity is less. Currently, quanti-
fication of HBV DNA with polymerase chain reaction 
allows risk stratification as fewer than 103 virions/μL is 
the approximate threshold for liver injury and infectivity.
88.	The answer is C.
(Chap. 41) This patient presents with severe acute alco-
holic hepatitis. In its earliest form, alcoholic liver disease 
is marked by fatty infiltration of the liver. In more acute 
alcoholic hepatitis, there is hepatocyte injury with balloon 
degeneration and necrosis. Many cases of alcoholic hepa-
titis are asymptomatic. However, as in this case, the severe 
manifestations can include fever, jaundice, spider nevi, and 
abdominal pain that can mimic an acute abdomen in its 
severity. On laboratory examination, the AST is typically 
elevated more than the ALT, although the total trans-
aminase levels are rarely greater than 400 U/L. Hyper-
bilirubinemia can be quite marked, with lesser elevation in 
­alkaline phosphatase. Hypoalbuminemia and coagulopathy 
are poor prognostic indicators. A discriminate function 
(DF) can be calculated as (4.6 × the prolongation of pro-
thrombin time above control) + serum bilirubin. A DF 
greater than 32 is associated with a poor prognosis and is 
an indication for the treatment of acute alcoholic hepati-
tis. The Model for End-Stage Liver Disease (MELD) score 
can also be used for prognostication in acute alcoholic 
­hepatitis, with a score greater than 21 being an indication 
for treatment as well. This patient has a discriminate func-
tion of 73, indicating very severe disease and a poor prog-
nosis. Complete abstinence from alcohol is imperative. 
Treatment with prednisone 40 mg daily (or prednisolone 
32 mg daily) for 4 weeks should be initiated. Following the 
initial period, a taper should be achieved over a period of 
4 weeks. Alternatively, pentoxifylline 400 mg three times 
daily for 4 weeks can also be used.
89.	The answer is C.
(Chap. 42) The clinical presentation is consistent with a 
cholestatic picture, which can present with painless jaun-
dice and pruritus. The pruritus can be prominent and 
is present in 50% of individuals at the time of diagno-
sis. The pruritus is typically intermittent and worse in 
the evening. There is no other prominent association 
such as following hot baths or showers, which occurs in 
polycythemia vera. Other causes of pruritus outside of 
cholestasis include lymphoma and uncontrolled hypo- 
or hyperthyroidism. However, the laboratory studies in 
this patient clearly represent cholestasis with an eleva-
tion in alkaline phosphatase and bilirubin. The clinical 
characteristics are more commonly seen in primary bili-
ary cirrhosis compared to primary sclerosis cholangitis, 
as the patient is a middle-aged female with positive anti-
mitochondrial antibodies. In contrast, primary sclerosing 
cholangitis is associated with positive perinuclear anti-
neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies in 65% of patients, and 
50% of individuals with primary sclerosing cholangitis 
have a history of ulcerative colitis.
90.	The answer is B.
(Chap. 42) Esophageal varices develop in the setting of 
portal hypertension associated most commonly with cir-
rhotic liver disease. In recent years, patients with cirrhosis 
have been commonly screened for varices by endoscopy, 
as about 33% will have varices on examination. More-
over, it is estimated that one-third of individuals with 
varices will develop bleeding. As this patient does not 
have medical care, it is unknown whether he has vari-
ces, but with the large volume of bleeding the patient 
has experienced, the treating physician should assume 
that the patient has variceal bleeding and act accordingly. 
The first step in the treatment of any individual with 
acute gastrointestinal bleeding is to ensure appropriate 
large-bore IV access, preferably in a large central vein 
or the antecubital fossae, and begin volume resuscitation. 
Volume resuscitation should be initiated with normal 
saline, and blood products should be administered when 
available. Once volume resuscitation has been initiated, 
emergent consultation with GI for endoscopic evalua-
tion should be obtained. Endoscopic treatment should 
include esophageal band ligation, but in the acute set-
ting, sclerotherapy may be used to control local bleeding 
with band ligation occurring at a future point in time. 
Review and Self-Assessment
723
If emergent endoscopy is not an option, placement of a 
Sengstaken-Blakemore or Minnesota tube to tampon-
ade bleeding should be employed. In addition, vasocon-
stricting agents are used to decrease splanchnic blood 
flow. While vasopressin was initially the agent of choice, 
cardiovascular ischemia can occur with the high doses 
used in GI bleeding. The currently preferred agents are 
octreotide or somatostatin by continuous infusion. Non-
specific beta blockers such as propranolol or nadolol are 
used for the primary or secondary prevention of variceal 
bleeding, but are not prescribed in the acute setting as 
these agents could worsen hypotension.
91.	The answer is A.
(Chap. 42) The cornerstone of the management of ascites 
is sodium restriction to less than 2 g daily. A common 
misconception is to institute a fluid restriction as well. 
However, this is neither effective nor necessary. With a 
sodium restriction to 2 g daily, most mild ascites can be 
managed quite well. If sodium restriction alone fails to 
correct ascites, then initiation of diuretics is required. 
Spironolactone at a dose of 100–200 mg daily is the ini-
tial diuretic used for ascites and can be titrated as high 
as 400–600 mg daily if tolerated. Loop diuretics can be 
added to spironolactone. The typical agent is furosemide 
beginning at 40–80 mg daily with the maximum doses 
being about 120–160 mg daily. Care must be taken to 
avoid renal dysfunction with loop diuretics, and higher 
doses may not be tolerated. If ascites is refractory to 
these treatments, transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic 
shunts (TIPS) can be considered. This procedure creates 
a portocaval shunt be introducing an expandable metal 
stent from the hepatic veins through the substance of the 
liver into the portal veins, creating a direct portocaval 
shunt. Thus, TIPS decreases portal pressures to decrease 
ascites and the risk of variceal bleeding. However, hepatic 
encephalopathy typically worsens following TIPS.
92.	The answer is A.
(Chap. 42) Severe right-sided heart failure may lead to 
chronic liver injury and cardiac cirrhosis. Elevated venous 
pressure leads to congestion of the hepatic sinusoids and 
of the central vein and centrilobular hepatocytes. Cen-
trilobular fibrosis develops, and fibrosis extends outward 
from the central vein, not the portal triads. Gross exami-
nation of the liver shows a pattern of “nutmeg liver.” 
Although transaminases are typically mildly elevated, 
severe congestion, particularly associated with hypoten-
sion, may result in dramatic elevation of AST and ALT 
50- to 100-fold above normal. Budd-Chiari syndrome, 
or occlusion of the hepatic veins or inferior vena cava, 
may be confused with congestive hepatopathy. How-
ever, the signs and symptoms of congestive heart failure 
are absent in patients with Budd-Chiari syndrome, and 
these patients can be easily distinguished clinically from 
those with heart failure. Venoocclusive disease may result 
from hepatic irradiation and high-dose chemotherapy in 
preparation for hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. 
It is not a typical complication of liver transplantation. 
Although echocardiography is a useful tool for assess-
ing left and right ventricular function, findings may be 
unimpressive in patients with constrictive pericarditis. A 
high index of suspicion for constrictive pericarditis (e.g., 
prior episodes of pericarditis, mediastinal irradiation) 
should lead to a right-sided heart catheterization with 
demonstration of “square root sign,” which is the limita-
tion of right heart filling pressure in diastole that is sug-
gestive of restrictive cardiomyopathy. Cardiac magnetic 
resonance imaging may also be helpful in determining 
which patients should proceed to cardiac surgery.
93.	The answer is B.
(Chap. 42) The presence of cirrhosis in an elderly woman 
with no prior risk factors for viral or alcoholic cirrho-
sis should raise the possibility of primary biliary cirrhosis 
(PBC). It is characterized by chronic inflammation and 
fibrous obliteration of intrahepatic ductules. The cause is 
unknown, but autoimmunity is assumed, as there is an 
association with other autoimmune disorders, such as 
autoimmune thyroiditis, CREST syndrome, and the sicca 
syndrome. The vast majority of patients with symptomatic 
disease are women. The antimitochondrial antibody test 
(AMA) is positive in over 90% of patients with PBC and 
only rarely is positive in other conditions. This makes it 
the most useful initial test in the diagnosis of PBC. Since 
there are false positives, if AMA is positive a liver biopsy is 
performed to confirm the diagnosis. The 24-hour urine 
copper collection is useful in the diagnosis of Wilson’s dis-
ease. Hepatic failure from Wilson’s disease typically occurs 
before age 50. Hemochromatosis may result in cirrhosis. 
It is associated with lethargy, fatigue, loss of libido, discol-
oration of the skin, arthralgias, diabetes, and cardiomy-
opathy. Ferritin levels are usually increased, and the most 
suggestive laboratory abnormality is an elevated transfer-
rin saturation percentage. Although hemochromatosis is 
a possible diagnosis in this case, PBC is more likely in 
light of the clinical scenario. Although chronic hepatitis B 
and hepatitis C are certainly in the differential diagnosis 
and must be ruled out, they are unlikely because of the 
patient’s history and lack of risk factors.
94.	The answer is D.
(Chap. 44) This patient presents with nonalcoholic fatty 
liver disease (NAFLD) that has progressed to cirrho-
sis. It is now commonly thought that many individu-
als previously identified as having cryptogenic cirrhosis 
had NAFLD as a cause of end-stage liver disease. With 
the rising prevalence of obesity in the United States and 
Europe, NAFLD is expected to continue to rise. At pres-
ent, the prevalence of NAFLD is estimated between to be 
14–20%. Of these individuals, 30–40% with nonalcoholic 
steatohepatitis will develop advanced fibrosis and 10–15% 
Review and Self-Assessment
724
will develop outright cirrhosis. Most patients diagnosed 
with NAFLD are asymptomatic with incident note of 
elevated liver enzymes found on testing for other reasons. 
The ALT is typically slightly higher than the AST, and 
both enzymes are only mildly elevated. In most instances 
the ALT and AST are only 1.5–2 times the upper limit of 
normal. NAFLD often accompanies other components 
of the metabolic syndrome, with insulin resistance being 
a common link between these disorders. The diagnosis 
of NAFLD requires a careful history and examination 
to rule out other disorders. Alcohol intake should be 
less than 20 g/d. Comprehensive testing should include 
serologies for viral hepatitis, iron studies, ceruloplasmin, 
α1 antitrypsin levels, and autoimmune serologies. Liver 
biopsy most commonly shows macrovesicular steatosis 
with a mixed inflammatory infiltrate in a lobular dis-
tribution. The fibrosis that occurs has a characteristic 
perivenular and perisinusoidal distribution. In cirrhotic 
patients, steatosis may not be seen, but can recur follow-
ing transplant. The only known effective treatment for 
NAFLD is weight loss and exercise. Thiazolidinediones 
are currently being studied given their effects on insulin 
resistance. In addition, ongoing research into statins and 
ursodeoxycholic acid is being undertaken, but no spe-
cific medication can be recommended at this point for 
patients with NAFLD.
95.	The answer is B.
(Chap. 45) In the National Health and Nutrition Exami-
nation Survey, the prevalence of gallstone disease in the 
United States was 7.9% in men and 16.6% in women. 
While the disease is quite prevalent, not all patients with 
gallstone disease require cholecystectomy. It is estimated 
that 1–2% of patients with asymptomatic gallstone dis-
ease will develop complications that will require surgery 
yearly. Therefore, it is important to know which patients 
with asymptomatic gallstones require referral for surgery. 
The first factor to consider is whether the patient has 
symptoms that are caused by gallstones and whether they 
are frequent enough and severe enough to necessitate sur-
gery. Commonly called biliary colic, the classic symptoms 
of gallstone disease are right upper quadrant pain and full-
ness that begins suddenly and can last as long as 5 hours. 
Nausea and vomiting can accompany the episode. Vague 
symptoms of epigastric fullness, dyspepsia, and bloating 
following meals should not be considered biliary colic. 
A second factor that would be considered in recommend-
ing a patient for cholecystectomy is whether the patient 
has a prior history of complications of gallstone disease 
such as pancreatitis or acute cholecystitis. A final factor 
that would lead to the recommendation for cholecys-
tectomy is the presence of anatomical factors that would 
increase the likelihood of complications such as a porce-
lain gallbladder or congenital abnormalities of the biliary 
tract. Individuals with very large stones (>3 cm) would 
also need to be considered carefully for cholecystectomy. 
Ursodeoxycholic acid can be used in some instances to 
dissolve gallstones. It acts to decrease the cholesterol 
saturation of bile and also allows the dispersion of cho-
lesterol from stones by producing a lamellar crystalline 
phase. It is only effective, however, in individuals with 
radiolucent stones measuring less than 10 mm.
96.	The answer is D.
(Chap. 45) A practitioner needs to have a high index 
of suspicion for acalculous cholecystitis in critically ill 
patients who develop decompensation during the course 
of treatment for the underlying disease and have no other 
apparent source of infection. Some predisposing condi-
tions for the development of acalculous cholecystitis 
include serious trauma or burns, postpartum following 
prolonged labor, prolonged parenteral hyperalimentation, 
and the postoperative period following orthopedic and 
other major surgical procedures. The clinical manifesta-
tions of acalculous cholecystitis are identical to calculous 
disease, but the disease is more difficult to diagnose. Ultra-
sonography and CT scanning typically only show biliary 
sludge, but they may demonstrate large and tense gallblad-
ders. Hepatobiliary scintigraphy often shows delayed or 
absent gallbladder emptying. Successful management relies 
on accurate and early diagnosis. In critically ill patients, a 
percutaneous cholecystostomy may be the safest immedi-
ate procedure to decompress an infected gallbladder. Once 
the patient is stabilized, early elective cholecystectomy 
should be considered. Metronidazole to provide anaerobic 
coverage should be added, but this would not elucidate or 
adequately treat the underlying condition.
97.	The answer is C.
(Chap. 45) Gallstones are very common, particularly in 
Western countries. Cholesterol stones are responsible for 
80% of cases of cholelithiasis; pigment stones account for 
the remaining 20%. Cholesterol is essentially water insol-
uble. Stone formation occurs in the setting of factors that 
upset cholesterol balance. Obesity, cholesterol-rich diets, 
high-calorie diets, and certain medications affect the 
biliary secretion of cholesterol. Intrinsic genetic muta-
tions in certain populations may affect the processing 
and secretion of cholesterol in the liver. Pregnancy results 
in both an increase in cholesterol saturation during the 
third trimester and changes in gallbladder contractility. 
Pigment stones are increased in patients with chronic 
hemolysis, cirrhosis, Gilbert’s syndrome, and disruptions 
in the enterohepatic circulation. Although rapid weight 
loss and low-calorie diets are associated with gallstones, 
there is no evidence that a high-protein diet confers an 
added risk of cholelithiasis.
98.	The answer is C.
(Chap. 46) In the United States, over 6000 individuals 
undergo liver transplants yearly. However, the demand 
for organs far outpaces the supply with a waiting list 
Review and Self-Assessment
725
of over 16,000 individuals. The most common reasons 
for liver transplant are alcoholic cirrhosis and chronic 
hepatitis C infection. When evaluating someone for liver 
transplantation, it is important to ensure that the patient 
is an appropriate candidate. For individuals with alco-
holic cirrhosis, sustained abstinence and recovery need 
to be demonstrated, although the recidivism rate is as 
high as 25% after transplantation. Absolute contraindi-
cations to liver transplant include uncontrolled infec-
tion, active substance or alcohol abuse, extrahepatobili-
ary malignancy (excluding nonmelanoma skin cancer), 
metastatic malignancy to the liver, AIDS, or life-threat-
ening or advance systemic disease. Cholangiocarcinoma 
almost invariably recurs following liver transplantation. 
Thus, it is now considered a contraindication to trans-
plant. While primarily performed in children, living 
donor transplantation is increasingly being considered 
in adults given the poor availability of cadaveric organs. 
In living donor transplantation, typically the right lobe 
of the liver is taken from a suitable healthy donor. Cur-
rently, living donor transplantation accounts for 4% of 
all liver transplants. It is certainly not without risk. The 
average healthy donor will be medically disabled for at 
least 10 weeks, and the risk of death for the donor is 
0.2–0.4%. Individuals receiving all forms of liver trans-
plant have demonstrated increasing survival over the 
past decades. The current 5-year survival rate is more 
than 60%. Following transplantation, however, rejection, 
infection, and recurrence of primary disease can occur. 
For chronic hepatitis B infection, reinfection of the 
transplant frequently occurs, but this may be reduced to 
as little as 35% with post-transplantation treatment with 
hepatitis B immunoglobulin. For hepatitis C, reinfection 
is universal and is associated with the development of 
allograft cirrhosis in 20–30% of patients within 5 years. 
Autoimmune diseases can also recur in the transplanted 
liver, although it can be difficult to differentiate between 
the autoimmune disease and rejection. Wilson’s disease 
and α1 antitrypsin deficiency, however, do not recur fol-
lowing transplantation.
99.	The answer is E.
(Chap. 46) The patient has advanced cirrhosis with a high 
risk of mortality, as evidenced by his episode of spon-
taneous bacterial peritonitis. His diabetes and remote 
skin cancer (since it was a basal cell carcinoma, not mela-
noma) are not absolute contraindications for liver trans-
plantation, but active alcohol abuse is. The other absolute 
contraindications to transplantation are life-threatening 
systemic disease, uncontrolled infections, preexisting 
advanced cardiac or pulmonary disease, metastatic malig-
nancy, and life-threatening congenital malignancies. 
Ongoing drug or alcohol abuse is an absolute contrain-
dication, and patients who would otherwise be suitable 
candidates should immediately be referred to appropriate 
counseling centers to achieve abstinence. Once that is 
achieved for an acceptable period of time, transplantation 
can be considered. Indeed, alcoholic cirrhosis accounts 
for a substantial proportion of the patients who undergo 
liver transplantation.
100.	The answer is A.
(Chap. 48) The most common cause of acute pancreati-
tis in the United States is gallstones causing common 
bile duct obstruction. Although bile duct obstruction 
may be demonstrated on technetium HIDA scan, right 
upper quadrant ultrasound is preferred for ease, demon-
stration of gallstones in the gallbladder, and demonstra-
tion of obstructed bile duct. Alcohol is the second most 
common cause, followed by complications of endoscopic 
retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP). Hyper-
triglyceridemia accounts for 1–4% of cases with tri-
glyceride levels usually greater than 1000 mg/dL. Other 
potential causes of pancreatitis include trauma, postop-
erative states, drugs such as valproic acid, anti-HIV medi-
cations, estrogens, and sphincter of Oddi dysfunction. 
Additionally, there are a number of rare causes that have 
been described. The most judicious first step in evalua-
tion is to test for gallstones and pursue more rare causes 
after the most common cause has been ruled out.
101.	The answer is A.
(Chap. 48) Physical examination in acute pancreatitis 
commonly shows an uncomfortable patient often with 
low-grade fever, tachycardia, and hypotension. Abdomi-
nal tenderness and muscle rigidity are often present to 
varying degrees. Cullen’s sign is a faint blue discolor-
ation around the umbilicus that may occur as the result 
of hemoperitoneum. Turner’s sign is blue-red-purple 
or green-brown discoloration of the flanks from tissue 
catabolism of hemoglobin. Both of these signs indicate 
the presence of severe necrotizing pancreatitis.
102.	The answer is E.
(Chap. 48) The BISAP (Bedside Index of Severity in 
Acute Pancreatitis) score has recently replaced Ranson’s 
criteria and APACHE II severity scores as the recom-
mended modality to assess the severity of pancreatitis 
due to the cumbersome nature of the prior scores and 
the requirement of prior scores to collect large amounts 
of clinical and laboratory data over time. Furthermore, 
the APACHE II and Ranson’s scoring mechanisms 
did not have acceptable positive and negative predic-
tive ­values in predicting severe acute pancreatitis. The 
BISAP score incorporates five variables in determining 
severity: BUN greater than 35 mg/dL, impaired mental 
status, presence of SIRS, age above 60 years, and pleural 
effusion on radiography. The presence of three or more 
of these ­factors is associated with substantially increased 
risk for in-hospital mortality. Additional risk factors 
­initially predicting severity include BMI of 30 or above 
and comorbid disease.
Review and Self-Assessment
726
103.	The answer is E.
(Chap. 48) Several trials over the last several decades 
have demonstrated that there is no role for prophylac-
tic antibiotics in the management of either interstitial or 
necrotizing pancreatitis. Antibiotics are recommended 
for only patients who appear septic at presentation while 
awaiting the results of culture data. If cultures are nega-
tive, antibiotics should be discontinued to decrease the 
risk of the development of fungal superinfection. Simi-
larly, several drugs have been evaluated in the treatment 
of acute pancreatitis and found to be of no benefit. These 
drugs include H2 blockers, glucagon, protease inhibitors 
such as aprotinin, glucocorticoids, calcitonin, nonsteroi-
dal anti-inflammatory drugs, and lexipafant, a platelet-
activating factor inhibitor. A recent meta-analysis of 
somatostatin, octreotide, and the antiprotease gabexate 
mesylate in the therapy of acute pancreatitis suggested a 
reduced mortality rate but no change in complications 
with octreotide, and no effect on mortality but reduced 
pancreatic damage with gabexate.
104.	The answer is C.
(Chap. 48) Persistent inflammatory changes in the pan-
creas may remain for weeks to months after an episode 
of acute pancreatitis. Similarly, there may be prolonged 
elevation of amylase and lipase. In this regard, persistent 
changes on CT or persistent pancreatic enzyme elevation 
should not discourage clinicians from feeding hungry 
patients with acute pancreatitis. Although there had been 
prior concern that feeding patients with pancreatitis may 
exacerbate pancreatic inflammation, this has not been 
borne out. Similarly, enteral feeding with a nasojejunal 
tube in patients with acute pancreatitis has been dem-
onstrated to have fewer infectious complications than 
feeding with total parenteral nutrition. Because of this, 
nasogastric feeding is the preferred method of nutritional 
support in acute pancreatitis. Enteral feeding also helps 
to maintain the integrity of the intestinal tract in acute 
pancreatitis.
105.	The answer is D.
(Chap. 48) The pathophysiology of acute pancreatitis 
evolves in three phases. During the initial phase, pancre-
atic injury leads to intrapancreatic activation of digestive 
enzymes with subsequent autodigestion and acinar cell 
injury. Acinar injury is primarily attributed to activation 
of zymogens (proenzymes), particularly trypsinogen, by 
lysosomal hydrolases. Once trypsinogen is converted 
to trypsin, the activated trypsin further perpetuates the 
process by activating other zymogens to further auto-
digestion. The inflammation initiated by intrapancre-
atic activation of zymogens leads to the second phase of 
acute pancreatitis, with local production of chemokines 
that causes activation and sequestration of neutrophils in 
the pancreas. Experimental evidence suggests that neu-
trophilic inflammation can also cause further activation 
of trypsinogen, leading to a cascade of increasing acinar 
injury. The third phase of acute pancreatitis reflects the 
systemic processes that are caused by release of inflam-
matory cytokines and activated proenzymes into the sys-
temic circulation. This process can lead to the systemic 
inflammatory response syndrome with acute respiratory 
distress syndrome, extensive third-spacing of fluids, and 
multiorgan failure.
106.	The answer is D.
(Chap. 48) Chronic pancreatitis is a common disorder in 
any patient population with relapsing acute pancreati-
tis, especially patients with alcohol dependence, pancreas 
divisum, and cystic fibrosis. The disorder is notable for 
both endocrine and exocrine dysfunction of the pan-
creas. Often diabetes ensues as a result of loss of islet cell 
function; though insulin-dependent, it is generally not as 
prone to diabetic ketoacidosis or coma as are other forms 
of diabetes mellitus. As pancreatic enzymes are essential 
to fat digestion, their absence leads to fat malabsorption 
and steatorrhea. In addition, the fat-soluble vitamins, A, 
D, E, and K, are not absorbed. Vitamin A deficiency can 
lead to neuropathy. Vitamin B12, or cobalamin, is often 
deficient. This deficiency is hypothesized to be due to 
excessive binding of cobalamin by cobalamin-binding 
proteins other than intrinsic factor that are normally 
digested by pancreatic enzymes. Replacement of pancre-
atic enzymes orally with meals will correct the vitamin 
deficiencies and steatorrhea. The incidence of pancreatic 
adenocarcinoma is increased in patients with chronic 
pancreatitis, with a 20-year cumulative incidence of 4%. 
Chronic abdominal pain is nearly ubiquitous in this dis-
order, and narcotic dependence is common. Niacin is a 
water-soluble vitamin, and absorption is not affected by 
pancreatic exocrine dysfunction.
107.	The answer is A.
(Chap. 48) This patient likely has chronic pancreatitis 
related to long-standing alcohol use, which is the most 
common cause of chronic pancreatitis in adults in the 
United States. Chronic pancreatitis can develop in indi-
viduals who consume as little as 50 g of alcohol daily 
(equivalent to ~30–40 ounces of beer). The patient’s 
description of his loose stools is consistent with steat-
orrhea, and the recurrent bouts of abdominal pain are 
likely related to his pancreatitis. In most patients, abdom-
inal pain is the most prominent symptom. However, up 
to 20% of individuals with chronic pancreatitis present 
with symptoms of maldigestion alone. The evaluation for 
chronic pancreatitis should allow one to characterize the 
pancreatitis as large- vs. small-duct disease. Large-duct 
disease is more common in men and is more likely to be 
associated with steatorrhea. In addition, large-duct disease 
is associated with the appearance of pancreatic calcifica-
tions and abnormal tests of pancreatic exocrine function. 
Women are more likely to have small-duct disease, with 
Review and Self-Assessment
727
normal tests of pancreatic exocrine function and normal 
abdominal radiography. In small-duct disease, the pro-
gression to steatorrhea is rare, and the pain is responsive 
to treatment with pancreatic enzymes. The character-
istic findings on CT and abdominal radiograph of this 
patient are characteristic of chronic pancreatitis, and no 
further workup should delay treatment with pancreatic 
enzymes. Treatment with pancreatic enzymes orally will 
improve maldigestion and lead to weight gain, but they 
are unlikely to fully resolve maldigestive symptoms. Nar-
cotic dependence can frequently develop in individuals 
with chronic pancreatitis due to recurrent and severe 
bouts of pain. However, as this individual’s pain is mild, 
it is not necessary to prescribe narcotics at this point in 
time. An ERCP or magnetic resonance cholangiopan-
creatography (MRCP) may be considered to evaluate for 
a possible stricture that is amenable to therapy. However, 
sphincterotomy is a procedure performed via ERCP that 
may be useful in treating pain related to chronic pan-
creatitis and is not indicated in the patient. Angiography 
to assess for ischemic bowel disease is not indicated as 
the patient’s symptoms are not consistent with intestinal 
angina. Certainly, weight loss can occur in this setting, but 
the patient usually presents with complaints of abdomi-
nal pain after eating and pain that is out of proportion 
with the clinical examination. Prokinetic agents would 
likely only worsen the patient’s malabsorptive symptoms 
and are not indicated.
This page intentionally left blank 
Bold numbers indicate the start of the main discussion of the topic; numbers with “f” and “t” refer to ﬁgure and table pages, respectively.
729
ABCG5/G8 hemitransporter,  
458–459
Abdomen
auscultation of, 71
inspection of, 71
palpation of, 71
Abdominal bruits, 537
Abdominal mass, 521
Abdominal pain, 2
acute pancreatitis and, 499
in appendicitis, 231–232, 232t
approach to the patient, 5–7
autoimmune pancreatitis and, 509
differential diagnosis of, 6t
in gastrointestinal disease, 83, 83t
hepatocellular carcinoma and,  
536–537
history in, 5–6
imaging in, 7
in intestinal ischemia, 225
in intestinal obstruction, 228
in irritable bowel syndrome, 204–205
in malabsorption syndromes, 176t
mechanisms of
abdominal wall disorders, 3t, 4
inflammation of parietal 
peritoneum, 2, 3t
metabolic, 3t, 5
neurogenic, 3t, 5
obstruction of hollow viscera,  
2–4, 3t
toxic, 3t
vascular disturbances, 3t, 4
in peptic ulcer disease, 136–137
in peritonitis, 254
referred, 3t, 4–5
Abdominal radiography
in gallbladder disease, 463,  
463t, 464f
in pancreatic disease evaluation,  
491t, 493
Abdominal swelling/distention, 70
in appendicitis, 232
causes of, 70
history in, 71
imaging in, 71, 72f
in intestinal obstruction, 228
physical examination in, 71
Abdominal wall disorders, 4, 38
Abdominoperineal resection, 564
Abetalipoproteinemia
diarrhea in, 49
pathophysiology of, 162
small-intestinal mucosal biopsies in, 
166, 167t
Abortion, septic, 288
Abscess
anorectal, 220–221, 221f
liver. See Liver abscess
periapical, 9
perinephric, 260–261
psoas, 261
renal, 260–261
Absorption
of carbohydrates, 162–163,  
163t
disorders of, 156–178
impaired, 81
of lipids, 160t, 160–162, 161f
nutrient, 157
of proteins, 163–164
Acalculous cholecystitis, 724
Acanthamoeba, 311–312, 312f
Acanthocytosis, 162
Acarbose, 148
ACE inhibitors, 656
Acetaminophen
hepatotoxicity caused by, 67, 387t, 
389–392, 392f, 449f
metabolism of, 389, 391
overdosage/poisoning with,  
391–392, 392f, 698–699, 720
Acetylcholine
in neural control of gastrointestinal 
system, 42
in swallowing, 28
Achalasia, 82, 117, 686, 705
classic, 118f
clinical features of, 117
diagnosis of, 117, 118f
differential diagnosis of, 117
dysphagia in, 29–30
with esophageal compression,  
118f
LES relaxation impairment in,  
117–118, 118f
spastic, 118f
subtypes of, 118f
treatment of, 31, 117–118
Achlorhydria, 154, 177–178
Acid-base imbalance, 619
Acidemia, 500
Acinar cell
injury, pancreatitis and, 499
pancreas and, 499
Acrocyanosis of digits, 645
Acromegaly, 9
Actinomycosis, 12t, 18
Activated charcoal, 40
Active energy expenditure, 615
Active transport, 158
Acupressure, 36, 88
Acustimulation, 88
Acute anaphylaxis, 45
Acute care settings
dietary intake and, 582–583
enteral nutrition in, 615
parenteral nutrition in, 615
Acute cholecystitis, 501
Acute intermittent porphyria, 457
Acute intestinal obstruction, 501
Acute mesenteric vascular occlusion, 
501
Acute myelomonocytic leukemia,  
14t, 17
Acute necrotizing pancreatitis, 504–505, 
703, 726
Acute pancreatitis, 481
abdominal pain in, 5, 6t
AIDS infection and, 507
approach to the patient, 490–495
causes of, 498t
complications and course of,  
503–506
diagnosis of, 491t–492t, 500–503
differential diagnosis for,  
501–503
general considerations, 497
laboratory data and, 499–500
necrotizing, 258
pathogenesis of, 499
treatment for, 504–506
Acute respiratory distress syndrome 
(ARDS), 499
INDEX
Index
730
Acute viral hepatitis, 357, 697–698, 
718–719
biopsy findings in, 446f–447f, 451f
clinical features of, 359t, 369t, 373
complications and sequelae of, 
377–379
diagnosis of, 373–377, 376t
differential diagnosis of, 379
epidemiology of, 368–373
etiology of, 357–366
extrahepatic manifestations of, 
367–368
fulminant, 378
global features of, 368–373, 369t
jaundice in, 67, 373–374
pathogenesis of, 366–367
pathology of, 368
prognosis of, 377
prophylaxis for, 380–384
risk factors for, 333
treatment of, 379–380
Acyclovir, 125
Adalimumab, 198–199
Adaptive thermogenesis, 626
Addison’s disease
diarrhea in, 48
oral manifestations of, 14t
Adefovir
adverse effects of, 404
chronic hepatitis B virus infection 
treated with, 403–404,  
407t, 408f
liver disease treated with, 486
Adenocarcinoma
colon, 91f, 529f
description of, 533
Adenomas, 532, 545–546
Adenomatous polyps, 524
calcium supplements and, 527
molecular changes in, 524
Adenomyomatosis, 469
Adenosine deaminase, 74
Adenosine triphosphate, 42
Adenovirus
diarrhea, 44, 305
enteric, 299t, 300f, 305
Adequate (nutrient) intake,  
577, 581
Adipocyte, 626, 627, 627f
Adiponectin, 627, 654
Adipose tissue, 626–627
Adjuvant therapy
advanced pancreatic cancer and,  
551t
hepatocellular carcinoma treated 
with, 541–542
Adrenal insufficiency
adrenocorticotropic hormone and, 
628
nausea and vomiting in, 34
Adrenergic agents, 640
Adrenocorticotropic hormone 
(ACTH), 628
Adult bile ductopenia, 69
Adult fluorosis, 600
Advanced pancreatic cancer, 549–551
Adverse drug reactions, 387
Adynamic ileus, 227–228, 230
Aeromonas spp. infections
clinical features of, 45t
diagnosis of, 52
diarrhea in, 44, 45t
Aerophagia, 70
Afferent loop syndrome, 147
Aflatoxin B1, 535–536
Agammaglobulinemia, 167t
Aging
metabolic syndrome and, 651
oral health and, 20
weight regulation and, 75
AIDS
acute pancreatitis and, 507
anal cancer and, 534
malignant tumors and, 533
VIPomas, 569
Alanine aminotransferase (ALT)
in alcoholic liver disease, 429, 429t
in liver function evaluation,  
342, 345t
Albendazole
ascariasis treated with, 322
capillariasis treated with, 326
hookworm infection treated with, 
323
strongyloidiasis treated with, 325
Albumin
description of, 605
serum, in liver function evaluation, 
341f, 343
Alcohol
absorption of, 432
chronic pancreatitis and, 508–509
thiamine deficiency and, 587–590
vitamin A deficiency and, 595
Alcohol abuse or dependence 
(alcoholism)
CAGE questionnaire, 333, 333t
chronic pancreatitis and, 508–509, 
512
dental disease and, 10
diarrhea in, 48
gastrointestinal bleeding in, 58–59
hepatitis in, 66
involuntary weight loss in, 76
pancreatic insufficiency in, 49
prevalence of, 432
thiamine and, 604
vitamin C and, 592
Alcohol consumption
metabolic responses to, 428
per capita, 427
prevalence of, 432
squamous cell esophageal cancer and, 
518
Alcohol dehydrogenase, 432
Alcoholic cirrhosis, 431
clinical features of, 432f–433f,  
432–433
diagnosis of, 433
laboratory evaluation of, 433
liver transplantation for, 486–487
pathogenesis of, 432
treatment of, 433–434
Alcoholic liver disease, 335t, 427, 696, 
700, 717, 722
biopsy findings in, 449f
chronic HCV infection and, 427t, 
428
cirrhosis, 431–432
clinical features of, 428–429
etiology of, 427–428
history in, 333, 333t
laboratory evaluation of, 429, 429t
lesions involved in, 427
liver transplantation for, 477, 486–487
pathogenesis of, 427–428
pathology of, 428
prognosis of, 429
risk factors for, 333, 333t, 427, 427t
treatment of, 339, 429–430, 430f
Aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH), 432
Alginic acid, 40
Alkaline phosphatase (AP)
in jaundiced patient, 66
in liver abscess, 259
in liver function evaluation, 341f, 
343, 345t
Alkalosis, 648
Allelic loss, 524
Alosetron, 210
Alpha-adrenergic antagonists, 18
Altmeier procedure, 217
Aluminum hydroxide, 139
Alzheimer’s disease, 76
Amalgam tattoo, 14t
Amanita, 45, 67
Ambulatory settings, dietary assessment 
in, 583–584
Index
731
Amebiasis, 306
complications of, 308–309
diagnosis of
mucosal biopsy, 309
serologic and molecular tests, 309
stool analysis, 309
differential diagnosis of, 310
epidemiology of, 306–307
intestinal, 308
liver abscess in
clinical features of, 308
diagnosis of, 309f, 309–310, 310
pathogenesis of, 307
rupture of, 309
treatment of, 310, 310t
pathogenesis of, 307–308, 309f
prevention of, 311
in travelers, 311
treatment of, 310t, 310–311
Amebomas, 307
Amelogenesis imperfecta, 10
Amenorrhea
anorexia nervosa and, 645
bulimia nervosa and, 648
in malabsorption syndromes,  
176t
American Cancer Society, 528
American Diabetes Association food 
exchange, 584
American Psychiatric Association 
Diagnostic and Statistical 
Manual of Mental Disorders, 
645
Amiloride, 74
Amino acid(s)
biotin and, 593
formulas, PN therapy and, 619
requirements, formulas providing, 
616
γ-Aminobutyric acid (GABA) agonists, 
40
Aminotransferase(s)
HCV and, 412
in jaundiced patient, 66
in liver function evaluation, 342, 
345t
Amiodarone, 394
Amitriptyline, 36t
Ammonia/ammonium, serum,  
341–342
Amoxicillin
adverse effects of, 143
in H. pylori eradication, 142t, 
142–143, 267t
Amphotericin B, 125
Ampicillin, 68
Amylase
ascitic fluid, 73
in pancreatic disease evaluation, 
490–493, 491t
Amyloidosis
diarrhea in, 49
gastroparesis in, 33
in liver disease, 457
nausea and vomiting in, 33
small-intestinal mucosal biopsies in, 
167, 167t
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), 
29, 31
Anal cancer, 534
Anal fissure, 222
Anal sphincter, 43f
Analgesics
acute pancreatitis and, 504
adverse effects of, 37
Anastomotic suture-line recurrences, 
530
Ancylostoma braziliense, 323
Ancylostoma caninum, 323
Ancylostoma duodenale, 321t, 322
Anemia
cancer and, 528
endoscopic findings in, 104, 104f, 105f
in gastrointestinal bleeding, 57
liver transplantation and, 462t, 483
in malabsorption syndromes, 176t
occult blood in stool and, 104
pernicious, 177, 178t, 521, 708
Angiogenesis, 128
Angiography, mesenteric, 35
Angiomas
description of, 532–533
spider, 71, 334, 432, 433f
Angiostrongylus spp. infections, 326–327
Angiotensin II receptor blocker, 656
Angular cheilitis, 22f
Animal fats, colorectal cancer and, 524t, 
525
Anisakiasis, 326, 696, 717
Anismus, 55–56
Ankylosing spondylitis, 193
Annular pancreas, 514
Anorectal abscess, 220, 221f, 689, 710
Anorectal angle, 43f
Anorectal disorders, 216
rectal prolapse, 216–218, 217f
Anorectal manometry, 55
Anorectum, 43f
Anorexia of aging, 75
Anorexia nervosa, 643
in appendicitis, 232
cardiac abnormalities, 645
characteristics of, 644t
clinical features, 643–645
diagnosis of, 645–646, 646t
endocrine abnormalities, 645
epidemiology of, 643
etiology of, 643
gastric adenocarcinoma and, 521
laboratory abnormalities associated 
with, 645
nausea and vomiting in, 34
physical features of, 644t, 645
prognosis, 646
thiamine deficiency and, 587
treatment, 646f, 646–647
Anorexiant medications, centrally 
acting, 639–640
Antacids
adverse effects of, 45
gastroesophageal reflux disease treated 
with, 39–40
gastrointestinal disease treated with, 
87
peptic ulcer disease treated with, 139, 
139t
Anthropometrics, 605
Antiarrhythmics, 34
Antibacterial drugs
C. difficile infections, 247
inflammatory bowel disease treated 
with, 195–196, 200f
prophylactic, 19
Antibiotic lock therapy, 620
Antibiotic-associated diarrhea, 45
Antibiotics
acute pancreatitis and, 504–505
enteric fever treated with, 273t
gastric lymphoma and, 523
nontyphoidal salmonellosis treated 
with, 277t
vitamin K deficiency with, 598
Anticholinergics
nausea and vomiting managed with, 
35, 36t
xerostomia caused by, 18
Anticoagulants
dental procedures and, 19
for endoscopic procedures, 108
Antidepressants
adverse effects of, 45
bulimia nervosa and, 649
irritable bowel syndrome treated 
with, 209–210
obesity and, 634
Antidiarrheal agents
carcinoid syndrome, 563
Clostridium difficile and, 620
Index
732
Aspirin
colon cancer and, 527
for endoscopic procedures, 109f, 110f
low-dose, 58
Astroviruses, 299t, 300f, 305
Ataxia-telangiectasia, 548
Atorvastatin, 656
Atresia
biliary, 470
esophageal, 116
Atrophic gastritis, 153, 521
Atypical carcinoid syndromes, 552, 556f
Autism, 592
Autodigestion, 498
Autoimmune cholangitis, 510
Autoimmune gastritis, 153
Autoimmune hepatitis, 66, 421, 
423–426, 699, 721
biopsy findings in, 448f
cirrhosis caused by, 434–435
clinical features of, 424
definition of, 423
diagnosis of, 335t, 425
differential diagnosis of, 425
immunopathogenesis of, 423–425
laboratory features of, 424
survival rates, 424
treatment of, 426
type I, 424
type II, 425
type III, 425
Autoimmune pancreatitis (AIP),  
509–513, 510t
Autologous islet cell transplantation, 
512–513
Azathioprine, 197, 200f
Azithromycin
Campylobacter infections treated with, 
288
cholera treated with, 295
Shigella infections treated with, 283t
travelers’ diarrhea treated with, 245t
Azotemia, 176t
AZT. See Zidovudine
B cell deficiencies of, 44
B cell lymphoma, 533
B ring, 115, 115f
Bacillus cereus infections
clinical features of, 45t
diarrhea in, 44, 45t
food-borne, 243, 244t, 690,  
712
nausea and vomiting in, 33, 239
Baclofen, 40
Bacteremia, 276
peritonitis in, 258
radiographic studies in, 232, 233f
signs and symptoms of, 710
treatment of, 234
Appetite regulation, 626f, 629f
monoamine regulation and, 639–640
Appetite-suppressing drugs, 639–640
Apple-core lesion, 529f
Aprepitant, 36t
APUDomas classification, 552
Arcobacter spp. infections, 286t
Area postrema (chemoreceptor trigger 
zone), 32, 34
Arsenic exposure/poisoning, 45, 48
Arterial thrombosis, 225t, 226
Arterioocclusive mesenteric ischemia, 
223, 224t
Arthritis, peripheral, 193
5-ASA agents, 195–196, 200f
Asacol, 195–196
Ascaris lumbricoides/ascariasis, 320, 696, 
716–717
clinical features of, 321t, 321–322
diagnosis of, 322
epidemiology of, 320–321
life cycle of, 320
treatment of, 321t, 322, 696, 717
Ascites, 72, 701, 723
causes of, 72
chylous, 73
in cirrhosis, 438t, 441–443
clinical features of, 442
complications of, 74
definition of, 441
evaluation of, 72–74, 73f, 442
fluid analysis in, 73
hepatocellular carcinoma and, 537
imaging in, 72, 72f
jaundice and, 66
in liver disease, 334
pathogenesis of, 72, 72f, 441f,  
441–442
peritonitis and, 253–254
refractory, 443, 443f
treatment of, 74, 442–443, 443f
Aspartate aminotransferase (AST)
in alcoholic liver disease, 429, 429t
in liver function evaluation, 342, 
345t
niacin toxicity, 592
Aspergillus, 535–536
inflammatory bowel disease versus, 
191t, 192
Aspiration, 27, 29
in dysphagia, 30
tube feeding and, 620
Antidysrhythmics, 45
Antiemetics, 35, 36t, 88
Antiepileptic drugs, 634
Antihistamines, 35
Antimicrobials, 523
Antimitochondrial antibodies, 435, 723
Antioxidant vitamins, 527
Antireflux surgery, 40
Antispasmodics, 209
Antithrombotics, 109f
α1-Antitrypsin
deficiency of
biopsy findings in, 449f
cirrhosis due to, 438
diagnosis of, 335t
in liver disease, 454–455
prevalence of, 454–455
treatment of, 455
in protein-losing enteropathy, 175
Antitumor treatments, 572–573
Antrectomy
duodenal ulcers treated with, 146, 146f
gastric carcinoids treated with, 564
Aortic aneurysm
abdominal, 71
rupture of, 4, 6t
Aortocolic fistula, 59
Aortoenteric fistula, 59
APC gene, 526
Aphagia, 27
Aphthous stomatitis, 193
Aphthous ulcer, 10, 13t
Appendectomy, 231, 234
Appendiceal carcinoids, 558–559
Appendiceal fecalith, 232, 233f
Appendiceal obstruction, 690, 710
Appendicitis, 231
abdominal distention in, 232
abdominal pain in, 6t, 7, 231–232, 
232t
acute, 231
anorexia in, 232
atypical patterns of, 232–233
bacteria associated with, 690, 710
clinical manifestations of, 231–233, 
232t, 233f
computed tomography of, 232, 233f
differential diagnosis of, 232t, 233–234
in elderly, 233
epidemiology of, 231
etiology of, 231, 690, 710
imaging of, 690, 710
incidence of, 231
infections with, 231
nausea and vomiting in, 33, 232
pathogenesis of, 231
Index
733
Bile salt uptake systems, 458–459
Bile salt–induced diarrhea, after 
cholecystectomy, 469
Biliary atresia, 470, 476
Biliary cirrhosis, 435, 435–437
primary, 435–436
clinical features of, 435–437
diagnosis of, 69, 335t, 436
laboratory evaluation of, 436
pathology of, 435
prevalence of, 435
treatment of, 436
secondary, choledocholithiasis and, 471
Biliary colic
abdominal pain in, 3, 5
acute pancreatitis, 501
in gallbladder disease, 464
indigestion in, 38
nausea and vomiting in, 33
treatment of, 39
Biliary dyskinesia, postcholecystectomy, 
469
Biliary ectasia, congenital, 470
Biliary hypoplasia, 470
Biliary obstruction, 92f, 100
Biliary sludge, 460–462
Biliary tree tumors, 535
Biliary tumors, 544
Biliopancreatic diversion, 641
Biliopancreatic diversion with duodenal 
switch, 641, 641f
Biliprotein, 63
Bilirubin
alcoholic liver disease and, 429t
biliary excretion of, 349
conjugated, 63, 345t, 348–349
conjugation of
hereditary defects in, 351t,  
351–353
impaired, 350
delta fraction, 63
extrahepatic disposition of, 349
in gut, 349
hepatocellular uptake of, 348–349
metabolism of, 62–63, 348–349
production of, 62–63, 349–350
serum, 62
isolated elevation of, 65, 65t
in liver function evaluation, 66, 
340–341, 341f, 345t
measurement of, 63
normal value, 62–63
transfer from blood to bile, 348f, 
348–349
unconjugated, 62–63, 341, 345t
urine, 63–64, 341, 345t
Benign small bowel tumors, 532–533
Benzodiazepines, for nausea and 
vomiting, 36, 36t
Benzphetamine, 640
Bereavement, 76
Beriberi, 587
Bernstein test, 39
Beta-adrenergic antagonists (beta blockers)
cyclic vomiting syndrome treated 
with, 36
variceal bleeding treated with, 58, 440
xerostomia caused by, 18
Bevacizumab, 532
Bicarbonate, 496
Bicarbonate salts, 619
Bile
composition of, 458–459
esophageal epithelium affected by, 121
in gallbladder, 458
limey, cholecystitis and, 468
production of, 458–460
secretion of, 458–459
Bile acid(s), 459
conjugated, 159
enterohepatic circulation of,  
158–160, 159f, 159t, 459
functions of, 158, 159f, 159t
malabsorption of, 48, 53
primary, 158
reabsorption of, 159t, 159–160
secondary, 158
secretion of, 159
synthesis of, 158
Bile acid diarrhea, 159t, 159–160
Bile acid pool, 459
Bile duct
common, 458
imaging of, 100–101
obstruction of, 725
Bile duct disease, 470–474
choledocholithiasis, 470–473
congenital anomalies, 470
extrinsic compression, 473
hemobilia, 473
hepatobiliary parasitism, 473
sclerosing cholangitis, 473–474
strictures, 473
trauma-related, 473
Bile duct stones, 92, 92f
Bile flow
regulation of, 458
sphincter of Oddi in, 459–460
Bile leak, from duct of Luschka, 93f
Bile reflux gastropathy, 148
Bile salt excretory protein, 356
Bile salt export pump, 459
Bacteria
adherence of, 238
colonic, 41–42
toxin production by, 239
Bacterial endocarditis, 19
Bacterial infections, liver transplantation 
and, 482t, 483
Bacterial overgrowth syndrome,  
173–174, 177
diagnosis of, 52, 173–174
diarrhea in, 49, 173
etiology of, 173
pathogenesis of, 173
small-intestinal, 39, 167t
steatorrhea in, 173
treatment of, 174
Bacteria-mediated endocytosis, 269
Bacteroides fragilis, 257
female genital tract, 257
intraperitoneal abscess, 257
liver abscess, 259
peritonitis, 255
Balamuthia, 312
Balantidium coli/balantidiasis, 318
Balloon expulsion test, 55–56
Balloon tamponade, 440
Balsalazide, 195, 196t
Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS), 629
Bariatric surgery, 641f, 641–642, 655
Barium radiography
in constipation, 54
in dysphagia, 31
in malabsorption syndromes, 165, 166f
in nausea and vomiting, 35
in peptic ulcer disease, 137, 138f
in ulcerative colitis, 186
Barrett’s esophagus/metaplasia, 519
dysplasia in, 121
endoscopic findings in, 89, 90f, 103, 
120f, 122
esophageal cancer and, 37, 120f, 122
gastroesophageal reflux disease and, 
37, 103
histopathology of, 122, 122f
Basal metabolic rate, 626
Bedside Index of Severity in Acute 
Pancreatitis, 503, 703, 725
Behavioral therapy, 639
Behçet’s syndrome
diarrhea in, 50
oral manifestations of, 10, 13t
Bell’s palsy, 18
Benign liver tumors, 545, 545–546
Benign recurrent cholestasis, 69
Benign recurrent intrahepatic 
cholestasis, 354t, 355
Index
734
Calcium channel blockers (CCBs),  
10, 18, 37, 634
Calcium chloride, 620
Caliciviruses, human, 299t, 299–302, 
300f
Caloric restriction, 655
Caloric values, 655
Campylobacter spp. infections, 285, 
694, 714
clinical features of, 45t, 286t, 287
colitis, 191, 191t
complications of, 287–288
definition of, 285
diagnosis of, 288
diarrhea, 44, 45t, 243t
differential diagnosis of, 288
epidemiology of, 285–286
etiology of, 285
food-related, 44, 285
pathogenesis of, 286–287
prognosis of, 289
treatment of, 288–289, 694, 715
Cancer, 526–527, 527–528. See also 
specific cancer
involuntary weight loss in, 76
obesity and, 633
protein-calorie malnutrition and, 
611–612
sessile polyps and, 524
staging, 522t
colorectal cancer and, 529, 529f, 
530t
pancreatic cancer and, 549, 550f
surveillance, inflammatory bowel 
disease and, 526–527
Candida spp. infections
C. albicans, 620
description of, 18
disseminated/deeply invasive
gastrointestinal, 191t, 259
renal abscess, 261
Candidiasis, 21f, 26f
Cannabinoids, 36, 36t
CAPD. See Continuous ambulatory 
peritoneal dialysis
Capecitabine, 551
Capillaria philippinensis/capillariasis, 326
Capsular polysaccharide complex, 257
Capsule endoscopy, 91, 91f
celiac sprue evaluations, 104, 104f
Crohn’s disease evaluations, 188, 188f
gastrointestinal bleeding evaluations, 61
gastrointestinal disease evaluations, 
85, 86t
jejunal vascular ectasia evaluations, 
91f
Bone disease
in cirrhosis, 445
inflammatory bowel disease and, 
194–195
obesity and, 633
Bone mass/strength, 194–195
Bone metastases, 537
Bone pain, 176t
Bone sarcoma, 10
Botulinum toxin, 35
Bourneville’s disease, 558
Brain
appetite regulation and, 626, 626f
glucose and, 577
lesions, molybdenum deficiencies 
and, 600
Brain natriuretic peptide, 73
Brainerd diarrhea, 46
Branched-chain amino acids, 586
BRC. See Benign recurrent cholestasis
Breast milk jaundice, 350
BRIC. See Benign recurrent 
intrahepatic cholestasis
Bridging necrosis, 368, 380
Bronchial carcinoids, 48, 559
Brown adipose tissue (BAT), 626
Brush cytology, 522
Budd-Chiari syndrome, 508, 537
abdominal pain in, 6t
ascites in, 73
liver transplantation for, 477
Budesonide, 50
Bulimia nervosa, 10, 18, 647
characteristics of, 644t
clinical features, 647–648
diagnosis, 648, 648t
epidemiology, 647–649
etiology of, 647
treatment, 648–649
Burkitt’s lymphoma, 10
Burning mouth syndrome, 18
Burns
metabolic rate and, 603
protein catabolism and, 603
C gene, of HBV, 358f, 360
C1 inhibitor (C1INH) deficiency, 5
C peptide levels, 566–567
Cabergoline, 561
Cachexia, 601
CagA, 263
CAGE questionnaire, 333, 333t
Calcium
adenomatous polyps and, 527
deficiency, 582
malabsorption of, surgery-related, 149
Bilirubin UDP-glucuronosyl transferase, 
63, 65
Biliverdin, 62
Biliverdin reductase, 62
Billroth procedures, 146f, 146–147
Binge eating and purging, 648
Binge eating disorder, 643
Biofeedback training, 56
Biopsy
bleeding during, HCC and, 539
gastroscopic, 522
liver. See Liver biopsy
Biotin, 593
Bisacodyl, 48, 56
Bismuth subsalicylate
adverse effects of, 47
diarrhea treated with, 47
H. pylori eradication using, 40, 142t, 
142–143, 267t
microscopic colitis treated with, 50
poisoning, 15t
travelers’ diarrhea treated with, 245t
Bismuth-containing preparations
adverse effects of, 143
peptic ulcer disease treated with, 
139t, 141
Bisphosphonate-related osteonecrosis of 
jaw, 19
Bitot’s spots, 595
Black hairy tongue, 15t
Black widow spider bite, 5
Bladder distention, 71
Blastocystis hominis, 44, 318–319
Bleeding
during biopsy, 539
diverticular, 213
Blind loop syndrome, 173
Bloating, 70
Blood
group A, gastric cancer and, 521
in stool, gastric adenocarcinoma and, 
521
Blood pressure
measurement of, in obese patients, 632
metabolic syndrome, 656–657
BMI. See Body mass index
Boceprevir, 418
Body mass index, 605, 631, 655
and nutritional status, 612t
anorexia nervosa and, 645
cardiovascular mortality and, 632
determining, 625f
table, 635t
waist circumference and, 634
Body weight “set point,” 631
Boerhaave’s syndrome, 125
Index
735
acute, 34
anticipatory, 34
delayed, 34
treatment of, 35
Chenodeoxycholic acid, 459
Chest discomfort/pain
with dysphagia, 30–31
in esophageal disorders, 112, 118–119
in gastroesophageal reflux disease, 
121
Chest tube drainage, 508
CHF. See Congestive heart failure
Chickenpox. See Varicella
Chief cell, 131
Child-Pugh classification
cirrhosis, 338, 338t
hepatocellular carcinoma, 540
Children
copper deficiency and, 599
cystic fibrosis and, chronic 
pancreatitis and, 509
liver transplantation in, 476–477, 
477t
obesity and, 627
vitamin A deficiency in, 595
vitamin A toxicity in, 596
vitamin E and, 597
Child-Turcotte-Pugh (CTP) score,  
479
Chloramphenicol, 288
Chloride channel activators, 210
Chloridorrhea, congenital, 48
Chlorpromazine, 69, 387t
Cholangiocarcinoma, 544–545
extrahepatic cholestasis in, 69
in sclerosing cholangitis, 474
Cholangitis
abdominal pain in, 6t
acute, 471
ascending, 101–102
autoimmune, 510
choledocholithiasis and, 471
jaundice in, 65
primary sclerosing, 194, 436–437
biopsy findings in, 450f
clinical features of, 68, 437, 474
diagnosis of, 68, 335t, 437
laboratory evaluation of, 437
small duct, 474
treatment of, 437
sclerosing, 473–474
clinical features of, 473–474
diagnosis of, 474
liver transplantation for, 477, 477t
natural history of, 474
treatment of, 474
Ceftriaxone
peritonitis treated with, 256
Shigella infections treated with,  
283t
Celiac disease, 167t, 167–168, 168f
barium radiography in, 166f
clinical features of, 168–169
complications of, 170–171
dermatitis herpetiformis and, 170
diagnosis of, 168f, 169–170
diarrhea in, 49, 170
endoscopic findings in, 104, 104f
environmental factors in, 169
etiology of, 169
genetic factors, 169
gluten restriction in, 87, 170
incidence of, 167–168
indigestion in, 38
oral manifestations of, 10
refractory, 170
small-intestinal mucosal biopsies in, 
167t, 167–168, 168f
treatment of, 39, 53
Cell signaling, 594
Cellular injury, 499
Central catheters, PN and, 613
Central neural circuits, 626f
Central venous catheters, 618, 620
Cerebrovascular disease, 29
Cetuximab, 532
Cevimeline, 18
CF. See Cystic fibrosis
CFTR. See Cystic fibrosis 
transmembrane regulator
CFTR mutations, 509
Chagas’ disease, 117
Chancre, syphilitic, 12t
Charcot-Leyden crystals, 50
Charcot’s triad, 101, 471
Chédiak-Higashi syndrome, 10
Cheilosis, 176t
Chemical burn, oral, 14t
Chemical carcinogens, 535–536
Chemoembolization
carcinoid crises and, 564
insulinomas and, 567
vasoactive intestinal peptidomas and, 
569
Chemoradiation combination therapy, 
520
Chemoreceptor trigger zone, 32
Chemotherapeutic agents
esophageal cancer and, 519
lymphomas, 533
metastatic disease and, 572
nausea and vomiting caused by
Caput medusa, 71, 335
Carbamazepine, 634
Carbohydrates, 577
digestion and absorption of, 162–163, 
163t
malabsorption of, 49
in parenteral nutrition formulas, 616
Carbon tetrachloride, 387t
Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), 530, 
530t
Carcinoid crisis, 562, 563
Carcinoid syndromes, 560
carcinoid tumors and, 558–564
carcinoid tumors without, 560
clinical features, 559t, 560–561
diagnosis, 562
diarrhea in, 50
neuroendocrine tumors, 554t–555t
pathobiology, 561–562
treatment of, 50, 563–564
Carcinoid tumors, 533–534, 555
carcinoid syndrome and, 554t–555t, 
558–564
classification of, 552
diagnosis, 562
malignant behavior, 556
metastatic, 48
nonmetastatic, 564
sites of, 552, 556t
systemic symptoms, 560
without carcinoid syndrome, 560
Carcinoma of ampulla of VATER, 545
Cardiac cirrhosis, 437–438, 701, 723
Cardiorespiratory failure, 602
Cardiovascular disease
in inflammatory bowel disease, 195
metabolic syndrome and, 650, 654
obesity and, 632
Cardiovascular mortality, BMI and, 632
Caries, dental, 8–9
Caroli’s disease, 477, 477t, 544
ß-Carotene, 594, 596
Carotenemia, 596
Carotenodermia, 62
Carotenoid absorption, 594
Carpal tunnel syndrome, 592
Cascara, 48
Caspofungin, 125
Castor oil, 48
Catheter infections, 620
Causalgia, 5
CCK (cholecystokinin), 495
CD4+ T cells, 257
CDCA. See Chenodeoxycholic acid
CDCA (chenodeoxycholic acid), 459
Cefoxitin, 256
Index
736
Chronic hepatitis C, 410–412
alcoholic liver disease associated with, 
427t, 428
aminotransferase activity in, 412
biopsy findings in, 448f
cirrhosis due to, 411–412, 434
clinical features of, 413
laboratory evaluation of, 413
liver disease progression in, 412
mortality data, 412
prognosis of, 412
treatment of, 413f, 413–423, 416t, 
417f, 419t–420t
antiviral therapy, 418, 419t–420t, 
421–423, 423
PEG IFN and ribavirin,  
413–417
protease inhibitors, 417–418,  
422
Chronic idiopathic nausea, 33
Chronic liver disease, 537
Chronic pancreatitis, 49, 495, 704, 
726–727
approach to the patient, 490–495, 
493f
cobalamin absorption in, 177
complications of, 512, 512t
diagnosis of, 491t–492t
endoscopic ultrasound of, 491t,  
494, 494t
etiologic considerations, 509
incidence of, 490
jaundice in, 69
pathophysiology, 508–509
Schilling test in, 178t
treatment, 512–513
Chronic small-intestinal disease, 598
Chylomicrons, 162
Ciguatera poisoning, 45
Cilansetron, 210
Cimetidine
adverse effects of, 68, 140
drug interactions of, 140
gastroesophageal reflux disease 
managed with, 39
peptic ulcer disease treated with, 
139t, 139–140
Ciprofloxacin
Campylobacter infections treated with, 
288
cholera treated with, 294
enteric fever treated with, 273, 273t
infectious diarrhea treated with, 47, 
245t
nontyphoidal salmonellosis treated 
with, 277t
Cholestatic disease, 331t, 332
Cholestatic hepatitis, 377
Cholesterol stones, 460–462, 462t
in short bowel syndrome, 172
Cholesterolosis, 470
Cholestyramine, 656
adverse effects of, 49
bile acid malabsorption treated with, 53
vitamin A absorption and, 594
Cholic acid, 459
Choline, 593
CHOP plus rituximab, 523
Chromium, 599
Chromium-6, 600
Chronic degenerative diseases, 582
Chronic diarrhea, 43, 47
approach to the patient, 50–51, 51f
congenital causes, 48
dysmotile causes, 47t, 50
factitial causes, 47t, 50
iatrogenic causes, 47t
inflammatory causes, 47t, 49–50
laboratory evaluation of, 52
osmotic causes, 47t, 48–49
physical examination in, 51, 52t
secretory causes, 47t, 48
steatorrheal causes, 47t, 49
treatment of, 52–53
Chronic diuretic therapy, 587
Chronic granulomatous diseases 
(CGDs), 44
Chronic hepatitis B, 398–411, 535–536
biopsy findings in, 447f–448f
cirrhosis due to, 434
clinical features of, 400
HBeAg-negative, 400, 406, 409t
HBeAg-reactive, 399–400, 406, 409t
HDV infection with, 370–371, 411
histology of, 398
laboratory evaluation of, 400
nonreplicative phase, 399–400
replicative phase of, 399–400
survival rates, 398
treatment of, 401–411, 407t, 408f, 
409t, 410t
combination therapy, 406
entecavir, 405–406, 407t, 408f
IFN-α, 401
lamivudine, 402–403, 407t, 408f
novel antivirals and strategies, 406
PEG IFN, 404–405, 407t, 408, 
408f, 410t
recommendations for, 406–411, 
409t, 410t
telbivudine, 406, 407t, 408f
tenofovir, 406, 407t, 408f
Cholecystectomy
complications of, 468–469
gallstones treated with, 463, 465
hyperplastic cholecystosis treated 
with, 470
somatostatinoma syndrome and, 568
Cholecystitis, 464–469
abdominal pain in, 5, 6t
acalculous, 466
acute, 465–467
chronic, 467
clinical features of, 66
complications of, 467–468
diagnosis of, 7, 466
emphysematous, 467
fistula formation secondary to, 467
jaundice in, 66
nausea and vomiting in, 33–34
treatment of, 465, 468
Cholecystokinin (CCK), 495
Cholecystopathy, acalculous, 466–467
Cholecystosis, hyperplastic, 469–470
Choledochal cyst, 470
Choledocholithiasis, 470–473
clinical features of, 66, 69, 470
complications of, 471
diagnosis of, 67–68, 471–473, 472t
pathophysiology of, 470
treatment of, 473
Cholelithiasis, 702, 724
Cholera, 694–695, 715
clinical features of, 45t, 292–293, 
293f
diagnosis of, 293
epidemiology of, 290–292, 
291f–292f, 293f
pancreatic, 48
pathogenesis of, 292
prevention of, 295
treatment of, 293–295, 294t, 295t
Cholera vaccine
killed whole-cell, 295
live attenuated viral, 295
Cholestasis, 685, 700, 704, 722
benign postoperative, 69
benign recurrent, 69, 354t, 355
drug-induced, 68, 388
extrahepatic, 67–69, 68t
imaging in, 67–68
intrahepatic, 67–69, 68t
jaundice in, 68t, 69
liver function tests in, 342–343,  
345t
of pregnancy, 69
progressive familial intrahepatic, 69, 
354t, 355–356
Index
737
Codeine, 53
Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT)
bulimia nervosa treated with,  
648–649
glossodynia treated with, 18
Colchicine, 49
Cold intolerance, 645
Colectomy, 56
Colestipol, 656
Colitis, 308, 310
amebic, 308
bleeding in, 59
collagenous, 50, 191t, 192–193
colonoscopy in, 90, 90f
in Crohn’s disease, 187–188
diarrhea in, 50
diversion, 191t, 193
etiology of, 90f
granulomatous, 180
inflammatory bowel disease versus, 
191t, 192–193
ischemic, 90f
lymphocytic, 191t, 193
microscopic, 50
pseudomembranous, 90f, 247, 248, 
248f
Collagen vascular disease, 126
Collagenous colitis, 191t, 192–193
Collagenous sprue, 171
Colloids, 504
Colon
absorption and secretion in, 42
bleeding from, 59
cathartic, 54
innervation of, 41–42
length of, 157
motility of, 41t, 42–43
normal physiology of, 41–43
polyps of, 105, 105f, 107f
postprandial motility in, 43
sodium absorption in, 42
storage and salvage in, 42
tone of, 42–43
transit time, 55
Colon cancer
aspirin and, 527
primary prevention, 527
Colonic obstruction
abdominal pain in, 3, 6t
diagnosis of, 7
endoscopic findings in, 99–100
mortality data, 229
nausea and vomiting in, 33
treatment of, 229–230
Colonic pseudo-obstruction, 228
Colonization factor antigen, 238
Citalopram, 209–210
C-kit receptor, 523
C-kit tyrosine kinase, 524
Clarithromycin
in H. pylori eradication, 142, 142t, 
267t
resistance to, 267
Clavulanic acid, 68
CLIP staging system, 537, 538t
Clonazepam, 18
Clonidine, 53, 569
Clonorchis sinensis, 544
Clopidogrel, 141
Closed head injury, Glasgow Coma 
Scale and, 612
“Closed loop” obstruction, 227–228
Clostridium difficile, 247, 620
Clostridium difficile–associated disease
antibiotics associated with, 247, 692, 
712
clinical features of, 45t, 249
diagnosis of, 46, 249t, 249–250, 712
epidemiology of, 242–244, 247
etiology of, 162, 247
fulminant, 251
global considerations, 249
in institutionalized persons, 44
laboratory evaluation of, 244
manifestations of, 691, 712
pathogenesis of, 162, 247–248, 248f
pathology of, 247–248, 248f
prevention and control of, 251–252
prognosis of, 251
proton pump inhibitors and, 141
recurrent, 249, 250–251
risk factors for, 247
treatment of, 250–251, 251t,  
690–691, 712
Clostridium perfringens infections
clinical features of, 45t
food-borne, 244, 244t
inflammatory bowel disease versus, 
191, 191t
CMV. See Cytomegalovirus infections
Coagulation disorders, 445
Coagulation factors, 344
Cobalamin (vitamin B12)
absorption of, 687, 707–708
deficiency of
oral manifestations of, 18
small-intestinal mucosal biopsies 
in, 167t
malabsorption of
description of, 707
Schilling test for, 177–178
surgery effects on levels of, 148
peritonitis prophylaxis using, 255
Shigella infections treated with, 283, 
283t
Circulating proteins, 608
Cirrhosis, 702, 725
alcoholic, 431–434
clinical features of, 432f–433f, 
432–433
diagnosis of, 433
laboratory evaluation of, 433
liver transplantation for,  
486–487
pathogenesis of, 432
treatment of, 433–434
ascites in, 72, 72f
autoimmune hepatitis and, 434–435
biopsy findings in, 448f
cardiac, 437–438, 701, 723
clinical features of, 431
complications of, 431, 438t,  
438–445, 441f
ascites, 438t, 441–443
bone disease, 445
coagulopathy, 445
hematologic abnormalities, 445
hepatic encephalopathy, 444
hepatorenal syndrome, 443
hypersplenism, 441
malnutrition, 444–445
portal hypertension, 438t, 438–439
splenomegaly, 441
spontaneous bacterial peritonitis, 
443
cystic fibrosis and, 438
definition of, 398, 431
etiology of, 431, 431t
hemochromatosis and, 438
hepatitis B virus as cause of, 434
hepatitis C virus as cause of, 434
hepatocellular carcinoma associated 
with, 536, 536t
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease and, 
434–435
nonalcoholic steatohepatitis and, 
434–435
pathology of, 431
primary biliary, 448f, 701, 723
types of, 438
Wilson disease and, 438
Cisplatin
with epirubicin, 523
hepatocellular carcinoma and, 542
metastatic disease and, 572
nausea and vomiting caused by,  
32, 35
13-cis-retinoic acid, 596
Index
738
C-reactive protein (CRP)
metabolic syndrome and, 654
in ulcerative colitis, 185
Creatinine-height index, 602
Cretinism, 9
CRH. See Corticotropin-releasing 
hormone
Cricopharyngeal bar, 29
Crigler-Najjar syndrome, 340, 477,  
718
clinical features of, 351t, 351–352
jaundice in, 65
subtypes of, 65, 351t, 351–352
Critical illness
cholestasis and, 69
REE and, 615
requiring ICU, SNS and, 612
Crohn’s disease, 90f, 179, 533, 708
appendicitis versus, 234
barium contrast small-intestinal 
radiologic examinations in, 
166f
cancer risks, 203
cardiopulmonary manifestations of, 
195
clinical features of, 187–190, 188f, 
190f
colitis in, 187–188
colorectal disease, 201–202
complications of, 189
contrast-enhanced MDCT in,  
188–189, 189f
diarrhea in, 50
differential diagnosis of, 190–193, 
191t, 288
disorders associated with, 180
endoscopic features of, 188f,  
188–189, 190f
epidemiology of, 179t, 179–180, 
180t
etiology of, 180
exogenous factors in, 183
gastroduodenal ulcer in, 37
gastrointestinal bleeding in, 59
genetic factors in, 180t, 180–182, 
181t
hepatobiliary disease in, 194
ileocolitis in, 187
immune regulation in, 180, 182
jejunoileitis in, 187
laboratory evaluation of, 188f,  
188–189, 190f
macroscopic features of, 184f,  
184–185
metabolic bone disorders in,  
194–195
bile duct evaluations, 472t
pancreatic disease evaluations, 491t, 494
Computed tomography enterography, 
188–189, 189f
Condyloma acuminata, 534
Confluent necrosis, 368
Congestive heart failure
anorexia nervosa and, 645
Framingham Study, 632
Conjugated bile acids, 159
Connective tissue disorders, 501
Connective tissue metabolism, 592
Constipation, 53
approach to the patient, 54, 54f
definition of, 53–56
epidemiology of, 41
etiology of, 53t, 53–54
idiopathic, 53
in irritable bowel syndrome,  
204–205
outlet abnormalities as cause of, 82
prevalence of, 41
psychosocial factors in, 53
rectal prolapse and, 216
severe, 54–56
treatment of, 56
Contact lenses, 312
Continuous ambulatory peritoneal 
dialysis, 256, 692,  
712–713
Continuous positive airway pressure, 
655
Copper, 599
Core liver biopsy, HCC and, 539
“Corkscrew” esophagus, 119, 119f
Coronary heart disease, 651
Coronary ischemia, 18
Coronavirus infections, 44
Corpus luteum cyst rupture, 233
Corrosive esophagitis, 125–126
Corticotropin-releasing hormone, 629
Cortisol, 629
COX. See Cyclooxygenase
COX-2 inhibitors, 129
in NSAID-induced ulceration 
prevention, 144
in peptic ulcer disease, 58
Coxsackievirus infections
herpangina, 11t
oral manifestations of, 11t
CPAP. See Continuous positive airway 
pressure
CPC. See Capsular polysaccharide 
complex
Craniopharyngioma, obesity and, 
629–630
Colonoscopy, 90, 91f–92f
acute ulcerative colitis evaluations, 
186, 186f
adenomatous polyp, 524
colitis evaluations, 90, 91f
colorectal cancer and, 530
constipation evaluations, 54
diarrhea evaluations, 46, 53
gastrointestinal bleeding evaluations, 
61
gastrointestinal disease evaluations, 
85, 86t
hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer 
evaluations, 526
intestinal ischemia evaluations,  
226
large-bowel cancer, for asymptomatic 
patients, 528
nausea and vomiting evaluations,  
35
virtual, 107, 107f
Colorectal cancer, 524
aspirin and, 527
clinical features, 528–530
Crohn’s disease and, 201–202
family history of, 106t
hereditary factors and syndromes, 
525t, 525–526
incidence, 524
inflammatory bowel disease and, 
202f, 202–203
metastases, 530–531
molecular pathogenesis of, 524
personal history of, 106t
presenting symptoms, 528
prognostic factors, 528–530
risk factors, 524t
screening for
endoscopic, 105f, 105–107, 106t, 
107f
rationale for, 527
strategies in, 106t
spread patterns for, 528–530
staging of, 528–530
survival factors, 529–530, 530t
treatment, 530–532
Combination chemotherapy
esophageal cancer and, 520
with radiation, for gastric 
adenocarcinoma, 523
Common bile duct, 458
Computed tomography
acute appendicitis evaluations,  
232, 233f
acute intestinal obstruction 
evaluations, 228, 229f
Index
739
Dental disease
caries, 8–9
involuntary weight loss in, 76
plaque, 8
Dentin, 8
Dentures, 20
Depression/depressive disorders
involuntary weight loss in, 76
nausea and vomiting in, 34
Dermatitis
glucagonomas and, 567
in malabsorption syndromes, 176t
Dermatitis herpetiformis, 170
Descending perineum syndrome, 54
Desipramine, 209
Developing countries, 598
Dexlansoprazole, 39
Diabetes mellitus, 584
abdominal pain in, 5, 6t
diarrhea in, 50, 53
gastroparesis in, 33
hypertriglyceridemia-associated 
pancreatitis and, 505
metabolic syndrome and, 650,  
651
nausea and vomiting in, 33
oral manifestations of, 9–10, 18
pancreatic inflammation and, 499
type 2, 657
insulin resistance and, 631–632
metabolic syndrome and, 654
Diabetic ketoacidosis
acute pancreatitis versus, 501
chronic pancreatitis and, 512
Diabetic neuropathy
constipation in, 55
pyridoxine and, 592
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental 
Disorders (DSM-IV), 645
Diarrhea, 43, 156, 687, 707
acute, 44–47, 690, 711
approach to the patient, 46
etiology of, 44
infectious, 44–45, 45t
treatment of, 46f, 46–47
antibiotic-associated, 45, 162
as symptom, 156
in bacterial overgrowth syndrome, 
173
bile acid, 159t, 159–160
bloody, 45, 45t, 688, 708
Brainerd, 46
carcinoid syndrome and, 560
in celiac disease, 170
after cholecystectomy, 469
chronic, 43, 47–53
Cycloserine, 592
Cyclospora cayetanensis/cyclosporiasis, 317
clinical features of, 317
diagnosis of, 315t, 317
epidemiology of, 317
treatment of, 317
Cyclosporine
gingival hyperplasia caused by, 10
inflammatory bowel disease treated 
with, 197–198, 200f
after liver transplantation, 481–482
Cyproheptadine, 36
Cystic duct stump syndrome, 469
Cystic fibrosis
children and, 509
chronic pancreatitis and, 704, 726
cirrhosis due to, 438
diarrhea in, 49
in liver disease, 455
Cystic fibrosis transmembrane regulator, 
496
Cystinuria, 164
Cytologic brushings
esophageal cancer and, 519
primary lymphoma of stomach and, 
523
Cytomegalovirus infections, 507
clinical features of, 192
diagnosis of, 192
diarrhea in, 44
esophagitis, 125
gastritis caused by, 153
inflammatory bowel disease versus, 
191t, 192
nausea and vomiting in, 33
Cytoprotective agents, 87
Cytoreductive surgery, 572
Cytotoxic drugs, 523
Dairy products, riboflavin and, 591
Day-care centers, 44
Debulking surgery, 152
Defecation, 43, 43f
Defecography, 55
Deglutitive inhibition, 27
Dehydration
anorexia nervosa and, 645
in cholera, 293–295, 294t–295t
in diarrhea, 46
vasoactive intestinal peptidomas,  
568
Delorme procedure, 217
Dental care/procedures
in medically complex patient, 19
preventive, 10
prophylactic antibiotics for, 19
microscopic features of, 185, 185f
nausea and vomiting in, 33
noninfectious diseases mimicking, 
191t, 192
ocular involvement in, 193–194
oral manifestations of, 10
pathogenesis of, 180
pathology of, 184f–185f, 184–185
perianal disease in, 187–188
in pregnancy, 202
protein-calorie malnutrition and, 612
radiographic features of, 188f,  
188–189, 190f
rheumatologic disease in, 193
serologic markers in, 189–190
small-intestinal disease, 201
small-intestinal mucosal biopsies in, 
166–167, 167t
smoking effects on, 179
“string sign” in, 187, 188
thromboembolic disorders in, 195
treatment of, 195–202, 196t, 200f, 
201t
T2-weighted MRI in, 190f
urologic disease in, 194
Cronkhite-Canada syndrome, 50
Cruise ship passenger, 44
Cryptosporidium/cryptosporidiosis, 315, 
695, 716
clinical features of, 44, 45t, 316
diagnosis of, 315t, 316
life cycle of parasite, 315–316
pathogenesis of, 316
treatment of, 316
CT. See Computed tomography
CT-guided needle aspiration, 506
CTP (Child-Turcotte-Pugh) score,  
479
CTZ. See Chemoreceptor trigger zone
Cullen’s sign, 499
Curling’s ulcer, 152
Cushing’s syndrome, 570
obesity and, 629, 634
obesity/abdominal fat in, 70
CVD. See Cardiovascular disease
Cyclic vomiting syndrome, 34, 36
Cyclooxygenase
COX-1, 128–129, 130f
COX-2 inhibitors, 128–129, 130f
in beneficial effects of NSAIDs, 
129
in NSAID-induced ulceration 
prevention, 144
in peptic ulcer disease, 58
in prostaglandin synthesis, 128,  
130f
Index
740
Diphenylhydantoin, 567
Disease
nutrient needs and, 582
response, SNS and, 612
Disease states, 612
Disease-specific nutritional support, 
613–615
Distal cholangiocarcinoma, 544–545
Diuretics
ascites treated with, 74
bulimia nervosa and, 648
hydrochloric acid and, 620
xerostomia caused by, 18
Diversion colitis, 191t, 193
Diverticular disease, 212
anal fissure, 222
anatomy of, 212f, 212–213
anorectal abscess, 220–221, 221f
bleeding in, 59, 213
complicated, 213, 213t
diagnosis of, 213
endoscopic findings in, 98, 98f
epidemiology of, 212
fecal incontinence, 218–219, 220t
fistula in ano, 221–222
hemorrhoidal disease, 219–220,  
220t
incidence of, 212
jejunal, 166f
pathophysiology of, 212f, 212–213
recurrent, 216
treatment of, 214–216, 215f, 215t
Diverticulitis
abdominal pain in, 6t
clinical features of, 213, 213t
diarrhea in, 45
evaluation of, 213, 213t
Hinchey classification of, 214, 214f, 
215–216
inflammatory bowel disease versus, 
191t, 192
staging of, 214, 214f
surgical management of, 689–690, 
709–710
Diverticulum
colonic, endoscopic findings in, 98, 
98f
esophageal, 115f, 115–116, 116f
Zenker’s, 115, 115f
DM. See Diabetes mellitus
Domperidone
adverse effects of, 35
gastroesophageal reflux disease treated 
with, 40
nausea and vomiting managed with, 
35, 36t
in protein-losing enteropathy, 175
secretory, 156
in short bowel syndrome, 172
travelers’, 44, 690, 711
etiology of, 44, 242, 243t
prevention of, 47
prophylaxis, 246
treatment of, 245t, 245–246,  
690, 711
in tropical sprue, 171
in ulcerative colitis, 185, 186t
after vagotomy, 148
VIPomas, 568
in Whipple’s disease, 174
in Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, 
149–150
Diazoxide, 567
Dicloxacillin, 68
Didanosine, 422, 507
Dientamoeba fragilis, 319
Diet
assessment of, 582–584
colorectal cancer and, 524t, 525
metabolic syndrome, 655
obesity and, 638–639
pancreatitis and, 504
peptic ulcer disease and, 136
therapeutic, 583–584
Dietary deficiency diseases, 582
Dietary fiber
colorectal cancer and, 525
for constipation, 56
for irritable bowel syndrome, 208
Dietary flavonoids, 593–594
Dietary protein, 576–577
Dietary reference intakes
and recommended dietary 
allowances, 577–581
for elements, 580t
for macronutrients, 638
vitamins, 578t–579t
Diethylcarbamazine, 696, 717
Diethylpropion, 640
Diet-related diseases, 582
Dieulafoy’s lesion, 59, 97, 97f
Diffuse carcinomas, 520
Diffuse esophageal spasm, 30, 118–119, 
119f
Diffuse intramural esophageal 
diverticulosis, 116
Diffuse metastatic disease, 571–573
Digoxin, 33t, 34
Dimenhydrinate, 35, 36t
Diphenoxylate, 148
carcinoid syndrome and, 563
diarrhea treated with, 53
Diarrhea, chronic, (Cont.):
approach to the patient, 50–51, 51f
congenital causes, 48
dysmotile causes, 47t, 50
factitial causes, 47t, 50
iatrogenic causes, 47t
inflammatory causes, 47t, 49–50
laboratory evaluation of, 52
osmotic causes, 47t, 48–49
physical examination in, 51, 52t
secretory causes, 47t, 48
steatorrheal causes, 47t, 49
treatment of, 52–53
definition of, 43
diabetic, 50, 53
differential diagnosis of, 156
disorders of absorption and, 156
endoscopic findings in, 107, 107f
enteral feeding and, 620–622
epidemiology of, 41
fatty acid, 159t, 160
idiopathic secretory, 48
infectious, 44, 238
approach to the patient, 240–242, 
241f
clinical features of, 44, 45t
complications of, 242, 242t
Cryptosporidia, 316
Cyclospora, 317
epidemiology of, 44, 242–244
food-related, 44, 244, 245t
Giardia, 313
host defenses against, 240
in immunodeficient persons, 44
inflammatory, 239t
in institutionalized persons, 44
Isospora, 316
laboratory evaluation of, 244–246
Microsporidia, 317
noninflammatory, 239t
pathogenesis of, 238–240, 239t
penetrating, 239t
prophylaxis, 246
with systemic manifestations, 45
treatment of, 245t, 245–246
viral vs. bacterial, 300t
irinotecan and, 530–531
in irritable bowel syndrome, 204–205
in jejunoileitis, 187
in malabsorption syndromes, 156, 
163–164, 176t
osmotic, 156
overflow, 44
persistent, 43
prevalence of, 41
prostaglandin E2 and, 561
Index
741
Dysplasia
in Barrett’s esophagus, 121
in inflammatory bowel disease, 203
Eating disorders, 643
constipation in, 55
diarrhea in, 50
Echinocandins, 125
Ectopic pregnancy
appendicitis vs., 232
pain in, 6t
Ectropion, 220
Edema, 334
Edentulousness, 20
EGF. See Epidermal growth factor
EHEC. See Enterohemorrhagic E. coli
Ekiri syndrome, 281
Elderly
appendicitis in, 233
involuntary weight loss in, 75
liver abscess in, 259
oral health, 20
water requirements, 577
weight regulation in, 75
Electrolytes
diarrhea treated with, 46
enteric fluid volumes of, 615t
in stool, 157
vasoactive intestinal peptidomas,  
569
Electromyography, 55
Elements, DRIs for, 580t
Embolectomy, in intestinal ischemia, 
225t
Embolism, arterial, 225t
Embolization
with combined chemotherapy,  
572
metastatic disease and, 572
Emesis, 32–33
Emphysema, 333–334
Emphysematous cholecystitis, 467
Empyema
abdominal pain in, 6t
cholecystitis and, 467
Enamel
hypoplasia of, 9–10
mottled, 10
Encephalitis, granulomatous amebic, 
312, 312f
Encephalitozoon spp., 317
Endocannabinoid system, 640
Endocrine tumors, 552
gastrointestinal tract, 552–573
pancreas, 552–573
End-organ damage, 512
Duct of Luschka, bile leak from, 93f
Ductal decompression, 512
Dumping syndrome, 147–148
Duodenal ulcers, 686, 705
acute pancreatitis, 501
clinical features of, 136–137
diagnostic evaluation of, 137–138, 
138f
endoscopic findings in, 89, 89f
epidemiology of, 131
history of, 136
NSAID-induced, treatment of,  
143–144, 144t
pathology of, 131
pathophysiology of, 132
perforation in, 137
physical examination in, 136–137
recurrence of, 147
surgical treatment of, 145–149,  
146f
Duodenitis, 59
Duodenum, 565
Duplication cyst, 59
d-Xylose test, 165
Dynamic contrast-enhanced CT 
(CECT), 505
Dysentery, 239
Dyslipidemia
metabolic syndrome and, 653
niacin toxicity, 592
Dyspepsia, 32, 37, 693, 713
endoscopic findings in, 102
essential, 137
functional, 137
new-onset, treatment of, 144
nonulcer, 103
Dysphagia, 27
approach to the patient, 30f,  
30–31
diagnostic procedures in, 31
endoscopic findings in, 103f–104f, 
103–104, 685, 705
esophageal, 29–30, 112–113, 117
esophageal cancers and, 519, 520
in gastroesophageal reflux disease, 
121
history in, 30–31
involuntary weight loss and, 76
motor, 28
oropharyngeal, 29
pathophysiology of, 28–30
physical examination in, 31
with solids vs. liquids, 30
structural, 28
transfer, 103
treatment of, 31
Dopamine
antagonists, for nausea and vomiting, 
35
appetite regulation, 640
Double-balloon endoscopy
in gastrointestinal disease, 86t
of jejunal vascular ectasias, 105f
Double-balloon enteroscopy, 61, 85, 
91, 91f
Double-contrast air-barium enema, 
528f
Double-contrast radiographic 
examination, 521–522
Down syndrome (trisomy 21), 9–10
Doxorubicin
hepatocellular carcinoma treated 
with, 542
metastatic disease and, 572
Doxycycline, 294
DRIs. See Dietary reference intakes
Drotrecogin alfa, 256
Drug metabolizing enzyme systems,  
593
Drug-induced hepatitis, 385
acetaminophen, 387t, 389–392,  
392f
17,α-alkyl-substituted anabolic 
steroids, 395
amiodarone, 394
antiretrovirals, 396
causality-assessment methodologies 
in, 388–389
clinical features of, 385, 387t
erythromycin, 394
halothane, 387t, 392–393
herbal medicines, 396
highly active antiretroviral therapy, 
396
HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors,  
395
isoniazid, 387t, 393
methyldopa, 393
oral contraceptives, 387t, 388, 
394–395
phenytoin, 394
sodium valproate, 393
treatment of, 389
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole,  
395
Drug-induced weight gain, 634
Drug-nutrient interactions, 608
Dry beriberi, 587–588
Dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry 
(DEXA), 445
Dubin-Johnson syndrome, 66, 354, 
354t
Index
742
Enterobius vermicularis/enterobiasis, 
321t, 325
Enterocele, 55
Enteroclysis, 61
Enterocolic fistula, 48
Enterocolitis, radiation, 50
Enterography, CT, 188–189, 189f
Enterohemorrhagic E. coli (EHEC), 238
Enterokinase deficiency, 164
Enteropathogenic E. coli (EPEC), 238
Enteroscopy
double-balloon, 91f, 91–92
single balloon, 91
spiral, 91, 91f
Enterotoxigenic E. coli (ETEC), 238
Enterovirus, 300f, 305
Environment
celiac disease and, 169
large-bowel cancer and, 524t, 525
obesity and, 627
Enzymes, serum, 342–343
Eosinophilic esophagitis, 123–124, 124f
clinical features of, 123, 124f
diagnosis of, 123
dysphagia in, 29–30
endoscopic findings in, 103, 104f, 
123, 124f
etiology of, 123
gastroesophageal reflux disease and, 
123
histopathology of, 123, 124f
indigestion in, 38
prevalence of, 123
treatment of, 31, 123–124
Eosinophilic gastritis, 155
Eosinophilic gastroenteritis
diarrhea in, 50
indigestion in, 38
small-intestinal mucosal biopsies in, 
166, 167t
EPEC. See Enteropathogenic E. coli
Epidermal growth factor
receptor antibodies, 543t
in restitution, 128
Epidermal growth factor receptor
advanced pancreatic cancer and, 551
colorectal cancer and, 531
Epidermal growth factor receptor kinase 
inhibitors, 543t
Epinephrine, 19
Episcleritis, 194
Epithelial cells/epithelium
gastric, 127–130, 128f, 129f
intestinal, 157–158
Epithelioid hemangioendothelioma 
(EHE), 544
Energy input, 576
Energy output, 576
Energy requirements
estimating, 608–609
individual regimens for, 615–616
Entamoeba dispar, 307
Entamoeba histolytica, 695, 715
description of, 192
diarrhea caused by, 44
immune response to, 308
laboratory identification of, 309–310
life cycle of, 306, 306f
tissue invasion by, 307, 308f
transmission of, 306, 306f
Entamoeba moshkowskii, 307
Entecavir, 405–406, 407t, 408f
Enteral nutrition (EN), 610
aspiration, 620
complications and, 620–622
diarrhea, 620–622
formulas, 616, 621t
global considerations, 622
inflammatory bowel disease treated 
with, 200, 200f
severe gastrointestinal disorders and, 
613
tube placement, patient monitoring 
and, 620–622
tubes, 610, 621t
Enteric fever
antibiotics for, 273t
ciprofloxacin for, 273, 273t
clinical course of, 271–272
complications of, 272
control of, 274
definition of, 270
diagnosis of, 272–273
epidemiology of, 270–271
global incidence of, 270–271, 271f
incidence of, 270, 271f
laboratory tests for, 272
neurologic manifestations of, 272
physical findings of, 271–272, 272f
prevention of, 274
risk factors for, 270
“rose spots” associated with, 271, 
272f
treatment of, 273t, 273–274
vaccinations against, 274
Widal test for, 272
Enteric fluid volumes, 615t
Enteric hyperoxaluria, 172
Enteric nervous system, 41–42
Enteritis
drug-induced, 167t
radiation, 167t
Endoscopic fulguration, 520
Endoscopic retrograde 
cholangiopancreatography 
(ERCP), 92, 92f
acute biliary obstruction, 93f, 100
bile duct evaluation, 472t
cholangiocarcinoma and, 544
cholestasis, 67–68
gallstone-induced pancreatitis,  
504–505
gastrointestinal disease, 85, 86t
liver disease, 336
pancreas divisum, 514
pancreatic cancer, 548
pancreatic disease, 491t, 495, 510
pancreatic pleural effusions, 508
primary sclerosing cholangitis,  
194, 437
risks of, 93
Endoscopic secretin–CCK test, 492t
Endoscopic sphincterotomy, 92, 92f
Endoscopic therapy
chronic pancreatitis pain and, 512
diarrhea treated with, 46
dysphagia treated with, 31
esophageal disease treated with, 113
esophageal varices treated with, 58, 
96–97, 97f
gastrointestinal bleeding treated with, 
57, 60f
gastrointestinal disease treated with, 
85–86, 86t, 88
Mallory-Weiss tears treated with, 58
nausea and vomiting, 34–35
peptic ulcer disease treated with, 57, 
137, 138f
portal hypertension treated with, 440
small bowel, 91f, 91–92
somatostatinoma syndrome and, 568
upper tract, in indigestion, 38–39
Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS), 94f
bile duct evaluation, 101, 472t
esophageal disease, 113
pancreatic disease evaluation, 491t, 
494, 494t
Endothelial nitric oxide synthase 
(eNOS), 72
Endovascular infections, 276
End-stage liver disease, 486
Enema, 88
Energy, 576
Energy balance, 625–626
Energy density concept, 638–639
Energy expenditure
components of, 626
in obese, 630–631
Index
743
Esophageal web, 518
Esophagitis
abdominal pain in, 6t
alkaline, 40
bleeding with, 57
Candida, 124f, 124–125
corrosive, 125–126
cytomegalovirus, 125
dysphagia in, 29
gastroesophageal reflux disease and, 
120
indigestion in, 37
infectious, 124–125
peptic, endoscopic appearance of, 
120f, 122
pill-induced, 31, 126
radiation, 125
treatment of, 40, 686, 705–706
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome with,  
121
Esophagogastroduodenoscopy, 89, 89f, 
113, 685, 705
Esophagogastroscopy, 31
Esophagus
anatomy of, 29
“corkscrew,” 119, 119f
feline, 104, 104f
foreign bodies in, 126
functions of, 80, 112
gastric juice effects on, 121
scleroderma, 126
structure of, 112
systemic disease effects on,  
126
Essential dyspepsia, 137
Estimated average requirement (EAR), 
577, 581
of nutrient, 577
Estrogen replacement, 527
Estrogen therapy, 647
ETEC. See Enterotoxigenic E. coli
Ethanol, 432
Evacuation disorders, 56
Ewing’s sarcoma, 10
External beam irradiation, 522
Familial adenomatous polyposis
colonic polyps in, 105f
colorectal cancer screening in, 105, 
106t
Familial atypical multiple-mole 
melanoma syndrome,  
547
Familial Mediterranean fever
abdominal pain in, 5, 6t
ascites in, 72
gastroesophageal reflux disease and, 
120f, 122, 122f
incidence of, 518–519
indigestion in, 37
morbidity data, 116
prevalence of, 116
risk factors for, 37
treatment, 519–520
Esophageal dilation, 124
Esophageal disease, 112
atresia, 116
chest pain in, 112
congenital anomalies, 116–117
dermatologic disorders and, 126
diagnostic studies of, 113–114, 114f
diffuse esophageal spasm, 118–119, 
119f
diverticula, 115f, 115–116, 116f
dysphagia in, 29–30, 112–113, 117
globus sensation in, 113
heartburn in, 112
hiatal hernia, 114
iatrogenic injury, 125–126
indigestion in, 37–38
manometric findings, 120
mechanical trauma, 125–126
motility disorders, 117
odynophagia in, 113
radiography of, 113
reflux testing for, 114
regurgitation in, 112
rings, 115, 115f
structural disorders, 114–116,  
115f, 116f
symptoms of, 112–113
tumors, 116
water brash in, 113
webs, 115, 115f
Esophageal food impaction, 99, 99f, 126
Esophageal inlet patch, 117
Esophageal manometry, 87, 113–114, 
114f, 120
Esophageal obstruction, 99, 99f
Esophageal occlusion, 81
Esophageal perforation, 124
Esophageal pseudodiverticulosis, 116f
Esophageal spasm
diffuse, 30, 118–119, 119f
spastic, 119f
spastic nutcrackers, 119
Esophageal stricture, 29
Esophageal varices, 700, 722
endoscopic findings in, 96–97, 97f
gastrointestinal bleeding in, 57t, 58
ligation of, 58
in portal hypertension, 439
Epulis, 23f
Erlotinib, 551
Erosive esophagitis, 57t
Erosive lichen planus, 21f
Erythema multiforme, 13t
Erythema nodosum, 193
Erythematosus, candidiasis, 21f
Erythroblastosis fetalis, 10
Erythromycin
adverse effects of, 34, 68, 394
Campylobacter infections treated with, 
288
cholera treated with, 295
gastroesophageal reflux disease treated 
with, 40
nausea and vomiting managed with, 
35, 36t
Erythroplakia, 10, 15t
Erythropoiesis, ineffective, 65, 350
Escape mutants, in HBV, 363
Escherichia coli infections
adherence of, 238
enterohemorrhagic, 238
enteropathogenic, 238
enterotoxigenic, 238
epidemiology of, 242–244
extraintestinal, 74, 254
intestinal
clinical features of, 45t
diagnosis of, 46
enterohemorrhagic: strain 
O157:H7
complications of, 45
food-related, 44
hemolytic-uremic syndrome 
and, 242t
laboratory identification of, 244
inflammatory bowel disease versus, 
191, 191t
Shiga toxin–producing, 239
toxin production by, 239
ESLD. See End-stage liver disease
Esomeprazole
gastroesophageal reflux disease treated 
with, 39
peptic ulcer disease treated with, 
139t, 140
Esophageal adenocarcinoma, 518–519
Esophageal atresia, 116
Esophageal cancer, 82, 518
causative factors, 518t, 518–519
clinical features of, 116, 519
diagnosis, 519
endoscopic appearance of, 94f,  
120f, 122
etiology of, 518–519
Index
744
Framingham Offspring Study (FOS)
CVD and, 632
metabolic syndrome and, 654
Free fatty acids (FFAs), 652
5-FU, 531–532
Fulminant hepatitis, 592, 697, 719
Functional dyspepsia, 36–37, 137
Fundoplication, 40
Fungal infections, 482t, 483
Furosemide, 74, 442
Gabapentin, 634
Gabexate mesylate, 505
Gag reflex, BN and, 648
α-Galactosidase, 87
Gallbladder
bile concentration within, 460
cancer of, 69, 545
functions of, 459
hypomotility of, 461
porcelain, 468
Gallbladder disease, 460
clinical features of, 464
congenital anomalies, 460
diagnosis of, 463, 463t, 464f
hyperplastic cholecystosis, 469–470
natural history of, 464–465
Gallstone(s), 460–465, 701–702,  
724
cholesterol stones, 172, 460f,  
460–462, 462t
clinical features of, 464
complications of, 465
epidemiology of, 460–463
genetic factors in, 461
jaundice in, 65
pancreatic inflammation and, 498
pathogenesis of, 460–463
pigment stones, 462t, 462–463
recurrent pancreatitis and, 505
treatment of, 465, 701–702, 724
ursodeoxycholic acid for, 465
Gallstone ileus, 467–468
Gallstone pancreatitis, 102, 505
Gangrene, 467
Gardner’s syndrome, 526
Gastric acid, 154
as pathogen barrier, 240
description of, 80
hypersecretion, 565
secretion of, 130, 131f
Gastric adenocarcinoma, 520–523
categories, 520
clinical features of, 521
diagnosis, 521–522
etiology of, 520–521
Flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD),  
591
Flavoenzymes, 591
Flavonoids, 593
Fluconazole, 124, 260
Fluid(s)
acute pancreatitis and, 504
for diarrhea, 46
pancreatitis and, 505
requirements, 615
restriction, 615
retention of, 611
Fluid overload, 615, 618
Fluoropyrimidine, 551
Fluoroquinolones
Campylobacter infections treated with, 
288
resistance to, 283
Fluoroscopy, in dysphagia, 29
5-Fluorouracil
advanced pancreatic cancer and,  
549
metastatic disease and, 572
Fluoxetine, 649
Flushing, 560–561
Fluvastatin, 656
Focal nodular hyperplasia (FNH), 545
Folate (vitamin B12)
deficiency of, 167t
definition of, 591
forms of, 592
supplements, for tropical sprue, 172
FOLFIRI regimen, 531
FOLFOX, 531–532
Folic acid, 604
supplements, adenomatous polyps 
and, 527
Folinic acid, 531
Food
obesity and, 631
thiamine from, 586
Food guide pyramid, USDA, 583t, 
583–584
on-line, 583t, 583–584
Food intake, 640
Food poisoning, 691, 712
Food-related illness
bacterial, 243–244, 244t
Campylobacter, 285
diarrhea in, 44, 45t
differential diagnosis of, 45t
viral, 45t
Fordyce spots, 15t
Foregut tumors, 552
Foreign body, in esophagus, 126
Fractures, 194
Famotidine
gastroesophageal reflux disease treated 
with, 39
peptic ulcer disease treated with, 
139t, 140
Farnesoid X receptor, 459
Fat(s), 49, 577
fat gene, 629
Fatigue
in chronic HBV infections, 400
in liver disease, 332
Fatty acid diarrhea, 159t, 160
Fatty acids
insulin resistance and, 652
types of, 160, 160t
Fecal elastase, 511
Fecal Hemoccult test, 527
Fecal impaction, 44
Fecal incontinence, 43–44, 218
anatomy of, 218
clinical features of, 218t, 218–219
epidemiology of, 218
evaluation of, 218t, 219
incidence of, 218
pathophysiology of, 218
PNTML in, 219
rectal prolapse and, 216
treatment of, 219
Fecal occult blood
colorectal cancer screening, 61
endoscopic findings in, 104
Fecalith, appendiceal, 232, 233f
Feeding tubes, 620–622
Feline esophagus, 104, 104f
Fenfluramine, 561
Fenofibrate, 656
Fetor hepaticus, 334
Fever
central access catheter and, 620
enteric. See Enteric fever
FGF. See Fibroblast growth factor
Fibrates, 656
Fibroblast growth factor, 128
Fibroblast mitogenesis, 561
Fibrolamellar HCC (FL-HCC), 544
Fine-needle aspiration, 549
Fissured tongue, 26f
Fissures, anal, 222
Fistula(s)
in ano, 221–222
cholecystitis and, 467
hepatobronchial, 309
Flatus/flatulence
in abdominal swelling, 70
in irritable bowel syndrome, 205
in malabsorption syndromes, 176t
Index
745
occult, 57
in peptic ulcer disease, 57t, 57–58, 
96, 97f, 137
sources of, 57t
lower gastrointestinal tract, 59
obscure, 61
occult, 57, 61, 104–105
small intestine, 59
upper gastrointestinal tract, 57–59
upper, 60
variceal, 96–97, 97f
vascular ectasias and, 98, 98f
Gastrointestinal carcinoid tumors, 
559–560
Gastrointestinal disease
abdominal pain in, 83, 83t
abnormalities in, 81
altered gut transit, 81–82
altered secretion, 81
immune dysregulation, 82
impaired blood flow, 82
neoplastic degeneration, 82
altered bowel habits in, 83, 83t
ascites in, 72
classification of, 81–82
clinical features of, 83t
endoscopy in, 85–86, 86t
functional testing in, 87
gastrointestinal bleeding in,  
83t, 83–84
genetic factors in, 82
heartburn in, 83, 83t
histopathology of, 87
history in, 84
involuntary weight loss in, 76
jaundice in, 83t, 84
laboratory evaluation of, 85
luminal contents in, 85
nausea and vomiting in, 33–34,  
83, 83t
nuclear medicine in, 86–87
physical examination in, 84–85
radiography in, 86–87
symptoms of, 82–84
treatment of, 87–88
alternative therapies, 88
directed to external influences,  
88
enteric therapies, 88
interventional endoscopy and 
radiology, 88
nutritional manipulation, 87
pharmacotherapy, 87–88
surgery, 88
without obvious organic 
abnormalities, 82
appendicitis versus, 233
nontyphoidal salmonellosis as cause 
of, 275–276
viral, 299–305
adenovirus, 299t, 300f, 305
agents of, 300f
astrovirus, 299t, 300f, 305
bacterial enteritis versus, 300t
calicivirus, 299t, 300f
clinical features of, 300t
diagnosis of, 300t
Norwalk virus, 695, 715
picobirnavirus, 305
rotavirus, 695, 715
torovirus, 300f, 305
treatment of, 300t
Gastroesophageal junction, 115,  
115f
Gastroesophageal reflux disease, 120, 
565, 686, 705
abdominal pain in, 6t
alarm symptoms in, 38t
approach to the patient, 38–40
Barrett’s esophagus in, 103
clinical features of, 121
complications of, 120f, 122, 122f
diagnosis of, 38–39, 114
differential diagnosis of, 121–122
dysphagia in, 29
endoscopic findings in, 103
eosinophilic esophagitis and, 123
epidemiology of, 37, 120
esophageal cancer and, 120f, 122
esophagitis and, 120
extraesophageal manifestations of, 
121
H. pylori and, 262
heartburn in, 112, 121
mechanisms of, 36–37
nausea and vomiting in, 33
pathophysiology of, 120–121
treatment of, 39–40, 122–123
Gastrointestinal bleeding, 57
approach to the patient, 59–61, 60f
chronic pancreatitis and, 512
colonic diverticula and, 98, 98f
in Crohn’s disease, 187
diagnosis of, 60–61, 94–96
Dieulafoy’s lesion and, 97, 98f
diverticular, 213
endoscopic findings in, 94–98, 
97f–98f
in gastrointestinal disease, 83t, 83–84
initial evaluation of, 94–96
in malabsorption syndromes, 176t
Mallory-Weiss tears and, 97–98, 98f
H. pylori infection and, 264, 264f, 
268
incidence and epidemiology, 520
nitrate-converting bacteria associated 
with, 520t
pathology of, 520
staging of, 94f
surgery-related, 149
treatment for, 522–523
Gastric antisecretory drugs, 566
Gastric atrophy, 153
Gastric bypass surgery, 655
Gastric carcinoids, 559–560, 564
Gastric carcinoma, 522t
Gastric emptying, 82
Gastric epithelium, 127–130, 128f, 129f
Gastric fundic varices, 97, 97f
Gastric glands, 127, 127f
Gastric juice, 121
Gastric lymphoid tumors, 523
Gastric motor dysfunction, 37
Gastric outlet obstruction, 81, 99,  
99f, 137
Gastric sarcoma, 523
Gastric scintigraphy, 35, 39
Gastric secretion, 130–131, 131f
Gastric ulcers
gastric adenocarcinoma and, 522
gastric carcinoma and, 521
Gastrin, 565, 687, 706
Gastrinomas, 565–566
diagnosis of, 565–566
diarrhea in, 48
extraabdominal sites for, 565
in MEN 1, 150
treatment of, 53, 565–566
Gastritis
abdominal pain in, 6t
acute, 153, 153t
after cholecystectomy, 469
chronic, 153, 154
classification of, 152–153, 153t
eosinophilic, 155
granulomatous, 155
halitosis in, 20
lymphocytic, 155
multifocal atrophic, 154
peptic ulcer disease and, 153
type A, 153–154
type B, 154, 154f
varioliform, 155
Gastroduodenal erosions, 57t
Gastroduodenal mucosal defense, 128f, 
128–130, 129f
Gastroenteritis
abdominal pain in, 6t
Index
746
genetic defects in, 65
jaundice in, 65
liver test patterns in, 345t
treatment of, 697, 718
unconjugated bilirubin in, 63
Ginger, 36, 88
Gingival erythema, linear, 10
Gingival fibromatosis, idiopathic 
familial, 10
Gingival hyperplasia, 10
Gingival inflammation, 24f
Gingival overgrowth, 21f
Gingival recession, 24f
Gingivitis, 9, 24f
acute necrotizing ulcerative, 9, 12t
Gingivostomatitis, herpetic, 11t
GIST. See Gastrointestinal stromal 
tumors
Glasgow Coma Scale, 612
Global health
C. difficile infections, 249
C. jejuni infections, 286
cholera, 290–292, 291f–292f,  
293f
rotavirus infections, 303–305,  
305f
Shigella infections, 279–280
Globus pharyngeus, 27
Globus sensation, 27, 113
Glossitis, 16t, 176t
Glossodynia, 18
Glossopharyngeal neuralgia, 18
Glucagon
in food impaction dislodgement,  
126
necrotizing acute pancreatitis and, 
505
Glucagonomas, 567
Glucocorticoids, 124
alcoholic cirrhosis treated with,  
433
alcoholic hepatitis treated with,  
429–430, 430f
autoimmune hepatitis treated with, 
426
inflammatory bowel disease treated 
with, 196–197, 200f
nausea and vomiting managed with, 
36t
pancreatitis treated with, 510
vasoactive intestinal peptidomas 
treated with, 569
Gluconeogenesis, 603
Glucose
in ascitic fluid, 73
control of, 619
intestinal fluid absorption and 
secretion, 42
Gastroparesis
definition of, 33, 82
nausea and vomiting in, 33, 34
in pancreatitis, 512
treatment of, 35
Gastropathy
gastrointestinal bleeding with, 58
hemorrhagic and erosive, bleeding in, 
58–59
prolapse, 59
Gastroscopic biopsy, 522
Gastrostomy tubes, 31, 520
Gemcitabine
advanced pancreatic cancer and,  
549, 551
cholangiocarcinoma and, 545
Gemfibrozil, 656
Gene mutations
ob gene mutation, 631
obesity and, 627–629
proopiomelanocortin and,  
628
Genetic syndromes
associated NETs and, 558t
obesity and, 627–629, 628f
Genetics
and pancreatic cancer, 547–548
anorexia nervosa and, 643
obesity and, 626, 627–629
Genital tract infections, 257, 276
Gentamicin, 288
Geographic tongue, 24f
GERD. See Gastroesophageal reflux 
disease
Ghrelin, 570, 626
Giant cell arteritis (temporal arteritis), 
18
Giardia spp., 695, 716
clinical features of, 44, 45t, 243t, 
314–315
diagnosis of, 52, 695, 715–716
small-intestinal mucosal biopsies, 
166, 168f
stool analysis, 315, 315t
epidemiology of, 242, 313–314
life-cycle and epidemiology of,  
313f, 313–314
pathogenesis of, 314
prevention of, 315
treatment of, 47, 315
Giardiasis, 695, 716
Gilbert’s syndrome, 697, 718
clinical features of, 351t,  
352–353
Gastrointestinal endoscopy, 89
in anemia, 104, 104f
antibiotic prophylaxis for, 95t
antithrombotic drugs for, 109f,  
110f
in Barrett’s esophagus, 89, 90f,  
103
in biliary obstruction, 102
in cancer staging, 94f, 108
in colonic pseudo-obstruction, 
99–100
in colorectal cancer screening,  
105–107, 106t, 107f
in diarrhea, 107, 107f
of duodenal ulcers, 89, 89f
in dyspepsia, 102
in dysphagia, 103f–104f, 103–104
elective, 102
in gastric outlet obstruction,  
99, 99f
of gastric ulcers, 89, 89f
in gastroesophageal reflux disease, 
103
in gastrointestinal bleeding, 94–98, 
97f–98f
in gastrointestinal obstruction, 
98f–100f, 99–100
in hematochezia, 108, 108f
indications for, 85–86, 86t
in nonulcer dyspepsia, 103
open access, 108, 109f, 110f
in pancreatitis, 108
in peptic ulcers, 103
procedures, 89
in reflux, 102–103
risks of, 93–94, 95t
upper endoscopy, 89, 89f
urgent, 94
Gastrointestinal motility, 41t
anorexia nervosa and, 645
test of, 35
Gastrointestinal neuroendocrine tumors, 
552
classification and pathology of, 
552–558
general features, 552, 553t
syndromes, 554t–555t
Gastrointestinal peptides, 560
Gastrointestinal polyposis syndromes, 
525t, 525–526
Gastrointestinal stromal tumors,  
520, 523–524
Gastrointestinal tract
cancer of, 518
extrinsic modulation of, 81
functions of, 80–81
Index
747
reinfection after, 143
“test and treat” approach, 39
triple therapy, 142, 142t,  
267t
Heller myotomy, 118
Hemangiomas, 545
Hematemesis, 34, 57
Hematochezia, 57, 95
Hematologic disease
in cirrhosis, 445
oral manifestations of, 10
Hematologic-related vitamins,  
586
Hemobilia, 59, 473
Hemoccult testing, 528
Hemochromatosis, 156
biopsy findings in, 450f
cirrhosis due to, 438
diagnosis of, 335t
hereditary, 453t, 453–454
V. vulnificus infection in, 297
Hemolysis, 350
Hemolytic anemia
jaundice in, 65
microangiopathic, 65
Hemolytic-uremic syndrome
clinical features of, 282
description of, 238
etiology of, 45
after infectious diarrhea, 242t
jaundice in, 65
Shigella infections and, 282
Hemorrhoidal cushions, 219
Hemorrhoidal disease, 219
anatomy of, 219
classification of, 219
clinical features of, 219
epidemiology of, 219
evaluation of, 219–220
incidence of, 219
pathophysiology of, 219
staging of, 219, 220t
treatment of, 220, 220t, 689,  
709
Hemorrhoidectomy, 220, 220t
Hemosuccus pancreaticus, 59
Heparin, 617–618
Hepatic arterial embolization
carcinoid syndrome and, 564
insulinomas and, 567
metastatic disease and, 572
Hepatic encephalopathy, 334
Hepatic hydrothorax, 74
Hepatic metastasis, 571–572
Hepatic steatosis, 194
Hepatic toxicity, 592
HBxAG (hepatitis B x antigen),  
358f, 360–361
HCC. See Hepatocellular carcinoma
HCV. See Hepatitis C virus
HDL cholesterol, 656
HDV. See Hepatitis D virus
Head injuries
protein catabolism and, 603–604
thiamine deficiency and, 587
Health care–associated infections
C. difficile, 247
diarrhea, 242
Heart failure
indigestion, 38
nausea and vomiting, 34
Heartburn, 31, 38
in esophageal disease, 112
in gastrointestinal disease, 83, 83t
Heat-labile enterotoxin, E. coli, 239
Heat-stable enterotoxin, E. coli, 239
α-Heavy chain disease, 533
Heavy metal pigmentation, 15t
Helicobacter cinaedi infection, 285, 286t
Helicobacter fennelliae infection, 285, 286t
Helicobacter pylori infection, 20, 131, 
262, 693, 713–714
clinical features of, 263–265
definition of, 262
diagnosis of, 39
epidemiology of, 131, 138, 139t, 
262, 265t, 265–266
eradication of, 40
etiology of, 262
gastric adenocarcinoma and,  
520–521
gastric cancer and, 264
gastric lymphoma and, 523
gastrinomas and, 565
gastritis caused by, 154
host factors in, 133, 133f
indigestion and, 37
natural history of, 134, 134f
noninvasive testing for, 686, 706
pathophysiology of, 132, 133f, 134f, 
263
peptic ulcer disease and, 57–58,  
131–134, 133f, 134f
prevention of, 268
treatment of, 686, 693, 706, 714
adverse effects of, 143
antibiotic resistance in, 267
approach to, 144–145, 266f, 
266–268
failure in, 143, 267
quadruple therapy, 142t, 267t
regimens, 142, 142t, 267t
Glucose intolerance
glucagonomas and, 567
metabolic syndrome, 653
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase 
(G6PD) deficiency, 65
g-Glutamyl transpeptidase (GGTP)
in alcoholic liver disease, 429,  
429t
in liver function evaluation, 341f,  
342
Gluten-free diet, 87, 170
Gluten-induced enteropathy. See Celiac 
disease
Glycogen storage disease type Ib,  
180
Gonococcal infections, 12t
Graafian follicle, 233
Graft-versus-host disease, 45, 50
Granisetron, 35, 36t
Granulomas, 457
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis 
(Wegener’s), 10, 18
Granulomatous amebic encephalitis, 
312, 312f
Granulomatous colitis, 180
Granulomatous gastritis, 155
GRFomas, 555, 557, 569
Griffiths’ point, 223, 223f
Growth hormone (GH)
anorexia nervosa and, 645
obesity and, 630
Guillain-Barré syndrome, 242t
Gumboil, 9
Gums, strawberry, 10
Gut dysfunction, 613
Gut flora
abnormalities of, 207
modulation of, 210
GVHD. See Graft-versus-host disease
Gynecomastia, 71, 632
H2 blockers, 505
Halitophobia, 20
Halitosis, 19
Halothane, 387t, 392
Hand-foot-and-mouth disease, 11t
Hartmann’s procedure, 215t, 230
Hartnup disease, 164
HAV. See Hepatitis A virus
HBcAg (hepatitis B core antigen),  
359t, 360–361
HBeAg (hepatitis B e antigen), 359t, 
360, 362, 700, 722
HBsAg (hepatitis B surface antigen), 
359t, 360–361
HBV. See Hepatitis B virus
Index
748
biopsy findings in, 447f–448f
cirrhosis due to, 434
clinical features of, 400
HBeAg-negative, 400, 406, 409t
HBeAg-reactive, 399–400, 406, 
409t
HDV infection with, 370–371, 
411
histology of, 398
laboratory evaluation of, 400
nonreplicative phase, 399–400
replicative phase of, 399–400
survival rates, 398
treatment of, 401–411, 407t, 408f, 
409t, 410t
combination therapy, 406
entecavir, 405–406, 407t, 408f
IFN-α, 401
lamivudine, 402–403, 407t, 408f
novel antivirals and strategies, 
406
PEG IFN, 404–405, 407t, 408, 
408f, 410t
recommendations for, 406–411, 
409t, 410t
telbivudine, 406, 407t, 408f
tenofovir, 406, 407t, 408f
clinical features of, 359t, 361f, 369t, 
373
complications and sequelae of, 
377–379
diagnosis of, 335t, 374, 376t
epidemiology of, 369t, 370
escape mutants in, 363
extrahepatic manifestations of, 
367–368
extrahepatic sites of, 363
genomic structure of, 358, 358f
global features of, 370
laboratory evaluation of, 361f,  
361–362, 362f, 373–377, 376t
liver transplantation for, 477–478
molecular variants of, 362–363
pathogenesis of, 366–367
prognosis of, 378
prophylaxis for, 381–383, 383t
proteins and particles of, 357f, 358f, 
358–361, 359t
recurrence of, 485–486
risk factors for, 333, 371t
screening for, 370, 371t
serologic and viral markers of, 361f, 
361–362, 362f
serologic patterns of, 375, 375t–376t
transmission of, 370
treatment of, 379–380
erythromycin, 394
halothane, 387t, 392–393
herbal medicines, 396
highly active antiretroviral therapy, 
396
HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors, 
395
isoniazid, 387t, 393
methyldopa, 393
oral contraceptives, 387t, 388, 
394–395
phenytoin, 394
sodium valproate, 393
treatment of, 389
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, 
395
fibrosing cholestatic, 68, 366, 485
fulminant, 378, 380
hepatocellular carcinoma and, 536
interface, 368, 397
jaundice in, 66
physical examination in, 66
relapsing, 377
Hepatitis A virus (HAV) vaccine, 339
in adults, 381, 382t
in children, 381, 382t
in liver disease, 381
postexposure prophylaxis use of, 381
Hepatitis A virus infection, 357–358, 
359t, 697–698, 719
clinical features of, 358, 358f, 359t, 
369t, 373
complications of, 377–379
diagnosis of, 335t, 374, 377
epidemiology of, 368–370, 369t
etiology of, 357–358
global features of, 368–370
histologic findings, 357f
laboratory evaluation of, 358, 358f, 
373–377, 376t
pathogenesis of, 368–370, 369t
prophylaxis for, 380–381
recurrence of, after liver 
transplantation, 485
risk factors for, 333
sequelae of, 377–379
transmission of, 368–370
treatment of, 380
Hepatitis B core antigen, 359t, 360–361
Hepatitis B e antigen, 359t, 360, 362, 
700, 722
Hepatitis B surface antigen, 359t, 
360–362
Hepatitis B virus infection, 699, 721
cholestasis in, 68
chronic, 398–411, 697, 718
Hepatitis
abdominal pain in, 6t
acute viral, 357, 697–698, 718–719
biopsy findings in, 446f–447f, 451f
clinical features of, 359t, 369t, 373
complications and sequelae of, 
377–379
diagnosis of, 373–377, 376t
differential diagnosis of, 379
epidemiology of, 368–373
etiology of, 357–366
extrahepatic manifestations of, 
367–368
fulminant, 378
global features of, 368–373, 369t
jaundice in, 67, 373–374
pathogenesis of, 366–367
pathology of, 368
prognosis of, 377
prophylaxis for, 380–384
risk factors for, 333
treatment of, 379–380
alcoholic, 66, 429, 429t
autoimmune, 66, 423–426, 699, 721
biopsy findings in, 448f
cirrhosis caused by, 434–435
clinical features of, 424
definition of, 423
diagnosis of, 335t, 425
differential diagnosis of, 425
immunopathogenesis of, 423–425
laboratory features of, 424
survival rates, 424
treatment of, 426
type I, 424
type II, 425
type III, 425
cholestatic, 377
chronic, 378–379, 397
classification of, 397–398,  
398t, 399t
clinical features of, 398t
grading of, 397, 399t
laboratory evaluation of, 398t
staging of, 398, 399t
diarrhea in, 44
drug-induced, 385
acetaminophen, 387t, 389–392, 
392f
17,α-alkyl-substituted anabolic 
steroids, 395
amiodarone, 394
antiretrovirals, 396
causality-assessment methodologies 
in, 388–389
clinical features of, 385, 387t
Index
749
abdominal swelling with, 71
in liver disease, 334
Hepatopulmonary syndrome, 335
Hepatorenal syndrome, in cirrhosis, 444
Herbal medicines/supplements, 396
Hereditable gastrointestinal polyposis 
syndromes, 525t, 525–526
Hereditary chronic pancreatitis,  
513–514
Hereditary hemochromatosis, 453t, 
453–454
Hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer, 
526, 547
Hereditary pancreatitis, 513
Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome, 180
Hernia, paraesophageal, 114
Herpangina, 11t
Herpes labialis, 11t
Herpes simplex virus infections
as opportunistic infection, 33
diarrhea in, 44
esophagitis, 125
orofacial, 11t
proctitis, 191t, 192
skin manifestations of, 11t
Herpes zoster
abdominal pain caused by, 5
oral manifestations, 11t, 18
postherpetic neuralgia, 18
Herpetic gastritis, 153
Heterotopic gastric mucosa, 117
HEV. See Hepatitis E virus
Hiatal hernia, 114
gastroesophageal reflux and, 37
sliding, 114
types of, 114
Hiccups, 228
High-amplitude propagated 
contractions, 42–43
Highly active antiretroviral therapy, 396
High-performance liquid 
chromatography (HPLC), 590
Hilar cholangiocarcinoma, 544
Hinchey classification, of diverticulitis, 
214, 214f, 215–216
Hindgut tumors, 561
Hip fracture, 141
Histamine H2 receptor antagonists
adverse effects of, 140
gastrinomas treated with, 566
gastritis treated with, 59
gastroesophageal reflux disease treated 
with, 39, 123
gastrointestinal disease treated with, 87
peptic ulcer disease treated with, 
139t, 139–140
genome of, 359t, 363–364
global features of, 370–371
laboratory evaluation of, 373–377
pathology of, 368
prognosis of, 378
prophylaxis for, 383
transmission of, 369t, 371
treatment of, 380
Hepatitis E virus infection, 359t,  
365–366
clinical features of, 359t, 369t, 373
diagnosis of, 335t
epidemiology of, 369t, 372–373
global features of, 372–373
laboratory evaluation of, 373–377
pathology of, 368
prophylaxis for, 384
risk factors for, 333
transmission of, 369t, 372–373
treatment of, 380
Hepatobiliary disease, 632–633
Hepatobiliary parasitism, 473
Hepatocellular carcinoma, 82, 535
age-adjusted incidence of, 535t
approach to patient, 538–539
clinical features, 536–538
clinical presentation of, 537t
CLIP staging system, 537, 538t
diagnosis of, 335t, 539
epidemiology, 535–536
etiologic factors, 535–536
evaluation of, 543
hemochromatosis with, 450f
high-risk populations, 539
history and physical examination, 543
incidence of, 535, 535t
indigestion in, 38
liver diseases and, 539
management choices for, 540f
OKUDA staging system, 537, 538t
paraneoplastic syndromes in, 537
pathologic diagnosis of, 539
patient presentation, 543
risk factors, 536t
staging, 537–538
targeted therapies for, 543t
transhepatic artery 
chemoembolization for, 541t
treatments for, 539–544, 540t
stages I and II, 539–542
stages III and IV, 542–543
Hepatocellular disorders, 331t, 332, 
345t
Hepatocytes, 330–331, 342, 345t,  
698, 720
Hepatomegaly, 537
Hepatitis B virus vaccine, 339, 698, 719
in adults, 383t
in hemodialysis patients, 383t
in infants and children, 383t
postexposure prophylaxis use of, 
382–383
Hepatitis B x antigen, 358f, 360–361
Hepatitis C virus infection, 359t, 364, 
364f, 699, 721
biopsy findings in, 447f
cholestasis in, 68
chronic, 410–412
alcoholic liver disease associated 
with, 427t, 428
aminotransferase activity in, 412
biopsy findings in, 447f, 448f
cirrhosis due to, 411–412, 434
clinical features of, 413
laboratory evaluation of, 413
liver disease progression in, 412
mortality data, 412
prognosis of, 412
treatment of, 413f, 413–423, 416t, 
417f, 419t–420t
antiviral therapy, 418, 
419t–420t, 421–423, 423
PEG IFN and ribavirin, 413–417
protease inhibitors, 417–418, 422
clinical features of, 359t, 369t, 373
complications and sequelae of, 
377–379
diagnosis of, 335t, 375–376
epidemiology of, 369t, 371–372, 372t
global features of, 371–372, 372t
HIV and, 422
laboratory evaluation of, 373–377, 
376t
liver transplantation for, 477–478
pathogenesis of, 367
pathology associated with, 368
prophylaxis for, 383–384
recurrence of, after liver 
transplantation, 486
risk factors for, 333, 372t
screening for, 371, 372t
transmission of, 369t, 371–372, 372t
treatment of, 380
Hepatitis D virus infection, 359t, 
363–364
chronic, 411
HBV infection with, 371, 411
treatment of, 411
clinical features of, 359t, 369t, 373
complications and sequelae of, 378
diagnosis of, 335t, 376
epidemiology of, 369t, 370–371
Index
750
Hypoglycemia
in hepatocellular carcinoma, 537
insulinomas, 566–567
Hypogonadism, 630t
Hypometabolic states, 603, 603t
Hyponatremia, 645
Hypophosphatasia, 10
Hypophosphatemia, 602, 604
Hypopituitarism, 9
Hypotension
in gastrointestinal bleeding, 60
in malabsorption syndromes, 176t
Hypothalamic disease, 634
Hypothalamus
appetite regulation and, 626
obesity and, 629–631
Hypothyroidism
ascites in, 73
obesity and, 629, 634
Hypoxemia, 500
IBD. See Inflammatory bowel disease
“Iceberg” disease, 168
Icterus, 334. See also Jaundice
Ictotest, 64
Idiopathic chronic pancreatitis, 509
Idiopathic secretory diarrhea, 48
IFG. See Impaired fasting glucose
IFN-α. See Interferon-α
IGT. See Impaired glucose tolerance
IL. See Interleukin
Ileal dysfunction, 177
Ileocolitis, 187
Ileorectostomy, 56
Ileus
abdominal swelling in, 71
adynamic, 227–228, 230
gallstone, cholecystitis and,  
467–468
Imatinib mesylate, 524
Imipenem
Campylobacter infections treated with, 
288
peritonitis treated with, 256
Imipramine, 68
Immune globulin deficiency, 166
Immune response/immune system
in celiac disease, 169
gut-related dysfunction of, 82
in inflammatory bowel disease, 180, 
182
in irritable bowel syndrome, 207
Immunizations, 381–382, 382t
Immunocompromised patients, diarrhea 
in, 44, 50, 243
Immunoglobulin A
in Dubin-Johnson syndrome, 354t, 
354–355
familial defects in hepatic excretory 
function, 354t, 354–356
in progressive familial intrahepatic 
cholestasis, 354t, 356
in Rotor syndrome, 354t, 355
hemolysis and, 350
ineffective erythropoiesis and, 350
unconjugated, 65
bilirubin metabolism disorders and, 
349
bilirubin production and, 349–350
in Crigler-Najjar syndrome, 351t, 
351–352
in Gilbert’s syndrome, 351t, 
352–353
hepatic bilirubin clearance and, 350
hereditary defects in, 351t,  
351–353
Hypercalcemia, 519
Hypercarotenemia, 645
Hyperemesis gravidarum
clinical features of, 34
thiamine deficiency and, 587
Hypergammaglobulinemia, 424
Hypergastrinemia, 149
Hyperglycemia, 615–616
acute pancreatitis and, 500
enteral nutrition therapy and, 613
parenteral nutrition and, 618–619
systemic response to inflammation 
and, 611
Hyperinsulinemia, 618, 632
Hypermetabolic states, 603, 603t
Hyperoxaluria, 172
Hyperparathyroidism, 565–566
Hyperplastic polyp, 524
Hypersplenism, 441
Hypertension, 582, 653
Hyperthyroidism
diarrhea in, 50
oral pain in, 18
Hypertonic dextrose, 618
Hypertriglyceridemia, 653
acute pancreatitis and, 500, 505
pancreatic inflammation and, 500
pancreatitis associated with, 505
Hyperuricemia, 654
Hypoalbuminemia, 343
Hypoaminoacidemia, 567
Hypocalcemia, 500
Hypochlorhydria, 153
Hypogammaglobulinemia
common variable, 44, 50
infectious diarrhea in, 243
Histiocytosis
Langerhans cell, 10
oral manifestations of, 10
Histoplasma spp. infections, 12t
HIV infection
acute syndrome, 11t
gastrointestinal disease in
diarrhea, 44
infections, 317
HCV and, 422
hepatobiliary disease in, 69
oropharyngeal disease in, 18
aphthous ulcers, 10
dysphagia, 31
during primary infection, 11t
protein-calorie malnutrition and, 612
H+, K+-ATPase, 130–131, 153
HNPCC. See Hereditary nonpolyposis 
colon cancer
Hoarseness, 29–30
Hodgkin’s disease, 18
Home parenteral and enteral nutrition, 
614t
Homeostasis Model Assessment 
(HOMA), 653
Hookworm infection
clinical features of, 321t, 322–323
diagnosis of, 323
epidemiology of, 322
inflammatory bowel disease versus, 
191t, 192
treatment of, 321t, 323
Hormone excess state, PETs and, 564
Hormone stimulation test, 511
HPEN. See Home parenteral and 
enteral nutrition
HSV. See Herpes simplex virus 
infections
5HT. See Serotonin
Human caliciviruses, 299, 299t, 300f
Human papillomavirus, 534
HUS. See Hemolytic-uremic syndrome
Hutchinson’s teeth, 9
Hydrochloric acid, 620
Hydrops, cholecystitis and, 467
Hydrothorax, 74
Hyperamylasemia, 494t
Hyperamylasuria, 494t
Hyperbilirubinemia
in alcoholic liver disease, 429
approach to the patient, 64f, 64–69
conjugated, 65
in benign recurrent intrahepatic 
cholestasis, 354t, 355
disorders of bilirubin metabolism 
and, 353–354
Index
751
Insecticides, 536
Insulin
enteral nutrition and, 620
obesity and, 634
parenteral nutrition formula and, 619
sensitivity, 657
Insulin resistance, 616. See also 
Metabolic syndrome
chromium and, 599
colorectal cancer and, 525
metabolic syndrome and, 652–653
treatment of, 657
type 2 diabetes mellitus and,  
631–632
Insulin-like growth factor-1, 630
Insulinomas, 566
diagnosis and treatment, 566–567
obesity and, 629
Interface hepatitis, 368, 397
Interferon-α
adverse effects of, 401
carcinoid crises and, 564
chronic HBV infection treated with, 
401
chronic HCV infection treated with, 
413–415
chronic HDV infection treated with, 
411
Interleukin, 654
Interleukin-6, 627
Interleukin-12, 200
Interleukin-23, 200
International Sensitivity Index, 344
Interval appendectomy, 234
Intestinal fluid, 42
Intestinal ischemia, 223
abdominal pain in, 225
acute, 223, 224, 225t, 226
anatomy of, 223–224, 224t
arterioocclusive, 223, 224t
chronic, 223, 226
clinical features of, 224
diagnosis of, 224–226
epidemiology of, 223
incidence of, 223
mesenteric venous thrombosis,  
223, 224t
nausea and vomiting in, 34
nonocclusive, 223–225, 224t
pathophysiology of, 223–224, 224t
treatment of, 225t, 226
Intestinal lymphangiectasia
clinical features of, 49, 175
small-intestinal mucosal biopsies in, 
166, 167t, 168f
Intestinal lymphoma, 166, 167t
disorders associated with, 180
dysplasia in, 203
epidemiology of, 179t, 179–180, 
180t, 687, 708
etiology of, 180
exogenous factors in, 183
extraintestinal manifestations of, 
193–195
gastrointestinal bleeding in, 59
genetic factors in, 180t, 180–182, 
181t
hepatobiliary disease in, 194
immune regulation in, 180, 182
after infectious diarrhea, 242t
infectious diseases mimicking, 191t, 
191–192
inflammatory cascade in, 182–183
metabolic bone disorders in,  
194–195
noninfectious diseases mimicking, 
191t, 192
ocular involvement in, 193–194
pathogenesis of, 180
pathology of, 184f, 184–185
pregnancy and, 202
rheumatologic disease in, 193
serologic markers in, 189–190
smoking and, 179
SNS and, 612
thromboembolic disorders in, 195
treatment of, 195–202, 196t, 200f, 
201t, 688, 708
adalimumab, 198–199
antibiotics, 197, 200f
anti-TNF therapy, 198–199, 200f
5-ASA agents, 195–196, 200f
azathioprine, 197, 200f
biologic therapies, 198–199,  
200f
cyclosporine, 197–198, 200f
glucocorticoids, 53, 196–197, 200f
infliximab, 198–199, 200f
methotrexate, 197
6-MP, 197, 200f
natalizumab, 199, 200f
nutritional therapies, 200, 200f
during pregnancy, 202
surgery, 200–202, 201t
tacrolimus, 198, 200f
therapies in development, 200–202
urologic disease in, 194
Inflammatory response, 182–183
Infliximab, 197–198, 200f
Influenza vaccine, 339
Inguinal hernia, 6t
Injury Severity Score, 612
deficiency of, 44, 50
macroamylasemia and, 515
Immunoproliferative small-intestinal 
disease, 533
Immunosuppressive therapy, after liver 
transplantation, 481–482
Impaired fasting glucose
insulin resistance versus, 653
metabolic syndrome, 657
Impaired glucose tolerance
chronic pancreatitis and, 512
insulin resistance versus, 653
Indigestion, 36
approach to the patient, 38–40
cancer-related, 37
definition of, 32
differential diagnosis of, 37–38
drug-induced, 39
in gastric motor dysfunction, 37
history in, 38
mechanisms of, 36–37
in peptic ulcer disease, 37
physical examination in, 38
treatment of, 39–40
in visceral afferent hypersensitivity, 
37
Indirect calorimetry, 609
Indirect fraction, 340
Indomethacin
medullary thyroid cancer treated 
with, 53
vasoactive intestinal peptidomas, 569
Infants
vitamin K deficiency in, 598
water requirements, 577
Infected pancreatic necrosis, 506
Infections
metabolic rate and, 603
vitamin A deficiency and, 595
Infectious mononucleosis, 11t
Infective endocarditis, 19
Inflammation, 465
Inflammatory bowel disease, 179
abdominal pain in, 6t
atypical colitides mimicking, 191t, 
192–193
cancer in, 202f, 202–203
cancer surveillance and, 526–527
cardiopulmonary manifestations of, 
195
clinical features of, 185–190, 186f, 
186t, 189f, 190f
diagnosis of, 688, 708
diarrhea in, 46, 50
differential diagnosis of, 190–193, 
191t, 288
Index
752
gut flora modulation, 210
patient counseling, 208
serotonin receptor agonists, 210
serotonin receptor antagonists, 210
stool-bulking agents, 208–209
symptom-related drugs, 211t
upper gastrointestinal symptoms in, 
205
visceral hypersensitivity and, 206
Ischemic colitis
description of, 226
diarrhea in, 45
endoscopic findings in, 90f
inflammatory bowel disease vs., 191t, 
192
ISI. See International Sensitivity Index
Isoflavones, 594
Isoniazid
hepatotoxicity caused by, 387t, 393
pyridoxine and, 592
Isospora belli/isosporiasis, 316
clinical features of, 44, 316
diagnosis of, 315t, 316
epidemiology of, 316
in HIV infection, 317
inflammatory bowel disease versus, 
192
treatment of, 317
Isotopic breath tests, 35
Ivermectin
ascariasis treated with, 322
strongyloidiasis treated with, 325
IVIg. See Intravenous immunoglobulin
Jamaica bush tea, 67
Jaundice, 62, 512
in acute cholecystitis, 466
acute pancreatitis and, 499
approach to the patient, 64f, 64–69
ascites and, 66
breast milk, 350
in cholestasis, 68t, 69
diagnosis of, 66–67
drug-induced, 66, 67t, 68, 68t
in gastrointestinal disease, 83t, 84
hepatocellular carcinoma, 536–537
hepatocellular conditions producing, 
67, 67t
history in, 66
laboratory evaluation of, 66–67
in liver disease, 65, 67, 67t, 332
neonatal, 350
obstructive, choledocholithiasis and, 
471
pancreatic cancer and, 548
pathophysiology of, 62
in elderly, 75
etiology of, 75–76, 76t
in malabsorption syndromes, 176t
significance of, 75
treatment of, 76
Iodides, adverse effects of, 18
Iodoquinol
amebiasis treated with, 310t
D. fragilis infection treated with, 319
Ion absorption defects, 48
IPSID. See Immunoproliferative small-
intestinal disease
Irinotecan
colorectal cancer and, 531–532
gastric adenocarcinoma and, 523
Iron overload
classification of, 453t
in hereditary hemochromatosis, 453t, 
453–454
Iron-deficiency anemia
gastric adenocarcinoma and, 521
from gastrointestinal bleeding, 60
in hookworm infection, 323
surgery-related, 148
Irritable bowel syndrome, 204, 
688, 709
abdominal pain in, 5, 6t, 204–205
abdominal pressure in, 70
abnormal serotonin pathways in, 207
altered bowel habits in, 50, 204
approach to the patient, 207–208
central neural dysregulation in, 206
clinical features of, 204–205
diagnostic criteria for, 204, 204t
differential diagnosis of, 689, 709
gas and flatulence in, 205
gastrointestinal motor abnormalities, 
205–206
gut flora abnormalities in, 207
immune activation and mucosal 
inflammation in, 207
infectious diarrhea and, 242t
nausea and vomiting in, 33
pathophysiology of, 205–207, 207f
post-infectious, 206–207
psychological abnormalities in, 206, 
207f
radiologic evaluations, 689, 709
severity of, 211t
treatment of, 208–211, 211t
antidepressants, 209–210
antidiarrheal agents, 209
antiflatulence therapy, 210
antispasmodics, 209
chloride channel activators, 210
dietary alterations in, 208
Intestinal obstruction, 227
abdominal pain in, 228
abdominal swelling in, 71, 228
acute, 227
adynamic ileus, 230
classification of, 227
clinical features of, 228
colonic obstruction, 229–230
differential diagnosis of, 3, 5
endoscopic findings in, 99f–100f, 
99–100
etiology of, 227
laboratory evaluation of, 228
mechanical, 228
mortality data, 229
nausea and vomiting in, 33, 34
pathophysiology of, 227–228
physical findings in, 228
radiographic studies in, 228–229, 
229f
small-intestinal, 229
treatment of, 229–230
vomiting in, 228
Intestinal protozoal infections, 695, 
715–716
Intestinal pseudoobstruction
nausea and vomiting in, 33
treatment of, 36t
Intestinal type carcinomas, 520
Intestine
blood supply to, 223, 223f, 224t
resection of
diarrhea in, 48
indications for, 172
Intraabdominal infections, 276
Intracranial pressure, increased, 34
Intraluminal maldigestion, 49
Intramural esophageal 
pseudodiverticulosis, 116f
Intraoperative ultrasound, 540
Intraperitoneal abscess, 257
clinical features of, 257–258
diagnosis of, 258
etiology of, 257
pathogenesis of, 257
treatment of, 258, 258f
Intraperitoneal cavity, 253, 254f
Intravenous immunoglobulin, 251t
Intrinsic factor, 148, 708
Intrinsic innervation, 41
Intussusception
bowel obstruction in, 33
diagnosis of, 55
gastrointestinal bleeding in, 59
Involuntary weight loss, 75, 685, 705
assessment of, 76–77, 77t
Index
753
Lexipafant, 505
Libido, 176t
Lichen planus, 13t, 17, 21f
Lifestyle, 655
metabolic syndrome, 655
modifications in, for GERD,  
122–123
obesity and, 636–637, 638
Lille score, 430
Limey bile, 468
Lipase, 515
Lipid storage diseases, 456
Lipids, 160t, 160–162, 161f
Lipodystrophy, 651–652
α-Lipoic acid, 18
Lipolysis, 161, 652
Lipomas, 532
Listeria monocytogenes infections, 44
Lithium
obesity and, 634
vasoactive intestinal peptidomas,  
569
Lithotripsy, 88
Liver
functions of, 330–331, 340, 343–344
lobules of, 446
structure of, 330–331
vitamin A in, 594
Liver abscess, 258–260, 693, 713
amebic
diagnosis of, 259, 309f, 309–310, 
310
pathogenesis of, 308
rupture of, 309
treatment of, 310, 310t
Candida, 259
clinical features of, 259
diagnosis of, 259
etiology of, 259
treatment of, 259–260
Liver biopsy, 336–338
acetaminophen hepatotoxicity, 449f
acute hepatitis, 446f–447f, 451f
α1-antitrypsin deficiency, 449f
atlas of, 446–452
chronic hepatitis B, 447f
chronic hepatitis C, 447f, 448f
cirrhosis, 448f
hemochromatosis, 450f
hepatocellular carcinoma, 450f
liver allograft rejection, 449f
nonalcoholic steatohepatitis, 451f
percutaneous, in liver function 
evaluation, 341f, 344
primary sclerosing cholangitis, 450f
Wilson’s disease, 451f–452f
Lamivudine
adverse effects of, 402–403
chronic HBV infection treated with, 
402–403, 407t, 408f
liver disease treated with, 486
resistance to, 404
Langerhans cell histiocytosis, 10
Lanreotide
glucagonomas and, 567
GRFomas, 570
metastatic disease and, 572
Lansoprazole
gastroesophageal reflux disease treated 
with, 39
peptic ulcer disease treated with, 
139t, 140
Laparoscopic adjustable silicone gastric 
banding (LASGB), 641–642
Laparotomy, 224, 225t, 226
Lapband, 641
Large duct pancreatitis, 512
Large-bowel cancer
environmental factors for, 524t, 525
recurrences, 529
screening for, 528
Larva currens, 323
Laxatives
abuse of, 48, 50
adverse effects of, 45, 49
bulimia nervosa and, 648
constipation managed with, 54, 56
gastrointestinal disease managed with, 
87
l-dopa, 592
Lead colic, 5
Lead poisoning, 15t
Legionella spp. infections, 45
Leiomyomas, 532
Leiomyosarcomas, 523, 534
Leptin, 626, 631
obesity and, 631
regulation, 627–628, 628f, 629f
LES. See Lower esophageal sphincter
Leucovorin, 531
Leukemia, 10, 17
Leukocytosis, 500
Leukopenia, 537
Leukoplakia
hairy, 16t
oral, 10, 16t, 23f
sublingual, 22f
Levetiracetam, 36
Levofloxacin
H. pylori eradication using, 267t
infectious diarrhea treated with, 245t
peritonitis treated with, 256
physical examination in, 66
serum bilirubin measurement in, 63
urine bilirubin measurement in, 63–64
in viral hepatitis, 373–374
Jaw, osteonecrosis of, 19
Jejunal feeding tube, 613
Jejunal vascular ectasia
capsule endoscopy of, 91f
endoscopic findings in, 105
Jejunoileitis, 187
Jejunostomy, 520
Joint diseases, 633
Jugular venous pressure, 71
Juvenile polyps, 524
Kanagawa phenomenon, 296
Kaposi’s sarcoma, 15t
Kava Kava, 67
Keratitis, 312
Keratomalacia, 595
Kernicterus, 352
Keshan disease, 599
Ketanserin, 563
Ketoacidosis
halitosis in, 20
nausea and vomiting in, 34
α-Ketoacids, 586
Ketones, 604
Killian’s triangle, 115, 115f
Klatskin tumors, 544
Klebsiella spp. infections
abdominal, 74
clinical features of, 45t
diarrhea, 45t, 242
Kupffer cells, 330
Kussmaul’s sign, 71
Kwashiorkor, 601, 602–603, 605
marasmus versus, 602t
small-intestinal mucosal biopsies in, 
167t
Labyrinthitis, 34, 35
Lactase, 163
Lactase deficiency
diagnosis of, 52
diarrhea in, 49
indigestion in, 38
primary, 163, 163t
secondary, 163
treatment of, 39, 49, 53
Lactate dehydrogenase, 73
Lactose, 163
Lactose breath test, 52
Lactose malabsorption, 163
Lactulose, for constipation, 54, 56
Laennec’s cirrhosis, 66
Index
754
microscopic colitis treated with, 50
travelers’ diarrhea treated with, 245t
vasoactive intestinal peptidomas, 569
Lorazepam, 36, 36t
Lovastatin, 656
Low-carbohydrate/high-protein diets, 
638
Low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, 
655–656
Lower esophageal sphincter, 27–28
dysfunction of, 36–37
relaxation of
in achalasia, 117–118, 118f
in gastroesophageal reflux disease, 
121
Lubiprostone
constipation treated with, 56
irritable bowel syndrome treated 
with, 210
Ludwig’s angina, 9
Lung cancer, small cell, 33
Lung neuroendocrine tumors, 559
Lycopene, 596
Lymph nodes
clearance, gastric carcinoids, 564
colorectal cancer and, 529–530, 530t
metastases, 556
resection, gastric adenocarcinoma 
and, 522
Lymphadenitis
mesenteric, 233
oral manifestations of, 18
Lymphangiectasia
congenital intestinal, 49
intestinal, 166, 167t, 168f, 175
Lymphatic obstruction
acquired, 49
postmucosal, 49
Lymphocytic colitis, 191t, 193
Lymphocytic gastritis, 155
Lymphoid malignancies, 10, 14t
Lymphoma, 166, 457, 533
Lymphopenia, 374
M cells, 280
MAC. See Mycobacterium avium complex 
(MAC) infections
Macroamylasemia, 514
Macroglossia, 16t
Macular degeneration, 596
Magnesium hydroxide
adverse effects of, 139
peptic ulcer disease treated with, 139
Magnetic resonance 
cholangiopancreatography
bile duct, 102, 472t
Liver fibrosis, 596
Liver function tests, 340
abnormal, evaluation of, 336, 337f, 
340, 341f
based on detoxification and excretory 
functions, 340–343, 341f
coagulation factors, 344
measuring biosynthetic function of 
liver, 343–344
shortcomings of, 340
ultrasound, 341f, 344
uses of, 344–345, 345t
Liver metastases, 572f
Liver pain, 332
Liver transplantation, 449f, 476, 702, 
724–725
in adults, 477t, 477–478
cadaver donor, 478–480
candidates for, 476
in children, 476–477, 477t
complications of, 482t, 482–484, 
483t
contraindications to, 478, 478t
graft rejection in, 484
history of, 476
immunosuppressive therapy in, 
481–482
indications for, 476–478, 477t, 
486–487
living donor, 480
MELD score and, 338, 341
orthotopic, 476
outcome of, 484–487
PELD system in, 338
postoperative course, 481–482
prevalence of, 476
prophylactic approaches to patients 
undergoing, 486
quality of life after, 487
recurrence of primary disease after, 
485–487
surgical technique, 480–481
survival after, 484–485
technical considerations, 478–481
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome treated 
with, 152
Liver tumors, 535
Liver X receptor, 459
Local anesthetics, 19
Local injection therapy, 541
Löffler’s syndrome, 321
Loperamide
carcinoid syndrome treated with, 563
diarrhea treated with, 47, 53, 148
irritable bowel syndrome treated 
with, 209
Liver disease/failure
acute, 334, 336
advanced, 334–335
in alcohol abuse, 333, 333t, 427–430, 
449f, 696, 717. See also 
Alcoholic liver disease
approach to the patient, 332, 337f
ascites in, 72, 72f, 334
chemical-induced, 385–396, 
390t–391t
cholestatic, 67–69, 331t, 332
chronic, 334, 336
clinical features of, 71, 332–334
definition of, 334
diagnosis of
algorithm for, 337f
biopsy in, 336
clinical history in, 332–334, 333t
components in, 332–333
family history in, 333–334
imaging in, 336
in jaundiced patient, 67
laboratory tests in, 335, 335t,  
696, 717
physical examination in, 334–335
drug-induced, 335t, 339, 385, 386f, 
387t, 389–396
emphysema and, 333–334
end-stage, liver transplantation for, 
486
etiology of, 427–428, 438
fatigue in, 332
genetic, 453–455
grading of, 332, 336–338
halitosis in, 20
hepatocellular, 331t, 332
hepatocellular carcinoma and, 539
hepatomegaly in, 334
icterus in, 334
infiltrative, 457
in inflammatory bowel disease, 195
itching in, 332
jaundice in, 65, 67, 332
metabolic, 455–457
nausea and vomiting in, 332
oral manifestations of, 10
pain in, 332
patterns of, 331t, 332
physical examination in, 66
risk factors for, 333
signs and symptoms of, 696, 717
skin manifestations of, 335
splenomegaly in, 334
staging of, 332, 336–338
types of, 331t, 331–332
in Wilson disease, 333, 335
Index
755
epidemiology of, 650–651
etiology of, 652–654
HDL cholesterol, 656
NCEP:ATPIII criteria, 650t,  
650–651
pathophysiology of, 652f
risk factors, 651–652
treatment of
blood pressure, 656–657
diet, 655
HDL cholesterol, 656
impaired fasting glucose, 657
insulin resistance, 657
LDL cholesterol, 655–656
lifestyle, 655
obesity, 655
physical activity, 655
triglycerides, 656
Metabolites, 626
Metals, 588t
Metformin, 657
Methotrexate, 197, 688, 708–709
α-Methyldopa, 393, 564
Methylprednisolone, 36t
Metoclopramide
adverse effects of, 35
gastrointestinal reflux disease treated 
with, 40
nausea and vomiting treated with, 
35, 36t
vasoactive intestinal peptidomas 
treated with, 569
Metronidazole
amebiasis treated with, 310, 310t
C. difficile infection treated with, 
250–251, 251t
D. fragilis infection treated with, 
319
diarrhea treated with, 47
Giardia infection treated with, 315
H. pylori eradication using, 142, 142t, 
267t
hepatic encephalopathy treated with, 
444
peritonitis treated with, 256
resistance to, 267
Trichomonas vaginalis infection treated 
with, 319
MI. See Myocardial infarction
Micellar formation, 161
Micelles, 459
Microlithiasis, 108
Micronodular cirrhosis, 536
Micronutrient malnutrition, 604
Microsomal ethanol oxidizing system, 
432
Maternal thiamine deficiency, 587
Mazindol, 640
McBurney’s point, 232
MCT. See Medium-chain triglycerides
MDCT. See Multidetector computed 
tomography
Mebendazole
ascariasis treated with, 322
hookworm infection treated with, 
323
Mechanical ventilation, 620
Meckel’s diverticulum, 59, 61
Meclizine, 35, 36t
Mediterranean lymphoma, 533
Medium-chain triglycerides, 616
Megacolon
diagnosis of, 54
treatment of, 56
Megarectum, 56
α-Melanocyte stimulating hormone 
(α-MSH), 628, 629f
Melanoma, oral, 14t
Melanosis coli, 54
Melena, 57
MEN 1. See Multiple endocrine 
neoplasia type 1
Menaquinone, 598
Ménétrier’s disease, 175
indigestion in, 38
nausea and vomiting in, 34
peptic ulcer disease and, 155
treatment of, 155
Meningitis, 276
Meningoencephalitis, primary amebic, 
311, 311f
Mental retardation, 630t
MEOS. See Microsomal ethanol 
oxidizing system
6-Mercaptopurine, 197, 200f, 426
Mercury exposure/poisoning, 15t
Mesalamine, 195–196, 196t, 201
Mesenteric ischemia, 690, 710
abdominal pain in, 6t
indigestion in, 38
nausea and vomiting in, 32
Mesenteric lymphadenitis, 6t, 233
Mesenteric vascular occlusion, 501
Mesenteric venous thrombosis,  
223–224, 224t
Metabolic acidosis, 619–620
Metabolic disturbances, 619t
Metabolic syndrome, 650
clinical features, 654–655
associated diseases, 654
signs and symptoms, 654
diagnosis of, 655
cholangiocarcinoma and, 544
in cholestasis, 67–68
in liver disease, 336
pancreatic cancer and, 548–549
pancreatic disease and, 491t, 494, 
511, 511f
primary sclerosing cholangitis, 194, 437
Magnetic resonance elastography, 336
Magnetic resonance imaging
in Crohn’s disease, 190f
in liver disease, 336
Malabsorption, 156
approach to the patient, 164–167, 
167f, 167t, 168f
bacterial overgrowth syndrome, 
173–174
classification of, 176t
clinical features of, 164–165
genetic factors in, 169
laboratory evaluation of, 164–165
pathophysiology of, 176t
radiologic examination in, 165, 166f
Schilling test in, 165
small-intestinal mucosal biopsy in, 
165–167, 167t, 168f
surgery-related, 148–149
urinary d-xylose test in, 165
Malaria, 6t
Maldigestion, 510
Malignancy, 567
Mallenkot drain, 221
Mallory-Weiss tears
gastrointestinal bleeding in, 57, 57t, 
97–98, 98f, 125
nausea and vomiting in, 34
treatment of, 58, 125
Malnutrition, 601
alcoholic liver disease and, 427t, 428
and nutritional assessment, 601–609
in cirrhosis, 444–445
in malabsorption syndromes, 176t
secondary, 601
Malocclusion, 9
MAMC (Mid-arm muscle 
circumference), 605
Manganese, 600
Manometry
anorectal, 55
esophageal, 31, 38–39
intestinal, 35
Marasmus, 601
kwashiorkor, 602t
Mastocytosis
small-intestinal mucosal biopsies in, 
167t
systemic, 48
Index
756
history in, 34
in intraperitoneal disorders, 33t, 
33–34
in liver disease, 332
mechanisms of, 32–33
physical examination in, 34
in pregnancy, 34, 36
treatment of, 35–36, 36t
antiemetics, 35, 36t
gastrointestinal motor stimulants, 
35
Near-total gastrectomy, 522
NEAT. See Nonexercise activity 
thermogenesis
Necator americanus, 321t, 322
Necroscopy, 505
Necrosis, 505
Necrotizing acute pancreatitis, 504–505
Nematode infections
intestinal, 321t
anisakiasis, 326
capillariasis, 326
Enterobius vermicularis/enterobiasis, 
321t, 325–326
trichostrongyliasis, 326
Neoadjuvant radiotherapy with 
sensitizing chemotherapy, 545
Neomycin, 49, 210, 444
Neonatal jaundice, 350
Neoplastic clone, 523
Neostigmine, 230
Nephrolithiasis, 6t
Nephrotic syndromes, 73
NETs. See Neuroendocrine tumors
Neuritis, 18
Neurodegenerative disease, 594
Neuroendocrine cell markers,  
552, 553t
Neuroendocrine tumors
genetic syndromes and, 558t
prognostic factors in, 557t
treatment of, 573
Neurologic disease, 76
Neutropenia, 374
Neutropenic enterocolitis, 6t
Neutrophils, 499
Nevus, oral, 15t
NHANES III, 651, 651f
Niacin, 591, 592
Nicotinamide, 591
Nicotinic acid
Pellagra syndrome and, 591
triglycerides and, 656
Nifedipine, 10
Night blindness, 176t
Nissen fundoplication, 40, 123
gastrinomas and, 565–566
GRFomas, 570
Multiple sclerosis, 55
Munchausen syndrome, 50
Murphy’s sign, 66
Mushrooms, 45, 67
Myasthenia gravis, 31
Mycobacterium avium complex infections, 
44, 49, 192
Mycophenolic acid, 481–482
Myenteric plexus, 42
Myocardial infarction, 501
abdominal pain in, 4, 6t
dental care after, 19
nausea and vomiting in, 34
N-Acetyl-benzoquinone-imine, 389, 
391, 720
N-Acetylcysteine, 392, 720
Naegleria infection
clinical features of, 311
epidemiology of, 311
laboratory evaluation of, 311f
pathogenesis of, 311
NAFLD. See Nonalcoholic fatty liver 
disease
Nalidixic acid, 275
NAPQI, 391. See N-acetyl-
benzoquinone-imine
NASH. See Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis
Nasogastric drainage, 620
Nasogastric suctioning, 88
Nasogastric tube, 31
Natalizumab, 199, 200f
National Cholesterol Education 
Program, Adult Treatment 
Panel III criteria 
(NCEP:ATPIII criteria)
metabolic syndrome and, 650t,  
650–651, 656
non-HDL cholesterol, 656
Natural orifice transluminal endoscopic 
(NOTES) surgery, 93
Nausea
chronic idiopathic, 33
definition of, 32
Nausea and vomiting, 32–40
in appendicitis, 232
approach to the patient, 34–35
diagnostic testing in, 34–35
drug-induced, 33t, 34
in endocrine/metabolic disease,  
33t, 34
etiology of, 33t, 33–34
in extraperitoneal disorders, 33t, 34
in gastrointestinal disease, 83, 83t
Microsporidia/microsporidiosis, 317
clinical features of, 44, 317
diagnosis of, 317
in HIV infection, 317
life cycle of parasite, 317, 318f
treatment of, 317
Midgut carcinoids, 553, 560–561, 562
Migraine headache, 34
Migrainous neuralgia, 18
Migrating motor complex, 42
Mineral(s), 598–600
absorption of, 158
in formulas, 616–617
loss, 615
Minocycline, 14t
Mirizzi’s syndrome, 466
Mirtazapine, 35, 634
Misoprostol, 144
Mitomycin C, 542
Mittelschmerz, 233
Mixed function oxidase systems, 
vitamin C and, 592
Model for End-Stage Liver Disease 
(MELD) score, in liver 
transplantation, 338, 341, 479
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors, 634
Monoclonal antibodies, 200
Monocyte chemotactic protein  
(MCP-1), 499
Monomeric formulas, 616
Mood stabilizers, 634
Mortality
blood pressure and, 656
pancreatic cancer and, 549
Motilin agonists, 36t
Motility disorders, 117
Motion sickness, 32
nausea and vomiting in, 34
treatment of, 35, 36t
Motor stimulants, 40
MRCP. See Magnetic resonance 
cholangiopancreatography
MRI. See Magnetic resonance imaging
MRP2. See Multidrug resistance–
associated protein 2
Mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue 
(MALT) lymphoma, 262, 523
Mucosal malabsorption, 49
Mucous retention cyst, oral, 15t
Multidetector computed tomography, 
188, 189f
Multidrug resistance–associated protein 
2, 349
Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1
gastrinomas in, 150
markers of, 557, 558
Index
757
Nutrient(s), 576
digestion and absorption of, 157–158
EAR of, 577
needs
dietary composition, 582
disease and, 582
factors altering, 581–582
physiologic factors, 581–582
route of administration, 582
requirements, essential, 576–577
terminologies, 584
Nutrition, in high-risk patient, 605, 
605t
Nutritional assessment, 584, 605–609
history, 605
laboratory tests for, 607t–608t
requirements, 576–584
Nutritional deficiencies, 606t
Nutritional monitoring, 583
Nutritional status
body mass index and, 612t
laboratory studies and, 605–608
Nutritional support
gastrointestinal disease treated with, 
87
inflammatory bowel disease treated 
with, 200, 200f
irritable bowel syndrome treated 
with, 208
systemic response to inflammation 
and, 612
timing of, 612
Obesity, 634
biology of, 624–633
comorbid conditions, bariatric 
surgery and, 641
definition and measurement of, 624
etiology of, 627–629, 630–631
evaluation of, 634–637
genes, 627–629, 628t
hepatobiliary disease secondary to, 
632–633
history-taking for, 634
metabolic syndrome and, 651
treatment of, 655–657
pathogenesis of, 630–631
pathologic consequences of, 631–633
prevalence of, 624–625
selecting treatment, 638t
treatment of, 637f, 637–642
Obesity hypoventilation syndrome, 632
Obesity-associated organ systems 
review, 635–636, 636t
Obstructive sleep apnea, 20,  
654–655
for endoscopic procedures, 109f, 110f
necrotizing acute pancreatitis and, 505
polyposis coli and, 526
Nontyphoidal salmonellosis
antibiotic resistance in, 275
antibiotics for, 277t
bacteremia caused by, 276
clinical manifestations of, 275–276
control of, 278
diagnosis of, 276–277
endovascular infections caused by, 
276
epidemiology of, 274–275
gastroenteritis associated with,  
275–276
genital tract infections caused by,  
276
incidence of, 274–275
intraabdominal infections caused by, 
276
meningitis caused by, 276
osteomyelitis caused by, 276
prevention of, 278
transmission of, 275
treatment of, 277t, 277–278
urinary tract infections caused by, 
276
Norepinephrine, 639
Norfloxacin
bacterial peritonitis treated with,  
74
infectious diarrhea treated with,  
245t
peritonitis prophylaxis using, 255
Norovirus infections, 299–302, 300f, 
695, 715
clinical features of, 45t, 299t, 301
diagnosis of, 301–302
diarrhea, 44, 45t, 243t
epidemiology of, 301
immunity to, 301
pathogenesis of, 301
prevention of, 302
treatment of, 302
Nortriptyline, 36t
Norwalk virus. See Norovirus infections
Nosema spp., 317
NOTES (natural orifice transluminal 
endoscopic) surgery, 93
NSAIDs. See Nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs
Nuclear medicine, 86–87
Nucleoside analogues, 410t
5’-Nucleostidase, in liver function 
evaluation, 341f, 343
Nucleus pulposus, herniated, 5
Nitazoxanide
ascariasis treated with, 322
C. difficile infection treated with, 251t
Cryptosporidium infection treated 
with, 316
Giardia infection treated with, 315
Nitrates
adverse effects of, 37
gastric adenocarcinoma and, 520–521
Nitric oxide
in gastric mucosal integrity, 130
in swallowing, 28
Nizatidine
gastroesophageal reflux disease treated 
with, 39
peptic ulcer disease treated with, 
139t, 140
Nodular tumors, 544
Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease,  
455–456, 701, 723–724
cirrhosis caused by, 434–435
clinical features of, 455–456
diagnosis of, 456
macrovesicular steatosis in, 455, 455t
metabolic syndrome and, 654
obesity and, 632–633
prevalence of, 455
treatment of, 456
Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis
biopsy findings in, 451f
cirrhosis due to, 434–435
description of, 455
diagnosis of, 335t
Nondiabetic retinopathy, 512
Nonenteric coated enzymes, 512
Nonexercise activity thermogenesis, 631
Nonfunctional pancreatic endocrine 
tumors, 569
Non-Hodgkin’s lymphomas, 533
Nonmetastatic carcinoid tumors, 
563–564
Nonocclusive mesenteric ischemia, 
223–225, 224t
Nonpolyposis syndromes, large bowel 
cancer and, 525t, 525–526
Non-provitamin A carotenoids, macular 
degeneration and, 596
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
adverse effects of
colitis, 191t, 192
diarrhea, 45
gastrointestinal bleeding, 57
gastrointestinal ulcers, 37
proximal ileal stricture, 92f
colon cancer, 527
in COX-2 inhibition, 129
Index
758
P gene, 360
Paget’s disease of bone, 9
Pain
management, chronic pancreatitis 
and, 512–513
palliation, 522
pancreatic cancer and, 548
Palliation
esophageal cancer and, 520
of pain, external beam irradiation,  
522
Palmar erythema, 334, 432, 432f
Palpation, abdominal, 6
PAM. See Primary amebic 
meningoencephalitis
Pancreas
autoprotection of, 497
biopsy of, 491t, 495
exocrine secretion, 496
gastrinomas and, 565–566
inflammation of, gallstones and,  
498
stellate cells of, 509
Pancreas divisum, 514
Pancreatic abscess, 507
Pancreatic ascites, 508
Pancreatic calculi, 511f
Pancreatic cancer, 512, 547, 
548f
adjuvant therapy, 551t
clinical features, 548
diagnostic procedures, 548–549
early detection of, 548
epidemiology of, 547
extrahepatic cholestasis in, 69
gastroparesis in, 33
genetic considerations, 547–548
incidence and etiology, 547
metastatic, 551
obstruction due to, 99, 99f
operable, treatment for, 549
risk factors for, 547
screening for, 548
staging of, 549, 550f
survival, 551t
treatment, 549–551
Pancreatic carcinoma, 505–506
Pancreatic cholera, 48
Pancreatic disease, 490
acute, 490
approach to the patient, 490–495
ascites in, 72
diagnosis of, 490–495, 491t–492t, 
493f, 494t
etiology of, 490
indigestion in, 38
nausea and vomiting secondary to, 
33t, 34
oral pigmentation secondary to, 14t
Oral hypoglycemics, 34, 566
Oral intake, 504
Oral mucosa
age-related changes in, 20
pigmented lesions, 14t–15t
vesicular, bullous, or ulcerative 
lesions, 11t–14t
white lesions, 15t–16t
Oral pancreatic enzymes, cobalamin 
malabsorption, 511
Oral rehydration solution
cholera managed with, 293–294, 295t
composition of, 245, 283, 293–294, 
295t
infectious diarrhea managed with, 
245, 245t
Shigella infections managed with, 283
Organophosphates, 45
Orlistat, 640
Oropharyngeal disease, 29
ORS. See Oral rehydration solution
Orthodeoxia, 335
Orthotopic liver transplantation
FL-HCC and, 544
hepatocellular carcinoma and,  
539–541, 543
OSA. See Obstructive sleep apnea
Osler-Weber-Rendu syndrome, 59
Osmotic diarrhea, 156
Osmotic laxatives, 49
Osteoarthritis, 18
Osteomyelitis
psoas abscess in, 261
Salmonella, 276
Osteonecrosis
in inflammatory bowel disease, 195
of jaw, 19, 25f
Osteoporosis, 594
Osteosarcoma, 10
Outlet obstruction to defecation, 55
Ova and parasite examination, 46, 52
Ovarian cyst
abdominal pain in, 7
twisted, 7
Overlapping sphincteroplasty, for fecal 
incontinence, 219
Oxalate absorption, 172
Oxaliplatin
colorectal cancer and, 531–532
tumors and, metastatic to liver, 545
Oxidative stress hypothesis, 652–653
Oxyntic cell, 127, 127f
Oxyntic gland, 127, 127f, 130, 131f
Occult blood in stool, 524
Occult colorectal cancers, 527
Occult gallstone disease, 505
Occult gastrointestinal bleeding, 57
OCG. See Oral cholecystography
Octreotide, 148, 561
anesthesia and, carcinoid crises and, 
563
carcinoid syndrome treated with, 53
glucagonomas and, 567
GRFomas, 570
insulinomas and, 567
metastatic disease and, 572
nausea and vomiting treated with, 
35, 36t
necrotizing acute pancreatitis and, 
505
somatostatinoma syndrome and, 568
variceal bleeding treated with, 58, 
440
vasoactive intestinal peptidomas, 569
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome treated 
with, 151
Ocular disorders, 193–194
Ocular melanomas, 545
Odynophagia, 27, 38, 113, 124, 519
OKUDA staging system, HCC and, 
537, 538t
Oligomenorrhea, 648
Olsalazine, 195, 196t
OLTX. See Orthotopic liver 
transplantation
Omega-3 fatty acids, 656
Omeprazole
action of, 140
formulations of, 140
gastroesophageal reflux disease treated 
with, 39
H. pylori eradication treated with, 
142t, 143, 267t
peptic ulcer disease treated with, 58, 
139t, 140
Oncogenes, 558
Ondansetron, 35, 36t
Open access endoscopy, 108, 109f, 110f
Operative resection, esophageal cancer 
and, 520
Opioids, 34
Opisthorchis viverrini, 544
Oral calculus, 24f–25f
Oral carcinoma, 23f
Oral cholecystography, 463
Oral contraceptives
cholestasis secondary to, 68
hepatotoxicity secondary to, 387t, 
388, 394–395
Index
759
SNS and, 611
technique for, 613
Parenteral protein, 616
Parenteral trace minerals, 616–617, 617t
Paresthesia, 176t
Parietal cell, 127, 127f, 130, 131f
Parietal peritoneum inflammation, 2
Parkinson’s disease
constipation in, 55
dysphagia in, 29, 31
Paromomycin
amebiasis treated with, 310, 310t
D. fragilis infections treated with, 319
Giardia infections treated with, 315
Parotitis, acute bacterial, 18
Paroxetine
irritable bowel syndrome treated 
with, 209
obesity and, 634
Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria, 
65
Partial liver resection, 531
Parulis, 9
Patient monitoring
feeding tube placement and, 620–622
parenteral nutrition, 617–618, 618t
PCM. See Protein-calorie malnutrition
Pedunculated polyps, 524
Pegylated interferon-α2a (PEG 
IFN-α2a), for chronic HCV 
infection, 415–416, 416t, 
417f, 418, 421–422
Pegylated interferon-α2b (PEG 
IFN-α2b)
for chronic HBV infection, 404–405, 
407t, 408, 408f, 410t
for chronic HCV infection, 415–416, 
416t, 417f, 421–422
ribavirin and, 413–417
PEI. See Percutaneous ethanol injection
PELD system, 338
Pellagra, 591
Pelvic floor dysfunction, 55–56
Pelvic floor retraining, 56
Pelvic inflammatory disease
abdominal pain in, 2, 7
appendicitis versus, 233
PEM. See Protein-energy malnutrition
Pemphigoid, mucous membrane,  
10, 13t
Pemphigus vulgaris, 10, 13t
Penicillamine, 592
Pentamidine, 507
Pentoxifylline
alcoholic cirrhosis treated with, 433
alcoholic hepatitis treated with, 430f
pathophysiology, 508–509
Schilling test in, 178t
treatment, 512–513
complications of, 507t
diagnosis of, 7
endoscopic findings in, 108
etiology of, 702, 725
gallstone, 102
gastroparesis secondary to, 512
glucocorticoids for, 510
mild acute, 503–504
nausea and vomiting in, 33–34
phases of, 499
recurrent, 505–506
severe acute, 504
smoking and, 508
Panitumumab, 531
Pantoprazole
gastroesophageal reflux disease treated 
with, 39
peptic ulcer disease treated with, 
139t, 140
Pantothenic acid (Vitamin B5), 593
Papillary dysfunction, 469
Papillary stenosis, 469
Papillon-Lefevre syndrome, 10
Paracentesis, 72–73, 73, 685, 705
Paraesophageal hernia, 114
Paraneoplastic hypercalcemia, 570
Paraneoplastic syndromes
extrahepatic cholestasis in, 69
in hepatocellular carcinoma, 537
Parasitic infections, 473
Parasympathetic fibers, 42
Parathyroid disease
indigestion in, 38
nausea and vomiting in, 34
Parenteral catheters, 618
Parenteral electrolytes, 616, 617t
Parenteral emulsions, 616
Parenteral fat, 616
Parenteral glucose, 616
administration, 619
thiamine deficiency and, 587
Parenteral multivitamins, 617, 617t
Parenteral nutrition, 610, 616
extrahepatic cholestasis in, 69
hepatotoxicity of, 395–396
inflammatory bowel disease treated 
with, 200, 200f
infusion technique for, 617–618
limitations, 617
metabolic disturbances, and their 
correction, 619t
patient monitoring and, 617–618, 
618t
Pancreatic ducts
obstruction of, 49
pseudocysts of pancreas and, 506
Pancreatic endocrine tumors, 552, 553, 
564–570
chemotherapy for, 572
malignant behavior, 556
Pancreatic enzymes, 512, 513t
in pancreatic disease diagnosis,  
490–493, 491t
replacement of, 53, 88
Pancreatic exocrine insufficiency, 
508–514
Pancreatic exocrine secretion
biochemistry and physiology of, 
496–497
in steatorrhea, 167
Pancreatic fibrosis, 508
Pancreatic infection, CT-guided needle 
aspiration and, 506
Pancreatic pleural effusions, 508
Pancreatic pseudocyst
chronic pancreatitis pain and, 512
MRCP and, 511
Pancreatic secretory trypsin inhibitor, 
514
Pancreatitis
acute, 481
abdominal pain in, 5, 6t
AIDS infection and, 507
approach to the patient, 490–495
causes of, 498t
complications and course of, 
503–506
diagnosis of, 491t–492t, 500–503
differential diagnosis for, 501–503
general considerations, 497
laboratory data and, 499–500
necrotizing, 258
pathogenesis of, 499
treatment for, 504–506
acute necrotizing, 504–505,  
703, 726
ascites in, 73, 74
choledocholithiasis and, 471
chronic, 49, 495, 704, 726–727
approach to the patient, 490–495, 
493f
cobalamin absorption in, 177
complications of, 512, 512t
diagnosis of, 491t–492t
endoscopic ultrasound of, 491t, 
494, 494t
etiologic considerations, 509
incidence of, 490
jaundice in, 69
Index
760
in peritoneal dialysis, 256
postoperative, 256
prevention of, 255
primary, 234, 253–255, 692, 712
prognosis of, 235
recurrence of, 255
secondary, 234, 255–256, 693, 713
treatment of, 235, 255, 256
Pernicious anemia, 177, 178t, 521, 708
Peroxisomal catalase, 432
Peroxisome proliferator-activated 
receptor gamma, 195
Pesticides, 536
PETs. See Pancreatic endocrine tumors
Peutz-Jeghers syndrome, 14t, 547–548
Peyronie’s disease, 561
pH, esophageal, 38–39
Phacomatoses, 557
Phagophobia, 27
Phantom pain, 18
Phendimetrazine, 640
Phenol exposure, 62
Phenothiazines, 569
Phentermine, 640
Phenytoin
gingival hyperplasia caused by, 10
hepatotoxicity caused by, 394
Photodynamic therapy, 545
Photosensitivity, 592
Phrygian cap, 460
Phylloquinone, 598
Physical activity, 576
metabolic syndrome, treatment, 655
obesity and, 639
Physical examination
hepatocellular carcinoma, 538
in high-risk patient, 605, 606t
Physical fitness, 635
PICCs. See Peripherally inserted central 
catheters
Picobirnaviruses, 300f, 305
PID. See Pelvic inflammatory disease
Piecemeal necrosis, 397
Pigment stones, 462t, 462–463
Pill esophagitis, 126
Pilocarpine, 18
Pivmecillinam, 283t
Plant proteins, 576
Plaque, dental, 8–9
Plasma
insulin levels in, 566
proinsulin levels in, 566–567
VIPomas, 568
Platelet dysfunction, 592
Platypnea, 335
Pleistophora spp., 317
proton pump inhibitors, 139t, 
140–141
sucralfate, 139t, 141
surgery, 145–149, 146f
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome and, 
149–152
Percutaneous ethanol injection,  
540–541, 541
Percutaneous liver biopsy, 341f, 344
Percutaneous transhepatic 
cholangiography, 472t
Pergolide, 561
Perianal disease, 187–188
Perianal skin tags, 193
Periapical abscess, 9
Periapical cyst, 9
Periapical disease, 9
Periapical granuloma, 9
Pericarditis, 4, 6t
Perineal descent, 43f, 55
Perinephric abscess, 260–261
Periodontal disease, 9, 24f–25f
AIDS-related, 9
in elderly, 20
localized juvenile, 9
prevention of, 9
risk factors for, 9
Periodontitis, 22f
Periodontium, 8
Peripheral edema, 334, 634
Peripheral neuropathy
in malabsorption syndromes, 176t
pyridoxine and, 592
Peripherally acting medications, 640
Peripherally inserted central catheters, 
617
Periportal necrosis, 397
Peristalsis, 27–29
Peristaltic sounds, 7
Peritoneal carcinomatosis, 72, 72f, 73
Peritoneal dialysis, continuous 
ambulatory, 256, 692,  
712–713
Peritonitis, 234, 253, 690–691, 711
abdominal pain in, 2, 6, 6t, 254, 711
acute, 234–235
ascites in, 72, 73
aseptic, 234
bacterial, 74, 253–255, 443
clinical features of, 234–235,  
253–255
continuous ambulatory peritoneal 
dialysis-related, 692, 712–713
diagnosis of, 254, 254f
etiology of, 234, 235t
pathophysiology of, 254f
Peptic ulcer disease, 127, 565
abdominal pain in, 6t, 136–137
acute pancreatitis, 501
barium radiography in, 137, 138f
clinical features of, 127, 136–137
conditions related to, 149
diagnostic evaluation of, 137–138, 
138f
differential diagnosis of, 137
dyspepsia in, 144
endoscopic findings in, 89, 103
benign, 89f, 137, 138f
hemorrhage, 96, 96f
malignant, 89f
epidemiology of, 131
etiology of, 131–134, 136t
gastric physiology and, 127f–129f, 
128–130
gastritis and, 153
gastrointestinal bleeding in, 57, 57t, 
96, 96f, 137
genetic factors in, 134–135
H. pylori-related, 57–58, 131–132, 
262, 264f
history in, 136
indigestion in, 37
Ménétrier’s disease and, 155
mortality data, 127
NSAID-induced, 132
epidemiology of, 135
pathophysiology of, 135,  
135f
treatment of, 143–144, 144t
pathophysiology of, 131–132, 133f, 
134f
perforation in, 137
physical examination in, 136–137
prevalence of, 127
prevention of recurrent bleeding in, 
58
recurrence of, 147
smoking and, 135
stress-related mucosal injury, 152
treatment of, 139–149
antacids, 139, 139t
approach to the patient, 144–145, 
145f
bismuth-containing preparations, 
139t, 141
cytoprotective agents, 139t, 
141–142
H. pylori eradication, 142t, 
142–143
H2 receptor antagonists, 139t, 
139–140
prostaglandin analogues, 139t, 141
Index
761
gastrointestinal disease treated with, 88
indigestion treated with, 40
Prochlorperazine
adverse effects of, 68
nausea and vomiting treated with, 
36, 36t
Procidentia, 689, 710
Proctitis
herpes simplex virus, 191t, 192
ulcerative colitis and, 185
Proctography, 55
Proctosigmoidoscopy, 526
Progesterone, 37
Progressive familial intrahepatic 
cholestasis, 69, 354t, 355–356
Proinflammatory cytokines, 654
Prokinetic agents
gastrointestinal propulsion affected 
by, 87
indigestion treated with, 40
nausea and vomiting treated with, 
35, 36t
Proliferator-activated receptor γ 
(PPARγ), 626
Proopiomelanocortin (POMC), 628, 
629f
Propranolol, 569
Propylthiouracil, 18
Prostacyclin, 130f
Prostaglandin analogues
adverse effects of, 141
peptic ulcer disease treated with, 
139t, 141
Prostaglandin E2
diarrhea and, 561
synthesis of, 130f
Prostaglandin-mediated flushing, 592
Prosthetic joint infections, 19
Protease inhibitors
acute pancreatitis and, 505
chronic hepatitis C virus treated with, 
417–418, 422
necrotizing acute pancreatitis and, 
505, 507
Protein, 576–577
digestion and absorption of, 163–164
in hepatitis B virus, 358f, 358–361
requirements for
estimating, 608–609
formulas providing, 616
Protein balance, equation, 609
Protein catabolic rate, 609
Protein catabolism, 603
Protein-calorie malnutrition, 582,  
610–612. See also 
Kwashiorkor
Postexposure prophylaxis (PEP)
hepatitis A virus, 380–381
hepatitis B virus, 382–383
Postherpetic neuralgia, 18
Post-ligament of Treitz feeding, 620
Potassium
excessive loss of, 616
vasoactive intestinal peptidomas, 569
Potassium-competitive acid pump 
antagonists, 141
Pott’s disease, 261
PPI. See Proton pump inhibitors
Prader-Willi syndrome, 629
Pravastatin, 656
Prednisolone, 426
Prednisone
alcoholic hepatitis treated with, 429, 
430f
autoimmune hepatitis treated with, 
426
pancreatitis treated with, 510
vasoactive intestinal peptidomas 
treated with, 569
Pregnancy
abdominal swelling in, 70
biliary sludge formation in, 462
cholestasis in, 69, 462
inflammatory bowel disease in, 202
nausea and vomiting in, 34, 36
oral manifestations of, 10
vitamin A and, 596
Pre-S genes, 358f, 360
Primary amebic meningoencephalitis
clinical features of, 311
diagnosis of, 311, 311f
pathogenesis of, 311
Primary bacterial peritonitis, 234,  
253–255, 692–693, 712–713
Primary biliary cirrhosis, 448f, 701, 723
Primary gastric lymphoma, 523
Primary intestinal lymphoma, 533
Primary liver tumors, 544–546
Primary malnutrition, 601
Primary radiation therapy, 519
Primary sclerosing cholangitis, 194, 436
biopsy findings in, 450f
clinical features of, 68, 437, 474
diagnosis of, 68, 335t, 437
laboratory evaluation of, 437
small duct, 194, 474
treatment of, 437
Primary tumor
HNPCC and, 526
localization, 570–571
Probenecid, 65
Probiotics
Pleomorphic adenoma, 19
Pleuritis, 5
Plummer-Vinson syndrome, 10, 115, 
686, 705
PN. See Parenteral nutrition
Pneumatic dilatation, 118
Pneumatosis coli, 281
Pneumatosis intestinalis, 224
Pneumococcal vaccine, 339
Pneumonia
abdominal pain in, 4, 5, 6t
acute pancreatitis vs., 501
community-acquired, 141
Pneumoperitoneum, 254, 254f
Pneumothorax, 613
Polycystic ovarian syndrome
metabolic syndrome and, 654
obesity and, 632, 634
Polymeric diets, 616
Polymorphonuclear cells, 429t
Polymyositis, 31
Polyp(s), 524
bleeding from, 59
endoscopic findings in, 90, 91f
in familial adenomatous polyposis, 
105
screening strategies for, 106t
Polypectomy, 59
Polyphenol, 593
Polypoid adenomas, 532
Polyposis coli, 526
Polyposis syndromes, 525t
Polysaccharide A, 257
Porcelain gallbladder, 468
Porphyria
abdominal pain in, 5
in liver disease, 456–457
treatment of, 457
Porphyria cutanea tarda
HCV infection and, 456
skin manifestations of, 456
treatment of, 457
Portal hypertension
ascites in, 73
in cirrhosis, 438t, 438–439
classification of, 439t
clinical features of, 439
definition of, 438
diagnosis of, 439–440
esophageal varices in, 58
etiology of, 438–439
treatment of, 440–441
vitamin A intoxication and, 596
Portal venous circulation, colorectal 
cancer and, 530
Portion control, 638
Index
762
Radioscintigraphy, 55
RAE. See Retinol activity equivalent
Ramsey Hunt syndrome, 18
Ranitidine bismuth
gastroesophageal reflux disease treated 
with, 39
H. pylori eradication using, 142, 
142t, 267
peptic ulcer disease treated with, 
139t, 140
Rapamycin, 482
Rapid gastric emptying, 82
Rash, 567
R-binder protein, 177
RBP4, obesity and, 627
RCC. See Renal cell carcinoma
Reactive arthritis, 276
diarrhea in, 45
oral manifestations of, 10
after Shigella infections, 282
Rebound tenderness, 6
Recommended dietary allowances 
(RDAs), 581
dietary reference intakes and,  
577–581
niacin and, 591
Rectal bleeding
in rectal prolapse, 216
in ulcerative colitis, 185, 186t
Rectal carcinoids, 559, 564
Rectal prolapse, 216
anatomy of, 216
clinical features of, 216–218, 217f
degree of, 217f
epidemiology of, 216
evaluation of, 216–218, 217f
incidence of, 216
pathophysiology of, 216
treatment of, 217f, 217–218
Rectoanal angle, 43, 55
Rectocele, 55
Rectopexy, 217
Rectosigmoid, cancers from, 528
Rectus sheath hematoma o, 4
Red blood cell scintigraphy, 61
Refeeding syndrome, 647
Referred pain, 4–5
Refusal to swallow, 27
Regional chemotherapy, HCC and, 
542
Regional lymph nodes, 529–530
Regurgitation, 32
in achalasia, 117
in esophageal disease, 112
in gastroesophageal reflux disease, 121
nasal, 29
Pudendal nerve terminal motor latency, 
219
Pulmonary disease, 632
Pulmonary infarction, 4
Pulp, dental, 8–9
Pulpitis, 8
Purging, in bulimia nervosa, 648
Purtscher’s retinopathy, 507
Push endoscopy, 91
Push enteroscopy, 61
Pyoderma gangrenosum, 193
Pyoderma vegetans, 193
Pyogenic granuloma, 10
Pyostomatitis vegetans, 193
Pyrantel pamoate
ascariasis treated with, 322, 696, 717
hookworm infection treated with, 
323
Pyridostigmine, 35, 36t
Pyridoxine (vitamin B6), 592
deficiency of, 592
dietary sources, 592
nausea and vomiting in pregnancy 
managed with, 36
toxicity of, 592
Pyrimethamine, 317
Pyruvate α-ketoglutarate, 586
Quasispecies, 365
Quinacrine, 62
Quinine, 14t
Quorum sensing, 292
Rabeprazole
adverse effects of, 140
gastroesophageal reflux disease treated 
with, 39
peptic ulcer disease treated with, 
139t, 140
Radiation enteritis, 167t
Radiation esophagitis, 125
Radiation therapy
adverse effects of
dysphagia, 28–29
gastrointestinal, 191t, 192
colorectal cancer and, 531–532
esophageal cancer and, 519
hepatocellular carcinoma, 542, 543t
radiolabeled somatostatin analogues, 
572–573
Radiofrequency ablation, 541
Radioimmunoassays, 566–567
Radionuclide scans/scintigraphy
for colonic transit measurement, 55
in gastrointestinal bleeding, 61
Radiopharmaceuticals, 463
Protein-energy malnutrition, 601–604
Protein-losing enteropathy, 175
clinical features of, 175
diagnosis of, 175
diarrhea in, 175
etiology of, 175
steatorrhea in, 175
treatment of, 175
Proteus spp., 261
Prothrombin time
prolonged, 66
vitamin K deficiency and, 597
Proton pump inhibitors
adverse effects of, 39, 140–141
diarrhea treated with, 53
drug interactions of, 140–141
gastrinomas, 565–566
gastroesophageal reflux disease treated 
with, 39, 123
H. pylori eradication using, 40, 267, 
267t
NSAID-induced ulcer prophylaxis 
using, 144
peptic ulcer disease treated with, 
57–58, 139t, 140–141
pharmacology of, 140–141
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome treated 
with, 151
Prozac. See Fluoxetine
Pseudoachalasia, 117
Pseudoaneurysms, 507
Pseudocysts
of pancreas, 506–507
rupture of, 507
treatment for, 507
Pseudodiarrhea, 43–44
Pseudodiverticulosis, 116f
Pseudohalitosis, 20
Pseudomembranous colitis, 90f, 248, 
248f
Pseudo-obstruction
colonic, 228
primary intestinal, 227
Pseudoterranova decipiens, 326
Psoas abscess, 261
PSTI. See Pancreatic secretory trypsin 
inhibitor
Psychiatric treatment, AN, 647
Psychiatric/psychological disorders
abdominal pain in, 6t
irritable bowel syndrome and, 206, 
207f
liver transplantation and, 482t, 484
Psychotropic agents, 634
Puborectalis muscle, 43f
PUD. See Peptic ulcer disease
Index
763
incidence of, 274–275
intraabdominal infections caused 
by, 276
meningitis caused by, 276
osteomyelitis caused by, 276
prevention of, 278
transmission of, 275
treatment of, 277t, 277–278
urinary tract infections caused by, 
276
pathogenesis of, 269–270
Salpingitis, 6t, 7
Sapovirus, 299t
Sarcoidosis
extrahepatic cholestasis, 69
indigestion, 38
oral, 18
Saturated fats, 656
Schatzki’s ring, 29–30, 104f, 110, 115, 
124f, 685–686, 705
Schilling test, 165, 177–178, 178t
Schizophrenia, 592
Scintigraphy, 86
Scleral icterus, 62
Scleroderma. See Systemic sclerosis
Scleroderma esophagus, 126
Scombroid poisoning, 45
Scopolamine, 35, 36t
Scurvy, 582, 592
Secondary active transport, 158
Secretin, 511
Secretin-pancreozymin test, 491t
Secretory diarrhea, 156
Sedentary lifestyle, metabolic syndrome 
and, 651
Selective internal radiation therapy, 573
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, 
209–210
Selenium, 599
Self-esteem, 647
Senna, 48
Sentinel acute pancreatitis event 
hypothesis, 509
Sepsis, 609, 612
kwashiorkor and, 602
protein catabolism and, 603
Sepsis with hypotension, catheter and, 
620
Serine protease inhibitor kasal type 1 
(SPINK1), 499, 514
Serotonin, 561–562
appetite regulation, 639
atypical carcinoid syndromes and, 
556f
foregut tumors and, 552
typical carcinoid syndromes, 556f
etiologic agent of, 302
global considerations, 304–305, 305f
immunity to, 304
pathogenesis of, 303
prevention of, 304
treatment of, 304
Rotavirus vaccine, 304
Rotor syndrome, 66, 354t, 355
Roux-en-Y gastric bypass, 641
Rumination, 32, 112
RXR agonists, 594
S genes, 358f, 360
Saccharomyces boulardii, 250, 251t
Sacroiliitis, 193
Saliva
characteristics of, 18
substitutes for, 18
Salivary duct obstruction, 18
Salivary glands
anorexia nervosa and, 645
carcinoma, 19
diseases of, 18–19
Salivary stone, 25f
Salmonella spp.
characteristics of, 269
clinical features of, 45t
enteric fever caused by. See Enteric 
fever
food-related, 44
gastroenteritis
appendicitis vs., 234
inflammatory bowel disease vs., 
191, 191t
treatment of, 242t
S. enteritidis, 275, 694, 714
S. paratyphi, 269–270
S. typhi, 269–271
S. typhimurium, 269
splenic abscess, 260
vaccines for, 274
Salmonellosis, 269
etiology of, 269
nontyphoidal
antibiotic resistance in, 275
antibiotics for, 277t
bacteremia caused by, 276
clinical manifestations of, 275–276
control of, 278
diagnosis of, 276–277
endovascular infections caused by, 
276
epidemiology of, 274–275
gastroenteritis associated with, 
275–276
genital tract infections caused by, 276
Reiter’s syndrome, 276
Reiter’s syndrome. See Reactive 
arthritis
Rejection, in liver transplantation, 484
Renal abscess, 260–261
Renal cell carcinoma, 69
Renal colic, 501
Renin-producing PET, 570
Reoviridae, 299t
Reproductive disorders, 632
Reproductive system, 645
Resistin, 627, 654
Resting energy expenditure (REE), 
576, 615–616
Restitution, 128
Restrictive weight loss surgeries,  
641–642
Restrictive-malabsorptive weight loss 
surgeries, 641–642
Retinaldehyde (11-cis), 594
Retinoic acid, 594
Retinoid receptors, 594
Retinoid-mediated gene transcription, 
594
Retinoids, 594
Retinol activity equivalent, 594
Retinol-binding protein, 594, 608
Retroperitoneal burn, 499
RFA. See Radiofrequency ablation
Rheumatoid arthritis, 18
Rheumatologic diseases, 193
RIAs. See Radioimmunoassays
Ribavirin, 413–417, 422
Riboflavin (Vitamin B2), 591
Rice water stool, 293, 293f
Ricinoleic acid, 48
Rifampin, 65
Rifaximin
diarrhea treated with, 47
hepatic encephalopathy treated with, 
444
irritable bowel syndrome treated 
with, 210
travelers’ diarrhea treated with, 245t
Right hemicolectomy, 564
Rimonabant, 640
Rings
B, 115, 115f
esophageal, 115, 115f
Rosuvastatin, 656
Rotavirus, 299t, 300f, 302, 695, 715
clinical features of, 45t, 243t, 300t, 
303–304
diagnosis of, 46, 299t, 304
epidemiology of, 243, 299t, 302–303, 
305f
Index
764
physiology of, 41
tumors of. See Small bowel tumors
Small-bore feeding tubes, 620
Smokeless tobacco, 10
Smoking
inflammatory bowel disease and, 179
leukoplakia and, 15t
pancreatitis and, 508
peptic ulcer disease and, 135
squamous cell esophageal cancer and, 
518
SNS. See Specialized nutritional support
“Soap formation,” acute pancreatitis 
and, 500
Sodium and potassium acetate salts, 619
Sodium bicarbonate, 139
Sodium diarrhea, congenital, 48
Sodium phosphate purgatives, 110
Sodium restriction, 74
Solid organ transplantation, 479
Solitary hepatic metastases, 531
Solitary rectal ulcer syndrome, 59, 191t, 
192
Somatostatin
glucagonomas and, 567
insulinomas and, 567
necrotizing acute pancreatitis and, 
505, 507
structure, 563f
Somatostatin analogues
carcinoid crises and, 563
GRFomas, 570
metastatic disease and, 572
for nausea and vomiting, 36t
Somatostatin receptor scintigraphy 
(SRS), 571f
Somatostatinoma, 49, 567–568
Spastic nutcracker esophageal spasm, 
119, 119f
Specialized nutritional support, 610
benefits of, 612–613
efficacy of, in disease states, 612
implementation of, algorithm for, 
611f
long-term, 613
requirements for, approach to patient, 
610–615
risks of, 612–613
Sphincter of Oddi
in bile flow, 459–460
functions of, 459
spasm of, after cholecystectomy, 469
Sphincteroplasty, 219
Sphincterotomy
chronic pancreatitis pain and, 512
endoscopic, 92, 92f
Sigmoidoscopy
in diarrhea, 46
flexible, 90
in gastrointestinal bleeding, 60–61
in gastrointestinal disease, 85, 86t
large-bowel cancer, for asymptomatic 
patients, 528
in ulcerative colitis, 186, 186f
Simethicone, 40
Simvastatin, 656
Single-balloon enteroscopy, 91
Singultus (hiccups), 228
Sinusitis, maxillary, 18
SIRS. See Systemic inflammatory 
response syndrome
Sister Mary Joseph’s node, 66
Sister of p-glycoprotein, 356
Sjögren’s syndrome, 18
Skeletal lesions, 600
Skin disorders, 126
Skin lesions, 591
Skin nodules, 499
Skin tag (acrochordon), 193
Skinfold measurements, 605
SLE. See Systemic lupus erythematosus
Sliding hiatal hernia, 114
Small bowel
feeding, 620
malignancies, 533–534
Small bowel tumors, 532–534
angiomas as, 532–533
benign, 532–533
leiomyomas as, 532
lipomas as, 532
polypoid adenomas as, 532
Small duct primary sclerosing 
cholangitis, 194
Small intestine
absorption and secretion in, 42
bleeding from, 59
carcinoids, 559
double-balloon enteroscopy of, 91, 
91f
endoscopy of, 91, 91f
extrinsic innervation of, 41
feeding, 620
function of, 80
innervation of, 42
intrinsic innervation of, 41
length of, 157
malignancies, 533–534
manometry of, 35
motility of, 41t, 42
mucosal biopsy of, 165–167, 167t, 
168f
obstruction of, 33, 81, 229–230
Serotonin agonists
for irritable bowel syndrome, 210
for nausea and vomiting, 35, 36t
Serotonin receptors
antagonists, for carcinoid syndrome, 
563
carcinoid syndrome, 563–564
Serum albumin, 605, 608
Serum amylase
acute pancreatitis and, 499–501
ascites fluid and, 508
chronic pancreatitis, 510
Serum ascites-albumin gradient, 73
Serum chromogranin A, 562
Serum cortisol, 645
Serum leptin, 645
Serum lipase, 510
Serum proteins, 608
Serum transaminases, 645
Serum zinc, 598
Sessile polyps, 524
Sessile tumors, of cecum, 528f
Shigella spp. infections, 694, 714
antibiotic resistance in, 283
characteristics of, 279
clinical features of, 45t, 243t,  
281–282
complications of, 45, 281, 284
diagnosis of, 282
epidemiology of, 279–280, 280f
genomic signatures of, 279
global considerations, 279–280
infectivity of, 279–280, 280f
inflammatory bowel disease versus, 
191, 191t, 282
laboratory identification of, 282
pathogenesis of, 280f, 280–281
prevention of, 284
treatment of, 282–284, 283t
Shigellosis, 694, 714
Shingles. See Herpes zoster
Shivering thermogenesis, 576
Short bowel syndrome, 172, 173, 
687, 707
Short-term memory, 587
Sialadenitis, chronic bacterial, 18
Sialolithiasis, 18
Sibutramine
adverse effects and, 640
appetite regulation and, 640
contraindications, 640
Sickle cell anemia
jaundice in, 65
splenic abscess in, 260
Sickle cell crisis, 65
Sigmoid volvulus, 99
Index
765
Subacute thyroiditis, 18
Subdiaphragmatic abscess, 6t
Submucosal plexus, 42
Substance P, 28, 42, 561
Subtotal gastrectomy, 522
Sucralfate
action of, 141
adverse effects of, 141
gastroesophageal reflux disease treated 
with, 40
peptic ulcer disease treated with, 
139t, 141
Sudan III stain, 164
Sudeck’s point, 223f, 223–224
Sulfasalazine, 195, 196t
Sulfonylureas, 634
Sulindac, 68
Sumatriptan, 36
Sunitinib, 524
Superficial gastritis, 153
Superior mesenteric artery occlusion, 
4, 33
Surgery
hepatocellular carcinoma treated 
with, 540
insulinomas and, 567
obesity treated with, 641f, 641–642
pancreatic abscess and, 507
pancreatic cancer, 549
somatostatinoma syndrome and, 568
Surgical debridement, 506
Surgical debulking, 567
Surgical mortality, from bariatric 
surgery, 641
Surgical resection
gastric adenocarcinoma and, 523
hepatocellular carcinoma and, 540, 542
nonmetastatic carcinoid tumors and, 
564
PETs and, 566
Survival rate
advanced pancreatic cancer and, 549, 
551, 551t
gastric adenocarcinoma and, 522–523
Swallowing
physiology of, 27–28, 28f
tests of, 31
Sweet’s syndrome, 193
Sympathomimetic adrenergic agents, 
640
Syndrome X. See Metabolic syndrome
Syndromes of obesity, comparison, 630t
Syphilis
abdominal pain in, 5
congenital, 12t
secondary, 10, 12t
Steatorrhea, 49, 53, 156, 159
in bacterial overgrowth syndrome, 
173
detection of, 164–165
etiology of, 160, 164–165, 169t
nonenteric coated enzymes and, 512
pancreatic exocrine function 
assessment in, 167
in protein-losing enteropathy, 175
in short bowel syndrome, 172
in Whipple’s disease, 174
Steatosis
hepatic, 194
macrovesicular, in nonalcoholic fatty 
liver disease, 455, 455t
Stents, 99, 99f
Steroid hormones, 634
Stevens-Johnson syndrome (SJS),  
13t, 22f
Stomach
function of, 80
tumors of, 520
Stomatitis, 176t
Stone extraction, 512
Stool
anion concentrations in, 157
electrolytes in, 157
fasting effects on, 156–157
occult blood in, 524
osmolality of, 157
in pancreatic disease evaluation, 492t
retained, 71
vomiting of, 34
Stool analysis, 52
Stool culture, 46
Stool osmolality gap, 707
Stool-bulking agents, 208–209
Strawberry gums, 10
Streptococcus bovis bacteremia, 527
Streptozotocin, 572
Stress-related gastric mucosal injury, 59
“String sign,” in Crohn’s disease,  
187, 188
Stroke
dental care after, 19
dysphagia in, 29
Strongyloides stercoralis/strongyloidiasis, 
696, 716
clinical features of, 321t, 323–324
diagnosis of, 324–325
epidemiology of, 323
inflammatory bowel disease vs.,  
191t, 192
life cycle of parasite, 321t, 323, 324f
treatment of, 321t, 325
Subacute necrosis, 368
Spider angioma, 71, 334, 432, 433f
Spinal cord disease/injury, 55
Spiral enteroscopy, 91, 91f
Spironolactone, 74, 442
Spleen
infarction of, 6t
rupture of, 6t
Splenectomy, 260
Splenic abscess
abdominal pain in, 6t, 260
clinical features of, 260
etiology of, 260
treatment of, 260
Splenomegaly
abdominal swelling in, 71
in cirrhosis, 441
hepatocellular carcinoma and, 537
in liver disease, 334
Spur cell anemia, 65
Squamous cell carcinoma, of esophagus, 
518
SRI. See Systemic response to 
inflammation
SSRIs. See Selective serotonin reuptake 
inhibitors
Staging
colorectal cancer, 528–530, 530t
gastric carcinoma, 522t
hepatocellular carcinoma, 537–538
pancreatic cancer and, 549, 550f
Stagnant bowel syndrome, 173, 177
Staphylococcus aureus infections
continuous ambulatory peritoneal 
dialysis-related peritonitis, 256
diarrhea in, 44, 45t
food-borne, 44, 45t, 243, 244t, 691, 
712
nausea and vomiting in, 33
parotitis, 18
psoas abscess, 261
splenic abscess, 260
Staphylococcus epidermis, 620
STARR (stapled transanal rectal 
resection) procedure, 217, 
217f
Starvation
marasmus and, 602
metabolic rate and, 603
protein catabolism and, 603
Statins, 656
hepatotoxicity caused by, 395
triglycerides and, 656
Stauffer’s syndrome, 69
Steatohepatitis, nonalcoholic
cirrhosis caused by, 434–435
diagnosis of, 335t
Index
766
Toroviruses, 300f, 305
Total colectomy, 526
Total energy expenditure, 615
Total gastrectomy
gastric adenocarcinoma and, 522
gastric carcinoids, 566
Total mesorectal excision, 531
Total pancreatectomy, 512–513
Total parenteral nutrition
acute necrotizing pancreatitis, 504
manganese deficiencies and, 600
molybdenum deficiencies, 600
Total protein loss, 609
Total surgical resection
colorectal cancer, 530
poor outcome following, predicators 
of, 530t
Toupet fundoplication, 40
Toxic megacolon
in Shigella infections, 281
treatment of, 284
Toxic shock syndrome (TSS), 45
Toxin-related hepatitis, 385–387
TPN. See Total parenteral nutrition
Trace minerals
deficiency of, 585–600
diseases and, 586
Tracheal suctioning, 620
Tracheoesophageal fistula, 519, 520
Transaminases, 342, 345t, 698, 719
Transarterial chemoembolization 
(TACE), 541t, 541–542,  
543t
Transcription factors, 594
Transfer dysphagia, 27, 110–111
Transferrin, 608
Transforming growth factor, 509
Transforming growth factor-ß, 128
Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic 
shunt
for ascites, 74, 443, 443f
for variceal bleeding, 58, 440–441
Transthyretin, 594
Trauma, 602, 609
bile duct–related, 473
Travelers’ diarrhea, 44, 690, 711
etiology of, 44, 242, 243t
prevention of, 47
prophylaxis, 246
treatment of, 245t, 245–246,  
690, 711
Triceps skinfold measurements, 605
Trichomonas vaginalis, 319
Trichomoniasis, 695, 716
Trichostrongylus/trichostrongyliasis, 
326
deficiency, 587–590
food sources, 586
treatment, 590
food sources of, 586–591
toxicity, 590–591
Thiazolidinediones (TZDs)
insulin sensitivity and, 657
obesity and, 634
Thienopyridines, 109f, 110f
Thiethylperazine, 36t
Third spacing, 608
Thoracoabdominal surgery, 612
3TC. See Lamivudine
Thrombocytopenia, 537
Thromboembolic disease, 195
Thrush
clinical features of, 15t, 18
treatment of, 15t
Thumbprinting, 224
Thyroid cancer, medullary
diarrhea in, 48
treatment of, 53
Thyroid disorders
indigestion in, 38
nausea and vomiting in, 34
Ticarcillin-clavulanate, 256
Tincture of opium, for diarrhea, 53
Tinidazole
amebiasis treated with, 310, 310t
Giardia infection treated with, 315
H. pylori eradication using, 267t
T. vaginalis infections treated with, 
319
TIPS. See Transjugular intrahepatic 
portosystemic shunt
Tissue cytology, 549
TMP-SMZ. See Trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole
TNF-α. See Tumor necrosis factor-α
TNM staging/classification system
colorectal cancer, 529, 529f
hepatocellular carcinoma, 537
Tobacco use, 527. See also Smoking
ß-Tocopherol, 597
Tocopherols, 597
Tocotrienols, 597
Tolbutamide, 68
Tolerable upper levels, 581
Tongue
alterations of, 16t
bald, 16t
black hairy, 15t
fissured, 16t, 26f
geographic, 16t, 24f
raspberry, 16t
strawberry, 16t
Systemic chemotherapy, 542
Systemic inflammatory response 
syndrome, 499
Systemic lupus erythematosus, 10
Systemic response to inflammation, 
610–612
Systemic sclerosis
esophageal involvement/dysphagia 
in, 30, 31, 126
gastrointestinal involvement in, 33
nausea and vomiting in, 33
Tachykinins, 561
Tacrolimus
inflammatory bowel disease treated 
with, 198, 200f
after liver transplantation, 481–482
TCAs. See Tricyclic antidepressants
Teeth
age-related changes in, 20
bulimia nervosa and, 648
development of, 8
discolored, 9
diseases of, 8
Hutchinson’s, 9
loss of, 10, 20
structure of, 8
tooth extraction, 19
Telaprevir, 418
Telbivudine
adverse effects of, 406
chronic HBV infection treated with, 
406, 407t, 408f
Temporomandibular disorder, 17
Tenatoprazole, 141
Tenofovir
chronic HBV infection treated with, 
406, 407t, 408f
liver disease treated with, 486
Testicular referred pain, 5
Tetany, 176t
Tetracycline
balantidiasis treated with, 318
cholera treated with, 294
D. fragilis infection treated with, 319
H. pylori eradication using, 142, 142t, 
267t
tropical sprue treated with, 172
Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), 36t
TGF. See Transforming growth factor
TGF-ß. See Transforming growth 
factor-ß
Theophylline, 37
Thermogenesis, 631
Thiamine (Vitamin B1), 586–591
alcohol abuse and, 604
Index
767
serologic markers in, 189–190
sigmoidoscopy in, 186, 186f
smoking effects on, 179
strictures in, 186
thromboembolic disorders in, 195
treatment of, 195–202, 196t, 200f, 
201t
surgery, 200–201, 201t
urologic disease in, 194
Ulcers
definition of, 127, 131
oral, 10, 13t
Ultrasonography
in bile duct evaluation, 472t
endoscopic, 92–93, 94f
in gallbladder disease, 463, 463t, 464f
in liver disease, 336
in liver function evaluation, 341f, 344
pancreatic disease and, 511
in pancreatic disease evaluation, 491t, 
493
Ultratrace elements, 600
Umbilical venous hum, 71
United Network of Organ Sharing 
(UNOS)
hepatocellular carcinoma and, 541
liver transplantation and, 479, 479t
Upper esophageal sphincter, 27–28
Upper gastrointestinal bleeding, 60
Urea breath test, 265t, 266
Urea nitrogen, 609
Uremia
abdominal pain in, 5
nausea and vomiting in, 34
Ureteral obstruction, 194
Urinalysis, 7
Urinary d-xylose test, 165
Urinary tract infections, 261, 276
Urine
excessive loss of, 616
5HIAA excretion, 562
metabolites, 629
tea/cola colored, 62
thiamine loss in, 587
Urine bilirubin, 341, 345t
Urine dipstick test, 64
Urobilinogens, 63, 349
Ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA),  
459, 465
Uveitis, 194
Vagal inputs, appetite regulation and, 
626
Vagotomy, 146f, 146–147
VA-HIT trial (Veterans Affairs HDL 
Intervention Trial), 656
Tumor brushings, 519
Tumor markers, 557
Tumor necrosis factor-α, 627
inhibitors of
for alcoholic cirrhosis, 433
for alcoholic hepatitis, 430, 430f
inflammatory bowel disease treated 
with, 198–199, 200f
metabolic syndrome and, 654
Tunneled catheters, 618
Turcot’s syndrome, 526
Turner syndrome, 180
Turner’s sign, 499
Typhoid fever. See Enteric fever
Typical carcinoid syndromes, 556f
Tyrosine kinase inhibitor, 551
UDCA, 465. See Ursodeoxycholic acid
UDP-glucuronosyltransferases,  
348–349, 349f
UGT1 gene complex, 349, 349f
Ulcerative colitis, 179, 708
cancer and, 203, 526
cardiopulmonary manifestations of, 
195
chronic, 90f
clinical features of, 185–187, 186f, 
186t
complications of, 186–187
diarrhea in, 50
differential diagnosis of, 190–193, 
191t, 288
disorders associated with, 180
epidemiology of, 179t, 179–180, 
180t
etiology of, 180
exogenous factors in, 183
genetic factors in, 180t, 180–182, 
181t
hepatobiliary disease in, 194
immune regulation in, 180, 182
laboratory, endoscopic, and 
radiographic features of,  
185–186, 186f
macroscopic features of, 183f,  
183–184
metabolic bone disorders in,  
194–195
microscopic features of, 184, 184f
noninfectious diseases mimicking, 
191t, 192
ocular involvement in, 193–194
pathogenesis of, 180
pathology of, 183–184, 184f
pregnancy and, 202
rheumatologic disease in, 193
Trichuris trichiura/trichuriasis
clinical features of, 321t, 325
diagnosis of, 325
inflammatory bowel disease versus, 
191t, 192
life cycle of parasite, 321t, 325
treatment of, 321t, 325
Tricyclic antidepressants
indigestion treated with, 40
nausea and vomiting treated with, 
35–36, 36t
obesity and, 634
Trigeminal neuralgia, 18
Triglycerides, 498
insulin resistance and, 652
long-chain, 160–162
medium-chain, 162
metabolic syndrome, treatment of, 656
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
acute pancreatitis and, 507
adverse effects of
cholestatic hepatitis, 68
hepatotoxicity, 395
Cyclospora infections treated with, 317
I. belli infections treated with, 317
peritonitis prophylaxis using, 255
Whipple’s disease treated with, 174
Troglitazone, 388
Tropheryma whippelii, 174
Tropical sprue, 171
clinical features of, 171
clinical pattern of, 171
diagnosis of, 171
diarrhea in, 49, 171
etiology of, 171
small-intestinal mucosal biopsies in, 
167, 167t, 168f
treatment of, 172
Trypsin
acute pancreatitis and, 499
pancreas and, 499
Trypsinogen, 499, 509
Tuberculosis, extrapulmonary
gastrointestinal, 38, 73, 74
oral manifestations, 10, 18
Tuberin, 558
Tubular polyps, 524
Tubulovillous polyps, 524
Tumor(s)
of ascending colon, presenting 
symptoms, 528
benign small bowel, 532–533
biology, of NETs, 552–558, 555
metastatic to liver, 545
surgical resection of, esophageal 
cancer, 519
Index
768
Vitamin D-deficiency rickets, 582
Vitamin E
absorption and metabolism, 597
deficiency, treatment, 597
requirement, 597
toxicity, treatment, 597
Vitamin K, 597–598
deficiency, 599
hepatocellular carcinoma and,  
542–543, 543t
Vittaforma spp., 317
VLCD. See Very low calorie diets
VLDL. See Very low density 
lipoproteins
Vomiting
activators of, 32–33
in acute cholecystitis, 465
in acute intestinal obstruction, 228
bulimia nervosa and, 648
coordination of, 32
definition of, 32
functional, 34
Mallory-Weiss tear following, 125
von Hippel-Lindau disease (VHL), 
557–558
von Recklinghausen’s disease, 558
VTE. See Venous thromboembolism
Waist circumference
BMI and, 634
ethnic-specific issues, 636t
metabolic syndrome, 653
rimonabant and, 640
Warfarin
for endoscopic procedures, 109f,  
110f
vitamin E toxicity and, 597
Warts, 16t
Water, 577
Water brash, 38, 113
Watermelon stomach, 59
Weakness, 176t
Webs, esophageal, 115, 115f
Weight gain, 71, 615
Weight loss, 655–656, 685, 705
biliary sludge formation related to, 
462
cholesterol stone formation related 
to, 462
diet, 655–656
esophageal cancers, 519
gastric adenocarcinoma and,  
521
hepatocellular carcinoma and,  
536–537
Villous adenoma, colorectal, 48
Villous polyps, 524
Vincent’s angina, 12t
Vincent’s infection, 9
Vinyl chloride, 67
VIP. See Vasoactive intestinal peptide
VIPomas, 48, 557, 568–569
Viral gastroenteritis, 299
adenovirus, 299t, 300f, 305
agents of, 300f
astrovirus, 299t, 300f, 305
bacterial enteritis versus, 300t
calicivirus, 299t, 300f
clinical features of, 300t
diagnosis of, 300t
picobirnavirus, 305
torovirus, 300f, 305
treatment of, 300t
Viral hepatitis, 45
Virchow’s node, 66, 71
Virtual colonoscopy
description of, 107, 107f
large-bowel cancer, for asymptomatic 
patients, 528
Visceral afferent hypersensitivity, 37
Vision, retinaldehyde and, 594
Vital signs, 645
Vitamin(s), 586
absorption of, 158
deficiency, and excess, 585–600
diseases and, 586
DRIs for, 578t–579t
functions of, 589f–590f
malnutrition, 587t
requirements, 616–617
status, 608
structure of, 589f–590f
Vitamin A, 594
acute toxicity of, 595–596
body stores of, 586
deficiency, 9, 595
dietary sources of, 594–595
intoxication, 596
metabolism, 594
Vitamin B12, 586, 591–592
Vitamin C, 592, 604
absorption and dietary sources, 592
deficiency of, 9, 592
toxicity, 592
Vitamin D
deficiency of, 9, 596
malabsorption of, surgery-related, 
149
metabolism of, 596
toxicity of, 597
Valacyclovir, 125
Valproate/valproic acid
hepatotoxicity caused by, 393
obesity and, 634
van den Bergh method, 63
Vancomycin, 250, 251t
Vanishing bile duct syndrome, 69
Variceal bleeding
cirrhosis-related, 439–441
endoscopic findings in, 96–97, 97f
esophageal, 58
recurrent, 440–441, 441f
treatment of, 440–441, 441f
Varicella, 11t
Varices
esophageal, 700, 722
endoscopic findings in, 96–97, 97f
gastrointestinal bleeding in, 57t, 58
ligation of, 58
in portal hypertension, 439, 441f
gastric fundic, 97, 97f
Varioliform gastritis, 155
Vasa recti, 212
Vascular ectasias
bleeding in, 59
endoscopic findings in, 98, 98f
jejunal, 105f
Vascular endothelial growth factor, 128
Vasoactive intestinal peptide, 28
Vasoactive intestinal peptidomas, 569
Vasoconstrictors, 19
VBG. See Vertical banded gastroplasty
VEGF. See Vascular endothelial growth 
factor
Venous stasis, 633
Venous thromboembolism
mesenteric, 223, 224t
treatment of, 225t
Verapamil, 567
Vertical banded gastroplasty, 641
Very low calorie diets, 639
Very low density lipoproteins, 653
Vibrio alginolyticus infections, 296t, 298
Vibrio cholerae
adherence of, 238
diarrhea caused by, 690, 711
epidemiology of, 290–292, 291f–292f
genome of, 292
laboratory identification of, 293
microbiology of, 290–292
non-O1/O139, 296t, 297
toxin production by, 292
Vibrio parahaemolyticus, 244t, 296, 296t
Vibrio vulnificus, 296t, 297–298
Video capsule endoscopy, 61
Index
769
Zenker’s diverticulum, 29, 34, 115, 
115f
ZES. See Zollinger-Ellison syndrome
Zidovudine, 14t
Zinc, 604
deficiency, 598–599
gluconate lozenges, 599
supplements, for hepatic 
encephalopathy, 444
toxicity, 599
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, 81, 133, 
149, 557–558, 565–566,  
706
clinical features of, 149–150
diagnosis of, 150, 150t
epidemiology of, 149
with esophagitis, 121
gastroduodenal ulcer in, 37
imaging studies in, 151, 151t
pathophysiology of, 149
peptic ulcer disease and, 149
small-intestinal mucosal biopsies in, 
167t
treatment of, 151–152
tumor distribution in, 149
tumor localization in, 151,  
151t
Zonisamide, 36
Zwitterionic characteristics, 257
Zymogen activation, 497
in adolescents, 425
biopsy findings in, 451f–452f
clinical features of, 454
copper deficiency and, 599
description of, 156
diagnosis of, 67, 335t
liver disease and, 333, 335, 438, 454
treatment of, 454
Wireless capsule endoscopy, 188, 188f
Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, 180
World Health Organization GI NET 
classification, 555
Xerophthalmia, 176t, 595
Xerostomia
dental disease and, 9
drug-induced, 18
etiology of, 18
halitosis caused by, 20
Yersinia spp. infections (yersiniosis)
appendicitis vs., 233
clinical features of, 45t
complications of, 45
diagnosis of, 46
diarrhea, 44, 45t
enteric fever, 239t
inflammatory bowel disease versus, 
191, 191t
90Yttrium resin beads, 545, 573
hypertriglyceridemia-associated 
pancreatitis and, 505
low-carbohydrate/high-protein diets, 
638
obesity and, 634
Orlistat for, 640
physical activity therapy, 639
protein-calorie malnutrition and, 
611, 612
rimonabant for, 640
surgeries, categories, 641–642
through behavioral therapy, 639
Weight regulation, 75
Weight status, 636t
Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome, 590
Wernicke’s encephalopathy, 590
Wet beriberi, 587–588
Whipple procedure, 512, 549
Whipple’s disease, 174, 687, 707
clinical features of, 174
diagnosis of, 174
diarrhea in, 49
etiology of, 174
small-intestinal mucosal biopsies in, 
165–166, 167t, 168f
treatment of, 174–175
Whipworms, 192
White sponge nevus, 15t
Widal test, 272
Wilson’s disease
